NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NOWCASTING AND PLACECASTING ENTREPRENEURIAL QUALITY AND
PERFORMANCE
Jorge Guzman
Scott Stern
Working Paper 20954
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20954
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015
This paper was prepared for the NBER/CRIW Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge
and Challenges conference, Washington, DC, December, 2014. We are thankful to David Audretsch,
Pierre Azoulay, Erik Brynjolfsson, Georgina Campbell, Christian Catalini, Iain Cockburn, Mercedes
Delgado, Catherine Fazio, Joshua Gans, Karen Mills, Fiona Murray, Abhishek Nagaraj, Ramana Nanda,
Hal Varian, Ezra Zuckerman, Sam Zyontz, and the conference organizers John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst,
Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar for comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank
participants in NBER/CRIW pre-conference, the MIT Regional Entrepeneurship Acceleration Program,
and seminar participants at the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy, Micro@Sloan, and the 2014
NBER-AIEA Conference, and the 2014 DRUID Meetings. We thank Raymond J. Andrews for his
superb development of the visualizations in Figures 3, 6, and 8. Carlos Garay provided RA support,
and Alex Caracuzzo and MIT Libraries provided important data support. We are thankful to Patrick
Fennelly and the Massachusetts Corporation Division for their help getting this data. We also acknowledge
and thank the Jean Hammond (1986) and Michael Krasner (1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward
B. Roberts (1957) Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT for financial support. All errors and omissions are
of course our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20954.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and Performance
Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 20954
February 2015
JEL No. C43,C51,C81,E27,L25,L26,R12
ABSTRACT
A central challenge in the measurement of entrepreneurship is accounting for the wide variation in
entrepreneurial quality across firms. This paper develops a new approach for estimating entrepreneurial
quality by linking the probability of a growth outcome (e.g., achieving an IPO or a significant acquisition)
as a function of start-up characteristics observable at or near the time of initial business registration
(e.g., the firm name or filing for a trademark/patent). Our approach allows us to characterize entrepreneurial
quality at an arbitrary level of geographic granularity (placecasting) and in advance of observing the
ultimate growth outcomes associated with any cohort of start-ups (nowcasting). We implement this
approach in Massachusetts from 1988-2014, yielding several key findings. First, consistent with Guzman
and Stern (2015), we find that a small number of observable start-up characteristics allow us to distinguish
the potential for a significant growth outcome: in an out-of-sample test, more than 75% of growth
outcomes occur in the top 5% of our estimated quality distribution. Second, we propose two new economic
statistics for the measurement of entrepreneurship: the Entrepreneurship Quality Index (EQI) and
the Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI). We use these indices to offer a novel
characterization of changes in entrepreneurial quality across space and time. For example, we are
able to document changes in entrepreneurial quality leadership between the Route 128 corridor, Cambridge
and Boston, as well as more granular assessments that allow us to distinguish variation in average
entrepreneurial quality down to the level of individual addresses. Third, we find a high correlation
between an index that depends only on information directly observable from business registration
records (and so can be calculated on a real-time basis) with an index that allows for a two-year lag
that allows the estimate of entrepreneurial quality to incorporate early milestones such as patent or
trademark application or being featured in local newspapers. Finally, we find that the most significant
“gap” between our index and the realized growth outcomes of a given cohort seem to be closely related
to investment cycles: while the most successful cohort of Massachusetts start-ups was founded in
1995, the year 2000 cohort registered the highest estimated quality.
Jorge Guzman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-343
Cambridge, MA 02142
jorgeg@mit.edu
Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sstern@mit.edu

“When any estimate is examined critically, it becomes evident that the maker,
wittingly or unwittingly, has used one or more criteria of productivity. The
statistician who supposes that he can make a purely objective estimate of
national income, not influenced by preconceptions concerning the ‘facts’, is
deluding himself; for whenever he includes one item or excludes another he is
implicitly accepting some standard of judgment, his own or that of the compiler
of his data. There is no escaping this subjective element in the work, or freeing
the results from its effects”.
Simon Kuznets.
National Income and its Composition, 1919-1938. Volume I. p. 3. (1941)

A central challenge of economic measurement arises from the inevitable gap between the
theoretical rationale for an economic statistic and the phenomena being measured. Not simply
an abstract concern, the ability to reliably and systematically link economic phenomena closely
linked to productivity or economic growth is central to the ability of policymakers and
researchers to evaluate policy or understand the drivers of economic performance.
These concerns are particularly salient in the measurement of entrepreneurship. Though
entrepreneurship is often cited by economists and policymakers as central to the process of
economic growth and performance (Schumpeter, 1942; Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Davis and
Haltiwanger, 1992), measuring the “type” of entrepreneurship that seems likely to be associated
with overall economic performance has been challenging.

While studies of high-performance

ventures primarily rely on samples that select a population of firms that have already achieved
relatively rare milestones such as the receipt of venture capital, broader population studies of
entrepreneurs and small business emphasize the low growth prospects of the average selfemployed individual (Hamilton, 2000; Hurst and Pugsley, 2011).

As emphasized by Schoar

(2010) in her synthesis of entrepreneurship on a global basis, there is a gap between the small
3

number of transformative entrepreneurs whose ambition and capabilities are aligned with scaling
a dynamic and growing business and the much more prevalent incidence of subsistence
entrepreneurs whose activities are an (often inferior) substitute to low-wage employment.
It is important to emphasize that, though luck and unobserved ability undoubtedly play an
important role in the entrepreneurial process, the gap in the outcomes and impact of different
ventures also reflect ex ante fundamental differences in the potential of those ventures. While
most “Silicon Valley”-type start-ups fail, their intention at the time of founding is to build a
company with a high level of equity and/or employment growth (and often are premised on
exploiting new technology or serving an entirely new customer segment). At the same time, the
ambition and potential for even a “successful” local business is often quite modest, and might
involve building a firm of a small number of employees and yielding income comparable to that
which would have been earned through wage-based employment. In other words, as emphasized
by Hurst and Pugsley (2010), though policymakers and theory often treat entrepreneurs as a
homogenous group (at least from an ex ante perspective), entrepreneurs seem to be very
heterogeneous in terms of the ambition and potential of their ventures. For the purposes of
measurement, then, it is critical that we not only capture variation in entrepreneurial outcomes
but also develop the capability to measure variation in the quality of entrepreneurial ventures
from the time of founding.
Building on Guzman and Stern (2015), 1 this paper develops a novel approach to the
estimation of entrepreneurial quality that allows us to characterize regional clusters of
1

Guzman and Stern (2015) introduces the distinction between entrepreneurial quality and quantity and the broad
methodology in this paper of predicting growth outcomes from start-up characteristics available at or around the time of
founding for a population sample of business registrants. At some points in describing the methodology and data, we
draw from that paper to accurately describe our procedures and sample. This paper significantly extends and expands
upon Guzman and Stern (2015) in several respects, including the formal definition and proposal for two new economic
statistics (EQI and RECPI), the inclusion of additional start-up characteristics variables such as media mentions and a
4

entrepreneurship at an arbitrary level of granularity (placecasting), and examine the dynamics of
entrepreneurial quality over time on a near real-time basis (nowcasting). Our approach combines
three interrelated insights. First, because the challenges to reach a growth outcome as a sole
proprietorship are formidable, a practical requirement for any growth-oriented entrepreneur is
business registration (as a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company).

We take

advantage of the public nature of business registration records (in this paper, from the state of
Massachusetts from 1988-2014) to define a population sample of entrepreneurs observed at a
similar (and foundational) stage of the entrepreneurial process. Second, moving beyond simple
counts of business registrants (Klapper, Amit, and Guillen, 2010), we are able to measure
characteristics related to entrepreneurial quality at or close to the time of registration. For
example, we can measure start-up characteristics such as whether the founders name the firm
after themselves (eponymy), whether the firm is organized in order to facilitate equity financing
(e.g., registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm acquires or develops
measurable innovations (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, we leverage the fact that, though
rare, we observe meaningful growth outcomes for some firms (e.g., those that achieve an IPO or
high-value acquisition within six years of founding), and are therefore able to estimate the
relationship between these growth outcomes and start-up characteristics.
We apply our approach in the context of Massachusetts from 1988-20142. First, consistent
with Guzman and Stern (2015) (which uses our approach on California data), we find that a

measure for serial founders, extending the method to a second state (Massachusetts), evaluating the dynamics over time at
both the state level as well at more granular regional levels, and explicitly comparing an index that can be computed in
real-time versus one that incorporates information from early milestones over the first two years of the venture.
2
Our current results depend on a cross section of firms using the locations listed as of November, 2014, rather than
their founding location. In a series of tests, we find the probability of changing location to be low – for example, for
cohorts from 2008-2012, the probability of changing zip codes is 0.12. We are currently undertaking a data effort to
account, to the extent feasible using public data, for the full history of location changes for all firms.
5

small number of characteristics allow us to develop a robust predictive model that distinguishes
firm quality. In an out-of-sample test, we find that 77% of realized growth outcomes occur in
the top 5% of our estimated quality distribution (and nearly 50% in the top 1% of the estimated
quality distribution). Importantly, we find that there is significant benefit in predictive accuracy
from including multiple start-up characteristics (relative to, say, exclusively relating quality to a
single characteristic such as applying for a patent), and, at the same time, the quantitative
significance of different start-up characteristics are roughly similar in our sample here and our
sample of California firms in Guzman and Stern (2015).
We then use these estimates to propose two new economic statistics for the measurement of
entrepreneurship: the Entrepreneurship Quality Index (EQI) and the Regional Entrepreneurship
Cohort Potential Index (RECPI). EQI is a measure of average quality within any given group of
firms, and allows for the calculation of the probability of a growth outcome for a firm within a
specified population of start-ups. RECPI multiples EQI and the number of start-ups within a
given geographical region (e.g., a town or even the state of Massachusetts). Whereas EQI
compares entrepreneurial quality across different groups (and so facilitates apples-to-apples
comparisons across groups of different sizes), RECPI allows the direct calculation of the
expected number of growth outcomes from a given start-up cohort within a given regional
boundary.
We use these indices to offer a novel characterization of changes in entrepreneurial quality
across space and time. We start with an overall assessment of Massachusetts, where RECPI
increased dramatically during the second half of the 1990s, and then falls dramatically in the
wake of the dot-com crash. RECPI then increased by more than 25% from its low in 2003
through 2012.

We find that RECPI has predictive power:
6

while there is no meaningful

relationship between the pattern of growth outcomes and the number of new firms (i.e., a
measure of quantity), RECPI at the county-year level has a strong quantitative and statistical
relationship with the number of realized growth outcomes.
We then turn to our placecasting applications, where we characterize entrepreneurial
quality at different levels of geographic granularity (but do not directly use information about the
location itself). We document striking variation in the level of average entrepreneurial quality
across different Massachusetts towns: the area around Boston has a much higher average level
of entrepreneurial quality than the rest of the state, and there is striking variation within the
Boston metro area, with Kendall Square, the northeast Route 128 corridor and the Boston
Innovation District registering a very high level of average entrepreneurial quality. Over time,
we document a striking change in entrepreneurial quality leadership as the Route 128 corridor
has ceded EQI leadership to Cambridge. We are also able to offer more granular assessments,
including comparing the areas immediately surrounding MIT / Kendall Square versus Harvard
Square, and illustrating the micro-geography of entrepreneurial quality with an address-level
visualization of the area immediately surrounding MIT.
We then examine the potential for nowcasting entrepreneurial quality, where we evaluate
whether it is possible to make timely entrepreneurial quality predictions in advance of observing
the ultimate growth outcomes associated with any cohort of start-ups. We specifically compare
an index which relies only on start-up characteristics immediately observable at the time of
business registration (name, Delaware registration, etc) with an index that allows for a two-year
lag in order to incorporate early milestones such as patent or trademark application or being
featured in local newspapers. Our results suggest that, though there is information that is

7

gleaned from allowing for a lag, a nowcasted EQI is feasible and closely correlated with a more
patient index.
Finally, we begin to consider the relationship between our measures and issues of
theoretical or policy interest. Specifically, we find that the most significant “gap” between our
index and the realized growth outcomes of a given cohort seem to be closely related to
investment cycles: while the most successful cohort of Massachusetts start-ups was founded in
1995, the year 2000 cohort registered the highest estimated quality. This finding is particularly
important in the light of recent work on capital market cycles, the need for follow-on financing
and innovative entrepreneurship (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2013; Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf,
2014). Though we are cautious in interpreting our results, our results are consistent with the idea
that an important loss from variation in the level of risk capital financing is the lack of follow-on
investment for precisely the cohort of ventures that actually registered the highest overall
potential impact.

More generally, consistent with earlier studies of the concentration of

innovation such as Audretsch and Feldman (1996) and Furman, Porter and Stern (2002), our
findings highlight the idea that, relative to the overall level of entrepreneurial activity,
entrepreneurial quality is highly clustered in both space and time.

Uncovering why

entrepreneurial quality is concentrated remains an important topic for future research.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. We motivate our approach by discussing the
need for a measure of entrepreneurial quality in Section II, and then present a methodology for
constructing such a measure in Section III. Section IV introduces the data, and Sections V and
VI present our key findings. A final section concludes.

8

II. Why is the Measurement of Entrepreneurial Quality Important?
Our motivation for developing an index of entrepreneurial quality stems from a growing
agreement within entrepreneurship scholars that while new firms seem to have a positive effect
in regional economic growth on average (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992; Haltiwanger, Jarmin and
Miranda, 2013; Kortum and Lerner, 2000; Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr, 2014), there is very
significant heterogeneity across firms from the time of their founding, and only a very small
fraction of start-ups seem to be driving the economy-wide benefits from entrepreneurship (Kerr,
Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2014). As emphasized by Schoar, even if entrepreneurship has a net
positive effect, policy efforts that aim to increase the supply of entrepreneurship without regard
to quality could have a negative economic effect: “I argue that unless we understand the
differences between those two types of entrepreneurs more clearly, many policy interventions
may have unintended consequences and may even have an adverse impact on the economy.”
(Schoar, 2010; also see Hurst and Pugsley, 2010, Lerner, 2010, and Decker, Haltiwanger,
Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014, for further discussion).
While there is increasing understanding of the importance of accounting for
heterogeneity among entrepreneurs in the measurement of entrepreneurship, developing
systematic measures of entrepreneurial quality has been challenging.

In the area of

entrepreneurial finance, researchers have often proceeded by simply examining samples of firms
that have reached relatively rare milestones such as venture capital: while this facilitates the
examination of the dynamics of high-potential firms, it nonetheless creates a disconnect between
these small samples of selected firms and the overall population of start-up firms.3 At the same
3

Self selection into the sample can result in a different type of selectivity. For example, the Startup Genome Project is a
9

time, researchers have attempted to use publicly available data to develop specific indices of
entrepreneurship, often at the regional level. Most of these indices have focused either on
measures of entrepreneurial quantity (e.g., the Kauffman Index of Entrepreneurial Activity
measures the rate of start-ups per capita using data from the Current Population Survey, and
work by Leora Klapper and co-authors has provided benchmarking data for the rate of business
registration across countries and time (Klapper, Amit, and Guillen, 2010), or on surveys that
measure entrepreneurial attention, attitudes, or entrepreneurial activity (with the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor being the most influential and systematic effort based on surveys on a
global basis (see Amoros and Bosma, 2014)). While these efforts have provided significant
insight into the overall rate and attitudes towards entrepreneurial activity, these approaches have
yet to directly address the interplay between the heterogeneity among entrepreneurs and the
process of economic growth. Finally, research exploiting establishment-level data such as the
Longitudinal Business Data (or the more aggregated Business Dynamics Statistics) have been
able to document the role of entrepreneurship in job creation (e.g., emphasizing the importance
of young firms rather than small firms in that process), and also highlighting an observed
reduction in the rate of business dynamism in the United States over time (Haltiwanger, 2012;
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014; Hathaway and Litan, 2014a).

But, as

emphasized by Hathaway and Litan, the challenge in directly incorporating heterogeneity is a
measurement problem: “The problem is that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to know at the

private effort to characterize regional start-ups aiming to address challenges of measuring the nature of start-up activity
(Reister, 2014). However, the data they have gathered through self-submission and curated methods is very far from
comprehensive. For example, in the Cambridge Innovation Center at 1 Broadway, in Cambridge, MA, Startup Genome
identifies only 9 (presumably active) firms at the time of writing, while business registration records show 229 new firms
at this address between 2007 and 2012.
10

time of founding whether or not firms are likely to survive and/or grow.” (Hathaway and Litan,
2014b).
Establishing a measurement framework for entrepreneurial quality would not simply be
of interest for policymakers but would also allow for the direct assessment of key questions in
entrepreneurship. For example, while clusters of entrepreneurship such as Silicon Valley or
Boston are associated with a disproportionate share of companies that achieve a meaningful
growth outcome (e.g., an IPO or acquisition), is this due simply to the fact that these areas are
home to higher quality ventures or is there a separate impact of being located in a fertile
entrepreneurial ecosystem? How does the quality of entrepreneurship vary across different types
of founders (e.g., men versus women, or other demographic distinctions)? Finally, how does
entrepreneurial quality vary with investment cycles (i.e., how does the level of entrepreneurial
quality change during an investment boom, and what happens to high-quality entrepreneurial
ventures that are founded just before an investment slowdown)? A measure of entrepreneurial
quality could also be used to evaluate the impact of specific policy changes and programs, and
also evaluate the role of institutions that impact some start-ups but not others. More generally,
systematic measurement of entrepreneurial quality has the potential to serve as a tool for a broad
range of questions relating to the causes and consequences of entrepreneurship.

III. Methodology
Building on this motivation, we now develop a novel methodology for estimating
entrepreneurial quality for a population sample of start-ups at the time of founding, and propose
preliminary candidates for two novel economic statistics to track and evaluate regional
entrepreneurial performance: an Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI), a measure of the average
11

quality of new firms, and a Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI), equal to
the average quality of new firms multiplied by the number of new firms within a given cohortregion. Our approach combines three interrelated elements: the ability to observe a population
sample of entrepreneurs, a procedure to estimate entrepreneurial quality for each start-up at the
firm level, and a procedure to aggregate across quality into regional indices.
Data Requirements. A first requirement for a timely and granular index of entrepreneurial
quality is an unbiased (ideally population) sample of new firms, and the ability to identify the
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship of new cohorts on a timely basis.4 As discussed further
in the Data section, we exploit publicly available business registration records to satisfy this first
requirement. Since business registration is a practical (and straightforward) requirement for
growth, the sample of business registrants in a given time period composes a meaningful cohort
of start-ups for which one could evaluate quantity (the number of business registrants, or the
number of business registrants of a certain type) as well as quality (by assessing the underlying
quality of each business registrant in a standardized way).
Estimating Entrepreneurial Quality. To assess quality (at any level of granularity), we
must first be able to estimate entrepreneurial quality for any given firm. To do so, we take
advantage of the fact that, both directly within business registration records as well as through
other publicly available data sources (such as the patent and trademark record, the news media,
etc), we are able to potentially observe a set of “start-up characteristics.” The central challenge
is to develop a systematic approach that allows one to rank different start-ups based on these
start-up characteristics. We do so by creating a mapping between a meaningful growth outcome

4

Limiting the sample to firms having achieved a meaningful intermediate outcome (e.g., the receipt of venture capital)
will inevitably conflate the process of selection into the intermediate outcome (which itself is likely to be changing over
time and location) with the variation in underlying quality of ventures across time and location.
12

(observed of course with a lag) and the characteristics observable at or near the time of founding.
More precisely, for a firm i born in region r at time t, with start-up characteristics
observe a growth outcome

, we

s years after founding and estimate:
(1)

Using this predictive model, we are able to predict quality as the probability of achieving a
growth outcome given start-up characteristics at birth, and so estimate entrepreneurial quality as
.5 To operationalize this idea, we draw on standard approaches in predictive modeling and
divide our sample into three separate elements: a training sample, a test sample, and a prediction
sample. The training sample is composed of the majority of observations for which we can
observe both start-up characteristics and the growth outcome (i.e., the observable growth sample
ends s years prior to the present) and is the sample we use to estimate (1). 6 We are then able to
use the remaining data from the observable growth sample to conduct out-of-sample validation
of our estimates (and of course are able to draw these samples multiple times to evaluate the
robustness of our results to alternative draws of both samples). Finally, we are able to construct
a prediction sample in which we observe start-up characteristics but have not yet observed the
growth outcome. As long as the process by which start-up characteristics map to growth remain
stable over time (an assumption which is itself testable), we are able to then develop an estimate
for entrepreneurial quality even for very recent cohorts. In particular, we can examine the
tradeoff between relying exclusively on start-up characteristics immediately observable at the
time of business registration (which will allow one to create real-time statistics) with estimates
5

While there exist several data mining methods to build a predictive model (including linear regression, binary regression,
and neural networks), our methodology uses a logit regression, which performs well in quality of predictions (relative to a
linear probability model) while still allowing interpretability of the economic magnitudes and significance of the
coefficients for the measures used (Pohlman and Leitner, 2003).
6
We reserve 30% of the sample for which we observe both the growth outcome and start-up characteristics for the test
sample.
13

that allow for a lag in order to incorporate early milestones such as patent or trademark
application or being featured in local newspapers.
Calculating an Entrepreneurial Quality Index.

To create an index of entrepreneurial

quality for any group of firms (e.g., all the groups within a particular cohort or a group of firms
satisfying a particular condition), we simply take the average quality within that group.
Specifically, in our regional analysis, we define the Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI) as an
aggregate of quality at the region-year level by simply estimating the average of

over that

region:
(2)
represents the set of all firms in region r and year t, and

where

represents the number

of firms in that region-year. To ensure that our estimate of entrepreneurial quality for region r
reflects the quality of start-ups in that location rather than simply assuming that start-ups from a
given location are associated with a given level of quality, we exclude any location-specific
measures Xr,t from the vector of observable start-up characteristics.
Three particular features of EQI are notable. First, while the general form of

is a

panel format, it is possible to construct a cross-sectional distribution of quality at a moment in
time (i.e.,

) to facilitate analyses such as spatial mapping.

Second, the level of

geographical aggregation is arbitrary: while the discussion of a “region” may connote a large
geographic area, it is possible to calculate EQI at the level of a city, ZIP code, or even individual
addresses. Finally, we can extend EQI in order to study an arbitrary grouping of firms (i.e., we
do not need to select exclusively on geographic boundaries). For example, we can examine startups whose founder share a common demographic characteristic (e.g., sex), or firms that
undertake a specific strategic action (e.g., engage in crowdfunding).
14

The Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI). From the perspective
of a given region, the overall potential for a cohort of start-ups requires combining both the
quality of entrepreneurship in a region and the number of firms in such region (a measure of
quantity). To do so, we define RECPI as simply

multiplied by the number of firms in that

region-year:
(3)
Since our index multiplies the average probability of a firm in a region-year to achieve
growth (quality) by the number of firms, it is, by definition, the expected number of growth
events from a region-year given the start-up characteristics of a cohort at birth. Under the
assumption of excluding regional effects (e.g., agglomeration economies) or time-based effects
(e.g., changes in available financing), our index can be interpreted as a measure of the
“potential” of a region given the “intrinsic” quality of firms at birth, which can then be affected
by the impact of the entrepreneurial ecosystem, or shocks to the economy and the cohort between
the time of founding and a growth outcome.
Assessing the Merit of our Quality Estimates. Our methodology estimates the quality of
new firms through a predictive model of probability of achieving a growth outcome, and as such
the predictive accuracy of the model must be evaluated before relying on its estimates to draw
economic inference. Specifically, given concerns about the potential for over-fitting (Taddy,
2013), we reserve 30% of the observable growth outcome sample in order to conduct out-ofsample validation.

In particular, we conduct the analysis multiple times to evaluate the

robustness of our estimates to the sample from which it is drawn, and also plot the share of
realized outcomes (in the test sample) associated with different percentiles of our estimated

15

quality distribution.

Robustness of the coefficients to different samples, and a model with

strong predictive accuracy in out-of-sample testing are stronger candidates as economic statistics.

IV. Data
As mentioned earlier, our analysis leverages publicly available business registration
records, a potentially rich and systematic data for entrepreneurship and business dynamics.
Business registration records are public records created when individuals register a business.
This analysis focuses on the state of Massachusetts from 1988-2014 (see Appendix I for a short
description and discussion of these records). During the time of our sample, it was possible to
register several types of businesses: corporations, limited liability companies, limited liability
partnerships, and general partnerships. While it is possible to found a new business without
business registration (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial,
including limited liability, protection of the entrepreneur’s personal assets, various tax benefits,
the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, credibility with potential customers, and the
ability to deduct expenses. Furthermore, all corporations, partnerships, and limited liability must
register with the state in order to take advantage of these benefits: the act of registering the firm
triggers the legal creation of the company. As such, these records form the population of
Massachusetts businesses that take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth.7
Concretely, our analysis draws on the complete population of firms satisfying one of the
following conditions: (a) a for-profit firm whose jurisdiction is in Massachusetts or (b) a for-

7

This section draws on Guzman and Stern (2015), where we introduce the use of business registration records in the
context of entrepreneurial quality estimation.
16

profit firm whose jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in
Massachusetts.

In other words, our analysis excluded non-profit organizations as well as

companies whose primary location is external to Massachusetts. Applied over the years 19882014, the resulting dataset is composed of 541,666 observations 8 . For each observation we
construct variables related to (a) the growth outcome for each start-up, (b) start-up characteristics
based on business registration observables and (c) start-up characteristics based on external
observables that can be linked directly to the startup. Table 1 reports the summary statistics,
both for the overall sample (divided out by our estimation and prediction sample periods) and
conditional on whether the firm achieved a growth outcome or not.
Growth. The growth outcome utilized in this paper, Growth, is a dummy variable equal to
1 if the startup achieves an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful positive
valuation within 6 years of registration9. Both outcomes are drawn from Thomson Reuters SDC
Platinum.10 We observe 462 positive growth outcomes for the 1988-2005 startup cohorts (used
in all our regressions), yielding a mean of Growth of 0.0014. The median acquisition price is $77
million (ranging from a minimum of $11.9 million at the 5th percentile to $1.92 billion at the 95th
percentile).11

8
The number of firm births in our sample is substantially higher than the US Census Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD), done from tax records. For Massachusetts in the period 2003-2012, the LBD records an average of 9,450 new
firms per year and we record an average of 24,066 firm registrations. While the reasons for this difference are still to be
explored, there are at least two reasons which we expect will be in part causing this difference: (i) partnerships and LLCs
who do not have income during the year do not file a tax returns and are thus not included in the LBD, and (ii) firms that
have zero employees are not included in the LBD.
9
Our results are robust to changes in the time allowed for a firm to achieve growth. See Guzman and Stern (2015,
Supplementary Materials) for a subset of those robustness tests.
10
While the coverage of IPOs is likely to be nearly comprehensive, the SDC dataset excludes some acquisitions.
However, though the coverage of significant acquisitions is not universal in the SDC dataset, previous studies have
“audited” the SDC data to estimate its reliability, finding a nearly 95% accuracy (Barnes et al, 2014).
11
In our main results, we assign acquisitions with an unrecorded acquisitions price as a positive growth outcome, since an
evaluation of those deals suggests that most reported acquisitions were likely in excess of $5 million. All results are robust
to the assignment of these acquisitions as equal to a growth outcome.

17

Start-Up Characteristics. The core of the empirical approach is to map growth outcomes
to observable characteristics of start-ups at or near the time of business registration. We develop
two types of measures:

(a) measures based on business registration observables, and (b)

measures based on external indicators of start-up quality that are observable at or near the time of
business registration. We review each of these in turn.
Measures Based on Business Registration Observables. We construct ten measures based
on information observable in the business registration records. Four are measures that we
anticipate are associated with firm potential, four are dummy variables based on the industry
cluster most closely linked to the start-up, and two are associated with measures of serial
entrepreneurship to capture the underlying quality of the founder.
We first create two binary measures that relate to how the firm is registered, Corporation,
whether the firm is a corporation rather than an LLC or partnership, and Delaware Jurisdiction,
whether the firm is registered in Delaware. Corporation is an indicator equal to 1 if the firm is
registered as a corporation and 0 if it is registered either as an LLC or partnership.12 In the period
of 1988 to 2005, 0.19% of corporations achieve a growth outcome versus only 0.03% of noncorporations.13 Delaware jurisdiction is equal to 1 if the firm is registered under Delaware, but
has its main office in Massachusetts (all other foreign firms are dropped before analysis).
Delaware jurisdiction is favorable for firms which, due to more complex operations, require
more certainty in corporate law, but it is associated with extra costs and time to establish and
maintain two registrations. Between 1988 and 2005, 5.8% of the sample registers in Delaware;
74% of firms achieving a growth outcome do so.
12

Previous research highlights performance differences between incorporated and unincorporated entrepreneurs (Levine
and Rubinstein, 2014).
13
It is important to note that the share of corporations in Massachusetts has moved dramatically after limited liability
companies where introduced in 1995, from around 92% in 1994, to 36% in 2013.
18

We then create two additional measures based directly on the name of the firm. Drawing
on the recent work of Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2014) (BCD), we use the firm and founder
name to establish whether the firm name is eponymous (i.e., named after one or more of the
founders). Eponymy is equal to 1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top managers is part of
the name of the firm itself. 14,15 15% of the firms in our training sample are eponymous (an
incidence rate similar to BCD), though only 1.08% for whom Growth equals one. It is useful to
note that, while we draw on BCD to develop the role of eponymy as a useful start-up
characteristic, our hypothesis is somewhat different than BCD: we hypothesize that eponymous
firms are likely to be associated with lower entrepreneurial quality.

Whereas BCD evaluates

whether serial entrepreneurs are more likely to invest and grow companies which they name after
themselves, we focus on the cross-sectional difference between firms with broad aspirations for
growth (and so likely avoid naming the firm after the founders) versus less ambitious enterprises,
such as family-owned “lifestyle” businesses.
Our second measure relates to the length of the firm name. Based on our review of
naming patterns of growth-oriented start-ups versus the full business registration database, a
striking feature of growth-oriented firms is that the vast majority of their names are at most two
words (plus perhaps one additional word to capture organizational form (e.g., “Inc.”)).
Companies such as Akamai or Biogen have sharp and distinctive names, whereas more
traditional businesses often have long and descriptive names (e.g., “New England Commercial
Realty Advisors, Inc.”). We define Short Name to be equal to one if the entire firm name has

14

We consider the top manager any individual with one of the following titles: President, CEO, or Manager.
We require names be at least four characters to reduce the likelihood of making errors from short names. Our results are
robust to variations of the precise calculation of eponymy (e.g., names with a higher or lower number of minimum letters).
15

19

three of less words, and zero otherwise. 47% of firms within the 1988-2005 period have a short
name, but the incidence rate among growth firms is more than 80%.16
We then create four measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
that the firm within which the firm is operating. To do so, we take advantage of two features of
the US Cluster Mapping Project (Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2015), which categorizes industries
into (a) whether that industry is primarily local (demand is primarily within the region) versus
traded (demand is across regions) and (b) among traded industries, a set of 51 traded clusters of
industries that share complementarities and linkages. We augment the classification scheme
from the US Cluster Mapping Project with the complete list of firm names and industry
classifications contained in Reference USA, a business directory containing more than 10 million
firm names and industry codes for companies across the United States. Using a random sample
of 1.5 million Reference USA records, we create two indices for every word ever used in a firm
name. The first of these indices measures the degree of localness, and is defined as the relative
incidence of that word in firm names that are in local versus non-local industries (i.e.,
).

We then define a list of Top Local Words, defined as those

words that are (a) within the top quartile of  and (b) have an overall rate of incidence greater
than 0.01% within the population of firms in local industries (see Guzman and Stern, (2015,
Table S10) for the complete list). Finally, we define local to be equal to one for firms that have
at least one of the Top Local Words in their name, and zero otherwise.

We then undertake a

similar exercise for the degree to which a firm name is associated with a traded name.

16

It is

We have also investigated a number of other variants (allowing more or less words, evaluating whether the name is
“distinctive” (in the sense of being both non-eponymous and also not an English word). While these are promising areas
for future research, we found that the three-word binary variable provides a useful measure for distinguishing
entrepreneurial quality.
20

important to note that there are firms which we cannot associate either with traded or local and
thus leave out as a third category. Just more than 15% of firms have local names, though only
3.7% of firms for whom growth equals one, and while 53% of firms are associated with the
traded sector, 57% of firms for whom growth equals one do.
We additionally examine the type of traded cluster a firm is associated with, focusing in
particular on whether the firm is in a high-technology cluster or a cluster associated with
resource intensive industries. For our high technology cluster group (Traded High Technology),
we draw on firm names from industries include in ten USCMP clusters: Aerospace Vehicles,
Analytical Instruments, Biopharmaceuticals, Downstream Chemical, Information Technology,
Medical Devices, Metalworking Technology, Plastics, Production Technology and Heavy
Machinery, and Upstream Chemical. From 1988 to 2005, while only 5.6% firms are associated
with high technology, this rate increases to 20% within firms that achieve our growth outcome.
For our resource intensive cluster group, we draw on firms names from fourteen USCMP
clusters: Agricultural Inputs and Services, Coal Mining, Downstream Metal Products, Electric
Power Generation and Transmission, Fishing and Fishing Products, Food Processing and
Manufacturing, Jewelry and Precious Metals, Lighting and Electrical Equipment, Livestock
Processing, Metal Mining, Nonmetal Mining, Oil and Gas Production and Transportation,
Tobacco, Upstream Metal Manufacturing. While 14% of firms are associated with resource
intensive industries, the rate drops to 8% amongst growth firms.
Finally, we sought to develop measures that would link entrepreneurial quality to the
quality and potential of the firm founders. Specifically, we construct two measures based on
whether the individuals connected to the firm have been associated with start-up activity in the
past. Repeat Entrepreneurship, equals 1 if the president, CEO, or manager of a firm is also listed
21

as a president, CEO, or manager in a deceased firm that became inactive before the current firm
was registered. To guarantee we match the same individual we require an exact match on both
name and address. We then interact Repeat Entrepreneurship with the High Tech cluster dummy
to create High Tech. Repeat Entrepreneurship, a measure of serial entrepreneurship in high
technology start-ups.17
Measures based on External Observables. We construct two measures related to start-up
quality based on information in intellectual property data sources and one measure related to
media presence close to birth.18
Building on prior research matching business names to intellectual property
(Balasubramanian and Sivadasan, 2009; Kerr and Fu, 2008), we rely on a name-matching
algorithm connecting the firms in the business registration data to external data sources.
Importantly, since we match only on firms located in Massachusetts, and since firms names
legally must be “unique” within each state’s company registrar, we are able to have a reasonable
level of confidence that any “exact match” by a matching procedure has indeed matched the
same firm across two databases. Our main results use “exact name matching” rather than “fuzzy
matching”; in small-scale tests using a fuzzy matching approach (the Levenshtein edit distance
(Levenshtein, 1965)), we found that fuzzy matching yielded a high rate of false positives due to
the prevalence of similarly named but distinct firms (e.g., Capital Bank v. Capitol Bank,
Pacificorp Inc v. Pacificare Inc.).19

17

While we only use these two founder measures in this paper, we have explored other measures including estimating
gender and ethnicity and plan to investigate these types of social and demographic variables in future work.
18
While this paper only measures external observables related to intellectual property and media, our approach can be
utilized to measure other externally observable characteristics that may be related to entrepreneurial quality (e.g., measures
related to the quality of the founding team listed in the business registration (e.g., through LinkedIn profiles), or measures
of early investments in scale (e.g., a web presence)).
19
Our matching algorithm works in three steps. (1) First, we clean the firm name by: (a) expanding 8 common
abbreviations (“Ctr.”, “Svc.”, “Co.”, “Inc.”, “Corp.”, “Univ.”, “Dept.”, “LLC.”) in a consistent way (e.g., “Corp.” to
22

We construct two measures related to start-up quality based on intellectual property data
sources from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Patent is equal to 1 if a firm holds a patent
application within the first year and 0 otherwise. We include patents that are filed by the firm
within the first year of registration and patents that are assigned to the firm within the first year
from another entity (e.g., an inventor or another firm). While only 0.6% of the firms
Massachusetts have a patent application, 7.2% of growth firms do. Our second measure,
Trademark, is equal to 1 if a firm applies for a trademark within the first year of registration.
While only 0.2% of firms have a trademark 3.7% of growth firms do.
Finally, we construct a measure based on the firm’s presence in media outlets. Media
Mentions is equal to 1 if a firm has a news story with its name in the business section of the
Boston Globe, within a year of its founding date. To do so, we search for all firms names in the
historical records of the Boston Globe allowing a one year window before and after the founding
date and finding those that have articles on the business section.20 While we can identify an
early media mention for only 0.14% of firms, this number increases to 3.6% when considering
growth firms.21

“Corporation”); (b) removing the word “the” from all names; (c) replacing “associates” for “associate”; and (d) deleting
the following special characters from the name: . | ’ ” - @ _ . Second, we create three variables that hold (a) the
organization type (e.g., Corporation, Incorporated, Limited Liability Company), (b) the firm name without the
organization type, and (c) the firm name without the organization type and without spaces. Finally, we proceed to do the
actual matching of data sets. First on firm name and organization type, then only on name, and finally on collapsed name.
Our companion paper contains further tests on the name matching procedure and all our scripts are available in the online
appendix.
20
We identify articles in the business section by using the journalist name and only keeping those that often report
business-related news.
21
While this result might lead to some bias due to the geographic nature of the Boston Globe, the state of Massachusetts is
sufficiently small that we expect high potential firms to be mentioned in the Boston Globe regardless of specific locations.
Furthermore, all of our results are robust to excluding this measure.
23

V.

Estimating Entrepreneurial Quality and Performance

We undertake our analysis in several stages. First, we examine the relationship between our
growth outcome and various start-up characteristics, identifying a candidate set of start-up
characteristics from which to estimate entrepreneurial quality, and evaluate the performance of
our estimator in an out-of-sample test. We then turn to the calculation of our two proposed
indices, EQI and RECPI, implement and evaluate our key placecasting and nowcasting
applications, and consider the overall performance of our estimator and indices as well as the
interpretation of our results in the context of the broader literature.
We begin in Table 2 with a series of univariate logit regressions of Growth on each of our
measured start-up characteristics. As mentioned earlier, these regressions (and all subsequent
regressions) are conducted on a random 70% training sample of the complete 1988-2005 dataset,
reserving 30% of the 1988-2005 data as a test sample. To facilitate the interpretation of our
results, we present the results in terms of the odds-ratio coefficient and the pseudo-R2.
These univariate results are suggestive. Various simple measures directly captured from the
registration record (such as whether the firm is a Corporation or registered in Delaware, or is
named after the founder or using less than two words) are each highly significant and associated
with a large increase in the probability that a given firm achieves a growth outcome.

For

example, corporations are associated with a more than 5X increase in the probability of growth,
and those that register in Delaware are associated with more than a 40X increase in the
probability of growth. Conversely, firms named after their founders have only a 5% chance of a
growth outcome relative to those with a non-eponymous name. Equally intriguing results are
associated with measures of the degree of innovativeness and novelty of the start-up: Patent is
24

associated with nearly a 60X increase in the probability of growth, and Trademark and
Mentioned in Boston Globe are each associated with more than a 30X increase in the probability
of growth. Importantly, not all candidate measures are associated with a meaningful statistical
relationship: both of our founder measures are associated with much smaller and statistically
insignificant effects on the probability of growth.
It is of course important to emphasize that each of these coefficients must be interpreted with
care. While we are capturing start-up characteristics that are associated with growth, we are not
claiming a causal relationship between the two: if a firm with low growth potential changes its
legal jurisdiction to Delaware that is unlikely to have any impact on its overall growth
prospects. 22 Instead, Delaware registration is an informative signal, based on the fact that
external investors often prefer to invest in firms governed under Delaware law, of the ambition
and potential of the start-up, as observed at the time of business registration. Reliance on a
univariate measure makes inference particularly tricky: in isolation, one cannot evaluate whether
any particular start-up characteristic is more or less important than others.
We therefore proceed in Table 3 to consider these effects in tandem.

We begin by

simply examining the impact of three measures directly observable from the business registration
record: Corporation, Short Name, and Eponymous. Each are statistically and quantitatively
significant: while corporations and short names are each associated with a more than 4X

22

One important concern in policy applications of this methodology, is that our measures might change incentives of
firms, such that they try to “game” the result by select into high-quality measures they previously did not care about (e.g.
changing its name form long to short). We note that this possibility, though real, is bounded by the incentives of the
founders. For example, it is unlikely that a founder with no intention to grow would incur the significant yearly expense
require to keep a registration in Delaware (which we estimate around $1000). Similarly, firms that signal in their name
being a local business (e.g. “Taqueria”) are unlikely to change their names in ways that affect their ability to attract
customers. Finally, we also note that any effects from “gaming” would be short-lived since, as low quality firms select into
a specific measure the correlation between such measure and growth – and therefore the weight our prediction model
would assign to it – weakens.

25

increase in the probability of growth, eponymy reduces the probability of growth by nearly 95%.
When we introduce cluster dummies in (2), the results for these business registration measures
remains similar; at the same time, the results suggest that businesses whose names are associated
with a traded high technology cluster are more than 3X more likely to grow and local businesses
register a 64% growth probability penalty. In (3), the inclusion of a dummy for whether the firm
registers in Delaware has several effects. First, and most importantly, Delaware registration is
associated with more than 40X increase in the probability of growth (we once again caution that
this effect is not causal but instead helps identify firms whose underlying potential both makes
them more likely to register in Delaware and more likely to realize a growth outcome). At the
same time, the inclusion of the Delaware dummy reduces the measured penalty associated with
eponymy and being associated with a local business name, and reduces the boost associated with
being in a high technology cluster.

Interestingly, the pseudo-R2 increases from 11% to 31%

with the inclusion of the Delaware dummy.

The specification in (3) is particularly interesting

since these data rely only on information directly observable from the registration record, and so
in principle can be observed on a nearly real-time basis for the purposes of a nowcasting version
of EQI.
In (4), we move towards incorporating measures that capture key early milestone
achievements for a start-up that might serve as informative signals for their likelihood of
entrepreneurial success. Events such as the assignment of a patent, a patent or trademark
application, or mention in the media can only occur once the venture has been launched, but
might occur in a timely enough manner to still provide information for the purposes of
entrepreneurial quality estimation (particularly for EQI applications in which we would like to
examine particular regions and places on an historical basis). Model 4 includes two measures of
26

intellectual property. Since the patent and Delaware indicators are highly correlated (62% of
patenting firms are also registered in Delaware), we separate the effect into distinct interaction
components. Having a patent increases the likelihood of growth 40 times, and Delaware firms
are 40 times more likely to achieve growth. Interestingly, the combined effect (131.9) is smaller
than the joint product of the individual effects. Finally, a firm with an early trademark is more
than 3 times more likely to grow. Importantly, the business registration coefficients remain
similar in magnitude and statistical significance to the results in (3).

Model 5 includes one

additional measure, Mentioned in Boston Globe, which captures whether the start-up was
mentioned in the business section of the primary Massachusetts newspaper within the first year
after registration.

Media is associated with more than a 5X increase in the probability of

growth, and the coefficients associated with the other variables remains similar.
Finally, (6) and (7) include two measures to capture the impact of serial entrepreneurship
– one based on whether at least one of the founders has ever been associated with a
Massachusetts start-up before and the other interacting that measure with our high-technology
cluster variable. Though the direction of each of these measures is as predicted, neither is
significant nor large (relative to many of the other coefficients in these regressions). We should
emphasize that, since we require that the serial entrepreneur maintains their address between the
two ventures, we may be not yet capturing and tracking serial entrepreneurship in a meaningful
way. Identifying more precise and nuanced information from founders is an important agenda
for future research using this methodology.
Overall, these regressions offer striking indicators of the relationship between observable
start-up characteristics and the realization of growth. There is dramatic variation in the estimated
probability of growth for individual firms. For example, using the estimates from (5), comparing
27

the growth probability of a Delaware corporation with a patent and trademark (116.3 * 3.4 * 7.9)
to a Massachusetts LLC without intellectual property yields an odds-ratio of 3097:1. 23
Importantly, the overall results accord well with Guzman and Stern (2015), which uses the same
methodology on California data:

if supported by further evidence from other states and

jurisdictions going forward, the stable nature of the markers of entrepreneurial quality provide an
important foundation for the creation of robust economic statistics in this area.
Candidate Specification Choice and Evaluation. Before turning to the calculation of our
indices and exploration of our nowcasting and placecasting applications, we first investigate
whether it is possible to identify a preferred benchmark candidate specification that we can use
as our basis for entrepreneurial quality estimation going forward. To do so, we first compare
models that include or exclude specific sets of regressors using a standard likelihood ratio test.
Specifically, in each row of Table 4, we compare the likelihood function (as well as differences
in pseudo-R2 (McFadden, 1974)) between two models, one of which (M) is nested in the other
(N).

For the first five rows (where we introduce different combinations of restricted and

unrestricted specifications), we can reject the null hypothesis associated with the restricted
model. In other words, regardless of which variables we include first, we find significant
explanatory effects from the Media, IP, and full range of Business Registration measures.
However, regardless of specification, we find no robust effects associated with our founder
measures.

As such, for the remainder of our analysis, we adopt (3-5) as our preferred

specification in evaluating our estimator.

23

More dramatically, at the (near) extreme, comparing the growth probability of a Delaware corporation with a patent (7.8
* 116.3), trademark (3.4), media mention (5.7) and non-eponymous short name (6.9 * 2.4) with an eponymous partnership
or LLC with a long name but no intellectual property or media mentions, the odds-ratio is 295,115 to one!
28

We then evaluate our estimates using the 30% test sample of observations which have not
been used in the estimation but for which we observe both the growth outcome and start-up
characteristics. In particular, using only data from the test sample (but relying on the estimates
from (3-5) to estimate entrepreneurial quality), Figure 1 presents the relationship between the
distribution of realized growth events versus the distribution of firm-level entrepreneurial
quality. The results are striking. 77% of all growth firms are in the top 5% of our estimated
growth probability distribution, and 49% are within the top 1% (interestingly, these results are
extremely similar to the findings for California from Guzman and Stern (2015)). To be clear,
growth is still a relatively rare event even among the elite: the average firm within the top 1% of
estimated entrepreneurial quality has only a 14% chance of realizing a growth outcome.
As well, we evaluate whether our results are driven by the particular sample which was
drawn for the training sample. This is particularly relevant as growth is rare in our dataset (only
462, or 0.14%) and several of our measures are also relatively rare (e.g., less than one per cent of
all firms patent or receive a trademark). To evaluate whether our sampling matters, we repeat
the process of separating out the sample into a training and test sample 100 times, implement (35) with each draw to estimate entrepreneurial quality for each firm in that draw’s test sample,
and then calculate a test statistic which is equal to the number of realized growth outcomes in the
test sample which we estimate to be in the top 5% of the estimated quality distribution. Relative
to our baseline sample result of 77%, the mean of this test statistic is 79% (with a 95%
confidence interval between 73% and 84%). At least within the overall Massachusetts sample in
this paper, our estimates of entrepreneurial quality are robust to the sample that we draw.

VI. Calculating Entrepreneurial Quality and Performance Indices

29

We now turn to the centerpiece of our analysis: the calculation of EQI and RECPI at
different levels of geographic agglomeration and across time in order to evaluate a number of
different placecasting and nowcasting applications. We now incorporate the full sample of
Massachusetts firms from 1988 through 2012, and so include the part of the prediction sample
for which we can observe the full set of start-up characteristics (recall that our baseline candidate
(3-5) involves a two-year lag between founding date and the incorporation of early patenting,
trademark, and media data).
We begin with the calculation of RECPI for the state of Massachusetts for each year
between 1988 and 2012.

In Figures 2(A) and 2(B), we compare the realized level of growth

events (per start-up cohort) with two different entrepreneurship indices: a simple measure of
entrepreneurial quantity (the number of newly registered businesses for that cohort) versus
RECPI which scales the number of registered businesses by the EQI for those businesses for
each cohort year. While there appears to be no correlation between the realized growth events
from a cohort and entrepreneurial quantity, there is a much closer relationship with RECPI,
where we are incorporating entrepreneurial quality.

RECPI grows at a rapid rate from 1991-

2000 (with a very large spike in 1999-2000) and then falls dramatically (along with the realized
level of exits between 2001-2004). From 2004-2012, Massachusetts RECPI has increased by
approximately 17%. Intriguingly, as we discuss in the Conclusion (and consistent with the
emphasis on investment cycles and start-up dynamics by Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013)), the
notable divergence between realized growth events and RECPI is coincident with the rapid rise
and collapse of the early-stage risk capital market in the late 1990s: realized growth events were
much “higher” than predicted for the 1995-1998 cohorts, essentially on-target for the 1999
cohort, and much lower for all subsequent cohorts.
30

Placecasting Entrepeneurial Quality
We now turn to a set of placecasting applications where we calculate EQI and RECPI for
different regions in Massachusetts (and during different time periods); in order to illustrate the
range of potential applications with these tools, we begin at a relatively aggregate level of
geographic scope and then focus in on much more granular analyses (i.e., we move from the
state to the city to the neighborhood to the individual address level). We begin in Figure 3 where
we calculate EQI for all firms registered in each of 351 distinct municipalities in Massachusetts
from 2007-2012. Though this map completely abstracts away from quantity (EQI is simply the
average quality for each town), there is a striking concentration of quality around the Boston
metropolitan area. Relative to an average EQI for the state of 0.8, Cambridge records the highest
level of average quality at 5.7 (i.e., the average firm founded in Cambridge has a 5 in 1000
chance in realizing growth which is nearly 8 times higher than an average firm in
Massachusetts). Cambridge is followed by a cluster of cities around the north-west section
between the Route 128 and 495 corridors, including Bedford, Waltham, Burlington, Lexington,
and Woburn. Maynard (the founding town for DEC Computers) ranks seventh with an EQI of
3.4. Though by far the largest city in Massachusetts (and the clear leader in the total number of
business registrations), Boston ranks 23rd in the state with an EQI of 2.0 between 2007-2012.
Though quality is highly concentrated around Boston, there are clusters of entrepreneurial
quality around different parts of the Commonwealth, including Amherst, Foxborough, and
Beverly. Importantly, quality is in the bottom half of the distribution in several former industrial
cities, including Worcester. Finally, quality is consistently low in popular vacation destinations
such as Cape Cod, Martha’s Vineyard, and the Berkshires.

31

These overall patterns of concentrated quality hold more generally over time. In Figure
4, we calculate EQI for the five largest counties in Massachusetts (associated with more than
95% of all growth outcomes) between 1988 and 2012.

Over the past twenty-five years,

Middlesex County (which includes both Cambridge and many of the key Route 128 towns) has
held a distinctive advantage in EQI, with a more recent period of convergence with Suffolk
County (i.e., Boston).

Within this broad pattern, there are striking dynamics among

entrepreneurial clusters within Boston. In Figure 5, we plot RECPI for three distinct areas: the
Route 128 Corridor (which we define as Waltham, Burlington, Lexington, Lincoln, Concord,
Acton and Wellesley), Cambridge, and Boston. During the 1990s, Route 128 contained the
highest level of RECPI, even though the combined populations of the Route 128 cities are only
29% of the total population of Boston. Over the past decade, there has been a dramatic shift in
overall entrepreneurial leadership in the Boston area. Cambridge now outpaces both Boston and
the Route 128 corridor, though both Boston and Cambridge experienced a significant estimated
increase in RECPI between 2009 and 2012. These changes are consistent with more qualitative
accounts: a range of media and academic commentators have highlighted the rise of Cambridge
as a hub of high-growth entrepreneurship (Katz and Wagner, 2014), and our estimates provide
direct evidence for this phenomena and also suggest that this rise is not simply the result of a
localized expansion of risk capital but instead reflects an increase in the intrinsic quality of startups within Cambridge relative to more suburban locations.
We further enhance the granularity of our analysis in Figure 6, where we calculate EQI
for each zip code in the Boston metropolitan area for the 2007-2012 period. Here we can see
that, even within cities such as Cambridge or Boston, there is considerable heterogeneity:
Kendall Square (02142) register the single highest level of EQI in the state, followed by the zip
32

code associated with the Harvard Business School (02163).

Other notable areas of

entrepreneurial quality include the area surrounding the Boston Innovation District (02210) as
well as a set of zip codes along the Route 128 corridor surrounding Lincoln Laboratories, as well
as the remaining zip codes within Cambridge. Wealthy residential districts such as Newton,
Brookline and Weston are associated with lower levels of average entrepreneurial quality.
Looking over time at a comparison between MIT/Kendall Square (02142), the area
surrounding Harvard University (02138 and 02163) and the Boston Seaport area (which now
includes the Boston Innovation District) (02210), we see that each of these areas registered a
similar level of entrepreneurial quality in the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, beginning
around 1994, the MIT/Kendall Square area began to experience a significant and sustained rise
in average entrepreneurial quality, and (contra the overall pattern of risk capital financing)
actually reached its highest level (in terms of an average) in 2003.

The average for the

MIT/Kendall Square area again increased over the second half of the last decade, and
experienced a very sharp increase in 2011 and 2012. A higher level of stability is observed in
the Harvard and Seaport District, though the Seaport District registers a significant rise starting
in 2010, coincident with the establishment of the Boston Innovation District in this area by
Mayor Thomas Menino.

While the rise of the MIT/Kendall Square area has been much

discussed (Katz and Wagner, 2010), it is nonetheless striking to see the impact of this sustained
pattern of economic on the geography of entrepreneurial quality.
We further refine our analysis and illustrate the potential of our approach by examining
the micro-geography of entrepreneurial quality at the level of individual addresses. Figure 8
shows the complete set of new business registrants between 2008-2012 in the three zip codes
adjacent to MIT: 02139, 02141, and 02142.

For each address where at least one start-up
33

registers, we include a circle whose radius is proportional to the number of business registrants,
and whose color is determined by the average level of entrepreneurial quality at that location.
The results are striking, with a very significant level of variation across individual addresses.
Across these two square miles, the average level of entrepreneurial quality (weighted by address)
is 6.0 but the median is 0.1, reflecting a highly skewed distribution. On the one hand, the area
around Central Square and Cambridgeport (to the north and west of MIT) are characterized by a
large number of addresses with a very small number of start-up events, each of which is
estimated to have a low level of quality (with EQI registering at 0.1 and lower for the majority of
individual addresses).

While there are some addresses in Central Square and Cambridgeport

registering significant levels of entrepreneurial quality (particularly along Massachusetts
Avenue), these are dwarfed by the intensive concentration of entrepreneurial quality (both in
terms of EQI and RECPI at each location) that immediately surrounds the Kendall Square area
(to the east of MIT). One Broadway, the home of the Cambridge Innovation Center, is the home
to 229 business registrants, with an average entrepreneurial quality score of 15. The Atheneum
(215 1st Street, a space that includes dedicated wet lab space for life sciences companies) hosted
15 firms with an average entrepreneurial quality score of more than 70. While entrepreneurship
is distributed across the MIT ecosystem, the cluster of world-class entrepreneurial quality
surrounding MIT is concentrated in an even smaller geographic area.
Nowcasting Entrepeneurial Quality
While our placecasting applications offer significant insight into the geography or
entrepreneurial quality and change in entrepreneurial quality over longer time periods, the
development of a measurement approach for entrepreneurial quality for policymakers must be
able to be calculated in a timely manner in order for it to be relevant and useful for policy
34

decisionmaking.

Indeed, a contribution of our method is the ability to predict entrepreneurial

quality for recent start-up cohorts (that have not yet realized growth outcomes or not) based on
observable start-up characteristics.

However, in our discussion of an estimation model in

Section V, we prioritized the inclusion of start-up characteristics that allow us to differentiate
between start-ups in nuanced ways rather than prioritizing the timeliness and ease of calculating
entrepreneurial quality. Most notably, our key measures associated with intellectual property
(either patents or trademarks) as well as our measure of media mentions are only observed with a
lag. For example, in the case of patents, inclusion of a measure of whether a firm files a patent
within one year after business registration necessitates a 2.5 year lag between business
registration and the inclusion of that firm in an entrepreneurial quality estimate (since patent
applications are not disclosed until 18 months after filing).

Alternatively, one could prioritize

being able to calculate a perhaps more noisy estimate of entrepreneurial quality with real-time
data that could be directly estimated from data available within the business registration record
itself. In Figure 9, we compare the patterns of indices that are based on EQI estimates that
depends only on information directly observable from business registration records (i.e., based
on (3-3)) with our baseline index that allows for a two-year lag that allows the estimate of
entrepreneurial quality to incorporate early milestones such as patent or trademark application or
being featured in local newspapers (i.e., (3-5)). In Figure 9(A), we simply compare the overall
RECPI for Massachusetts based on our baseline index versus an index that is explicitly
prioritizes nowcasting. The results are intriguing: there is a very close relationship between the
two through 2000, and, while there is divergence over time, the correlation between the two

35

indices is very high through the end of 2012. Interestingly, Massachusetts continues to register
an improving level of RECPI in 2013 and through November 24, 2014. 24
We then turn in Figures B and C to evaluate how our more granular analyses fare when
comparing the baseline and nowcasting indices. In Figure 9(B), we revisit the comparison
between Route 128, Cambridge and Boston. On the one hand, nowcasting advantages Boston
over these two other areas in terms of an overall ranking (presumably because Cambridge and
Route 128 are associated with firms that are more focused on formal intellectual property). At
the same time, beyond this level effect for Boston, the historical patterns are quite similar, with a
clear transition of entrepreneurial leadership from Route 128 to Cambridge over time. Indeed,
this gap sees to have only increased in the last two years. Finally, Figure 9(C) compares three
neighborhood clusters: MIT/Kendall Square, Harvard, and the Boston Innovation District. As in
Figure 9(B), the overall historical patterns are similar, though the absolute size of the gap
between the MIT area and the others is smaller. From a nowcasting perspective, the use of more
recent data documents the rise of the Boston Innovation District in a more sustained way, and
only suggests that the rate of new firm formation may have slowed after a dramatic rise between
2010 and 2011 (presumably because the initial firms within the District created an bump during
2011).
Evaluating Entrepreneurial Quality and Performance.
As a final exercise, we examine how our proposed measures perform in terms of
predicting the number of realized growth events associated with a given regional cohort. In
Table 5, we perform a series of regressions in which the dependent variable is the number of

24

For the sake of comparison, we scale the measure for 2014 by estimating the number of firms that will register from
November 24 to December 31 in 2014 through an adjustment equivalent to the share of firms that were registered over
these dates in 2013 (i.e., we multiply our estimate by 1.09).
36

Growth events per county-year, and examine various measures of entrepreneurship (and include
county fixed effects to account for differences in county overall size and composition). In (5-1),
we simply examine a measure of quantity (ln(# of births)): the coefficient is small, noisy, and
negative. In (5-2), we employ churn, a standard measure of business dynamism (Haltiwanger, et
al) to examine the impact of this measure on the number of growth events within a conty.
Though positive, the coefficient is small and remains insignificant. Even taken at face value, the
effect would be modest: doubling the level of churn would be associated with just an 8%
increase in the total number of expected growth events. Turning to EQI, we find a far more
encouraging result: EQI is not only statistically significant but also associated with a meaningful
increase in the realized number of growth events. Finally, RECPI is associated with a very large
increase in the overall elasticity: doubling RECPI is associated with more than a 50% increase in
the number of expected growth events in a region-cohort-year.

Though we caution that we

need to investigate this result further, it points to an important potential additional lens through
which to utilize these tools: an important share of realized growth events are due to “intrinsic”
factors observable at the time of founding, with other factors such as regional ecosystems,
timing, and idiosyncratic factors playing separate roles.

The variance decomposition of

entrepreneurial growth remains an important topic for future research.

VII.

Conclusion
Motivated by the need to account directly for heterogeneity among entrepreneurial

ventures, this paper has developed and applied a methodology that allows for the estimation of
entrepreneurial quality that facilitates both placecasting (identifying clusters of entrepreneurial
quality without direct use of location information in the prediction) and nowcasating (forecasting
37

the realized entrepreneurial quality of recent cohorts based on start-up characteristics but in
advance of realizing growth outcomes). We specifically introduce very preliminary exemplars
for two new economic statistics – an entrepreneurial quality index (EQI) and a regional
entrepreneurship cohort potential index (RECPI). While we emphasize that our approach is still
preliminary, we believe that the more general methodology offered here has the potential for
application by policymakers and analysts. Given the possibility that entrepreneurial quality is a
leading indicator for other outcomes in regional performance, tracking EQI would allow
government analysts to measure and manage entrepreneurial quality, and so track entrepreneurial
dynamics in a more proactive and informed way. Not simply a tool for direct measurement, our
methodology further allows government organizations (e.g., the Small Business Administration)
to design and evaluate interventions that focus on the quality of entrepreneurship rather than only
increasing rates of firm formation, thus facilitating an approach that could potentially increase
the impact of such interventions substantially.
While our focus in this paper has been in the development and preliminary application of
our methodology to address key challenges in the measurement of entrepreneurship, our results
also highlight potential linkages with areas of theoretical or policy interest.

For example,

RECPI, our quantity-adjusted index, estimates the expected number of growth events from a
cohort given its start-up characteristics, without accounting for regional effects or financial
cycles. Thus, RECPI can be interpreted as the “potential” of a cohort of new firms given their
intrinsic qualities. In close interplay with recent theory that relates changes in the demand for
quality entrepreneurship to investment cycles dynamics (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2013), our
index documents substantial year to year changes in the supply of quality of entrepreneurship.
The relationship is pro-cyclical – cohorts increase in quality as the investment opportunities
38

improve and the market gets “hotter”. However, the realized performance of a cohort is affected
by two opposing effects from the investment cycle: while later cohorts in the cycle have more
intrinsic potential to generate growth, earlier cohorts have more time in the “hot” market (before
a recession like the dot-com bust) to achieve it. The changing time dynamics of the supply of
entrepreneurial quality and its interplay with regional outcomes is an open area of research.
Spatially, in similarity to previous results that find substantial agglomeration of
innovation relative to overall industrial activity (Furman, Porter, and Stern,2002; Audretsch and
Feldman, 1996), we find entrepreneurial quality is substantially more concentrated than
entrepreneurial quantity or population. While there are several potential reasons for this pattern,
we find no reason to conclude any a-priori, and thus suggest this as an interesting finding with
potential for future research.
Finally, our results highlight the micro-geography of the quality of entrepreneurship and
suggest that clusters of entrepreneurial quality may benefit from being analyzed at a very low
level of aggregation.

In the spirit of recent work emphasizing the highly local nature of

knowledge spillovers and the nuanced shapes of entrepreneurial clusters (Arzhagi and
Henderson, 2008; Kerr and Kominers, 2015), examining the factors that shape the boundaries of
high-quality entrepreneurship is an important area for future research.

39

References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. (1992) “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction” Econometrica,
60(2): 323–351.
Amoros, Jose E., and Neils Bosma. (2014) “Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: 2013 Executive Report” London,
GB: London Business School, and Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson. (2008) “Networking of Madison Avenue” Review of Economic
Studies. 75 (4): 1011-1038
Audretsch, David B & Maryann P. Feldman. (1996) "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation and
Production," American Economic Review. 86(3): 630-640.
Balasubramanian, Natarajan, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. (2009) “NBER Patent Data-BR Bridge: User Guide and
Technical Documentation”. Working Paper.
Barnes, Beau, Harp, Nancy, Oler, Derek. (2014) “Evaluating the SDC Mergers and Acquisitions Database” SSRN
Working Paper #2201743
Belenzon, Sharon, Chatterji, Aaron and Brendan Daley. (2014) “Eponymous Entrepreneurs” Working Paper
Carlino, Geraldo, Catterjee, Satyajit, and Robert Hunt. (2007) “Urban Density and the Rate of Invention”. Journal of
Urban Economics. 61 (3): 389-419
Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. (1992) “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
Reallocation”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107 (3): 819-862
Decker, Ryan, Haltiwanger, John, Jarmin, Ron and Javier Miranda. (2014) “The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job
Creation and Economic Dynamism”. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 28(3): 3-24`
Delgado, Mercedes, Porter, Michael, and Scott Stern. (2015) “Defining Clusters in Related Industries.” Journal of
Economic Geography. forthcoming
Fairlie, Robert W.. (2014) “Kaufman Index of Entrepreneurial Activity: 1996-2013.” Ewing Marion Kaufman
Foundation, Kansas City, MS.
Feldman, Maryann, and David Audrestch. (1999) “Innovation in cities: Science-based diversity, specialization and
localized competition”. European Economic Review. 43(2): 409-429.
Furman, Jeffrey, Porter, Michael and Scott Stern. (2002) “The determinants of national innovative capacity”.
Research Policy. 31:899-933
Graham, Stuart, Hancock, Galen, Marco, Alan, and Amanda Fila Myers. The USPTO Case Files Dataset:
Descriptions, Lessons and Insights. United States Patent and Trademark Office. SSRN Working Paper
#2188621 (2013)
Gompers, Paul, Kovner, Anna, Lerner, Josh, and David Scharfstein. (2010) “Performance Persistence in
Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics. 96(1): 18-32.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. (2015) “Where is Silicon Valley?” Science. Vol. 347. Issue #6222.

40

Hamilton, Barton. (2000) “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis on the Returns to SelfEmployment”. Journal of Political Economy. 108(3): 604-631.
Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert, and John Friedman. (2001) “The Elements of Statistical Learning”. Second
Edition. Springer.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin Pugsley. (2011) “What do Small Businesses Do?”. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity.
Jaffe, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel, and Rebecca Henderson. (1993) “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 108 (3): 577-598.
Jovanovic, Boyan. (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica. 50(3): 649–670.
Katz, Bruce, and Julie Wagner. (2014) “The Rise of Innovation Districts: A New Geography of Innovation in
America”. Brookings Institution – Metropolitan Policy Program.
Kerr, William, Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. (2014) “Entrepreneurship as Experimentation”.
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 28 (3):

25-48.

Kerr, William, and Shihe Fu. (2008) "The Survey of Industrial R&D--Patent Database Link Project." Journal of
Technology Transfer. 33 (2):173-186
Kerr, William, and Scott Kominers. (2015) Review of Economics and Statistics. forthcoming
Klapper, Leora, Amit, Raphael, Guillen, Mauro. (2010) “Entrepreneurship and Firm Formation across Countries”.
NBER Volume: International Differences in Entrepreneurship. Edited by Josh Lerner and Antoinette
Schoar.
Kuznets, Simon. (1941) “National Income and its Composition, 1919-1938. Volume I” p. 3.
Lafontaine, Francine, and Kathryn Shaw. (2014) “Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by Doing?” NBER Working
Paper #20312
Levenshtein, V. I. (1965), "Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.", Doklady
Akademii Nauk SSSR 163 (4): 845–848
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. (2013) “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Does it Pay?”
NBER Working Paper #19276
Hathaway, Ian, and Robert Litan. (2014) “Declining Business Dynamism in the United States: A Look at States and
Metros”. Economic Studies at Brookings. Brookings Institution.
Hathaway, Ian, and Robert Litan. (2014) “Declining Business Dynamism: It’s For Real” Comment.
McFadden, Daniel. (1974) “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior”. Frontiers in Econometrics.
Chapter 4. Academic Press. p. 105-142.
Moskowitz, T., & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002). “The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity
Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Review. 92(4): 745-778.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. (2014) “Financing Risk and Innovation”. HBS Working Paper 11013.
41

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. (2013) "Investment Cycles and Startup Innovation." Journal of
Financial Economics (110): 403–418.
Pohlman, John, and Dennis Leitner. (2003) “A Comparison of Ordinary Least Squares and Logistic Regression.”
The Ohio Journal of Science. 103 (5): 118-125
Reister, Shane. (2014) “Why Should we Actively Track and Measure Startup Communities.” Available in:
Kauffman Thoughtbook 2015 – Entrepreneurship: New Directions for a New Era.

Retrieved from:

http://www.kauffman.org/thoughtbook2015/paths-to-entrepreneurship#startupcommunities on December,
2014.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1942) “Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy”. New York: Harper.
Schoar, Antoinette. (2010) “The Divide Between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship”. Innovation
Policy and the Economy, Volume 10. Edited by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern.
Taddy, Mathew. (2013) “Big Data Analysis”. Lecture on NBER Summer Institute: Econometric Methods for HighDimensional Data.

42

TABLE 1. Summary Statistics for Massachusetts Firms*
1988 to 2005
All Firms
N
Year

Mean

2006-2014

Growth = 0
Std. Dev.

N

Mean

Growth = 1
Std. Dev.

N

Mean

All Firms

Std. Dev.

N

Mean

Std. Dev.

319011

1997.4110

5.298

318549

1997.412

5.300

462

1996.842

4.130

197501

2009.6

2.353

Corporation

319011

0.736

0.441

318549

0.736

0.441

462

0.942

0.235

197501

0.374

0.484

Short Name

319011

0.474

0.499

318549

0.473

0.499

462

0.810

0.393

197501

0.475

0.499

Eponymous

319011

0.150

0.357

318549

0.150

0.357

462

0.011

0.104

197501

0.143

0.350

Delaware

319011

0.059

0.236

318549

0.058

0.235

462

0.738

0.440

197501

0.058

0.235

Trademark

319011

0.002

0.039

318549

0.001

0.038

462

0.043

0.204

197501

0.003

0.052

Patent

319011

0.005

0.070

318549

0.005

0.067

462

0.236

0.425

197501

0.004

0.065

319011

0.003

0.053

318549

0.003

0.052

462

0.069

0.254

197501

0.004

0.065

Repeat Entrepreneur

319011

0.011

0.104

318549

0.011

0.104

462

0.015

0.122

197501

0.014

0.117

Repeat Entrepreneur in High Tech

319011

0.001

0.027

318549

0.001

0.027

462

0.004

0.066

197501

0.001

0.027

Local

319011

0.191

0.393

318549

0.191

0.393

462

0.037

0.188

197501

0.220

0.414

Traded

319011

0.530

0.499

318549

0.530

0.499

462

0.578

0.494

197501

0.482

0.500

Traded High Technology

319011

0.056

0.231

318549

0.056

0.230

462

0.199

0.400

197501

0.041

0.199

Traded Resource Intensive

319011

0.135

0.342

318549

0.136

0.342

462

0.080

0.272

197501

0.102

0.302

Business Registration Information

Intellectual Property

Media Mentions
Mentioned in Boston Globe
Founder Effects

Cluster Groups**

* All non-profit firms, firms whose jurisdiction is not Delaware or Massachusetts, and firms in Delaware with a main office address outside of Massachusetts are dropped from our sample.
** Cluster groups are calculated grouping industry clusters in the US Cluster Mapping Project into five large categories.

43

TABLE 2. Univariate Logit from Predictors on Growth
Univariate

Corporation

Regression

Pseudo

Coefficient

R2

5.834**

1.9%

[1.379]
Short Name

4.901**

3.3%

[0.695]
Eponymous

0.052**

1.7%

[0.030]
Delaware

44.795**

20.2%

[5.591]
Patent

58.528**

8.3%

[8.092]
Trademark

38.689**

1.9%

[9.616]
Mentioned in Boston Globe

30.843**

2.4%

[6.541]
Repeat Entrepreneurship

1.117

0%

[0.563]
High Tech. Repeat Entrepreneurship

4.031

0%

[4.049]
N

223307

Incidence Ratios (Odds ratios) Reported. Robust standard errors in
brackets. + p <.1, * p <0.01, ** p<0.001

44

TABLE 3. Logit Regression on Growth (IPO or Acquisition in 6 years or less)
Firm Business Registration Data
1
2
3

Lagged Measures
4
5

Other Measures
6
7

Corporation

5.471**
[1.288]

5.155**
[1.222]

8.863**
[2.174]

8.065**
[1.994]

7.872**
[1.948]

7.880**
[1.952]

7.885**
[1.953]

Short Name

4.207**

3.840**

2.693**

2.454**

2.373**

2.372**

2.372**

[0.595]

[0.539]

[0.393]

[0.365]

[0.355]

[0.355]

[0.355]

0.0568**

0.0639**

0.132**

0.145*

0.143**

0.143**

0.143**

[0.0330]

[0.0371]

[0.0776]

[0.0850]

[0.0826]

[0.0826]

[0.0826]

40.36**

39.98**

40.00**

40.00**

[13.48]

[13.26]

[13.26]

[13.26]

40.38**

38.33**

38.33**

38.33**

[6.100]

[5.864]

[5.861]

[5.860]

131.9**

116.3**

116.2**

116.3**

[26.20]

[23.84]

[23.80]

[23.79]

3.369**

3.383**

3.382**

3.386**

[0.990]

[1.005]

[1.004]

[1.006]

5.742**

5.747**

5.738**

[1.518]

[1.516]

[1.508]

0.931

0.855

[0.507]

[0.533]

Eponymous
Delaware

42.63**
[5.876]

Delaware Patent Interactions
Patent Only
Delaware Only
Patent and Delaware
Trademark

Mentioned in Boston Globe
Founder Effects
Repeat Entrepreneurship
High Tech. Repeat Entrepreneurship

1.496
[1.972]

US Cluster Mapping Groups
Local

0.323**

0.636

0.718

0.726

0.726

0.726

[0.0884]

[0.181]

[0.206]

[0.209]

[0.209]

[0.209]

1.119

1.033

1.115

1.133

1.134

1.134

[0.145]

[0.137]

[0.150]

[0.154]

[0.153]

[0.154]

0.415**

0.642+

0.655+

0.640+

0.640+

0.638+

[0.0863]

[0.135]

[0.137]

[0.133]

[0.133]

[0.134]

3.971**

2.197**

1.748**

1.783**

1.782**

1.773**

[0.606]

[0.349]

[0.286]

[0.293]

[0.293]

[0.292]

223307
0.064

223307
0.090

223307
0.277

223307
0.302

223307
0.310

223307
0.310

223307
0.310

-2320.6

-2258.1

-1792.7

-1731.7

-1712.1

-1712.1

-1712.0

Traded
Traded Resource Intensive
Traded High Technology
Observations
Pseudo R-squared
Log-Likelihood

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in brackets + p<.05 * p<.01 ** p<.001

45

TABLE 4. Likelihood Ratio Test Comparing Different Models
Restricted Model

Unrestricted Model
Critical
Log-

Model (M)

Likelihood

LogModel (N)

Likelihood

p < .01
RM,N

Value

LR value

Business registration information without Delaware

-2258.1

Business Registration Information

-1792.7

20.61%

6.63

930.80**

Business Registration Information

-1792.7

Intellectual Property and business registration

-1731.7

3.40%

13.28

122.00**

Business registration information without Delaware

-2258.1

Intellectual Property and business registration without Delaware

-2094.01

7.27%

9.21

328.18**

Intellectual Property and Business Registration

-1731.7

Media, IP, and Business Registration

-1712.1

1.13%

6.63

39.20**

Only Delaware Registration

-1978.9

Media, IP, and Business Registration

-1712.1

13.48%

23.21

533.54**

Media, IP, and Business Registration

-1712.1

Media, IP, Business Registration, and Founder Effects

-1712.0

0.01%

9.21

0.20

46

TABLE 5. OLS Regression on Ln(Growth) by Cohort Year and County
1
Ln( # of births)

2

3

4

-0.0137
[0.0494]
(-0.277)

Ln(Churn)

0.0851

Churn = Births + Deaths

[0.0522]
(1.629)

Quality

0.234**

×1000 for readability

[0.0609]
(3.837)

Ln(RECPI)

0.514**

RECPI = Quality × # of births

[0.168]
(3.059)

County Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

N

266

266

266

266

0.794

0.796

0.809

0.808

2

R

Robust standard errors in brackets. t-statistics in parenthesis. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01.

47

Figure 1

48

49

50

Figure 3

51

52

53

FIGURE 6

54

55

FIGURE 8

56

57

58

59

APPENDIX I. Massachusetts Business Registration Records
Business registration records are a potentially rich and systematic data source for
entrepreneurship and business dynamics. While it is possible to found a new business without
business registration (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial,
including limited liability, protection of the entrepreneur’s personal assets, various tax benefits,
the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, credibility with potential customers, and the
ability to deduct expenses. Among business registrants, there are several categories, and the
precise rules governing each categories vary by jurisdiction and time. This study focuses on the
state of Massachusetts from 1988-2014, at which point one could register the following:
corporations, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, limited partnerships,
professional limited liability partnerships, and general partnerships (see (1) for further
information).
The data in this paper comes from the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Corporations Division (http://www.sec.state.ma.us/cor/coridx.htm, data received on November
27, 2014) containing four files, a master file, containing a master record for all firms ever
registered in Massachusetts at the moment of extraction; an individuals file, containing all the
directors and titles of each firm; a name history file, with previous names of each firm; and a
merger history file, with all mergers that have occurred in Massachusetts. The master file
includes the following fields: firm id, tax status (non-profit or for profit), firm type (corporation,
limited liability company, etc.), firm status (active, deceased, merged, etc.), jurisdiction
(Massachusetts, or another US state), address, firm name, Massachusetts incorporation date,
jurisdiction incorporation date (for foreign firms), address of the principal office (for firms

60

foreign to California), and Doing Business As names. The individual file includes the following
fields: firm id, title, first name, middle name, last name, business address and residential address.
After combining these files, we generate unique firm identifiers. For this paper, we select
a dataset of the for-profit firms first registered in Massachusetts from January 1, 1988 to
November 25, 2014, satisfying one of the following two conditions: for-profit firms whose
jurisdiction is Massachusetts, and for-profit Delaware firms whose main office is in
Massachusetts. Table A1 lists the number of observations in our dataset for each annual cohort
year from 1988 to 2014. It is useful to note that, for those firms registered in Delaware, we use
the year they register in Delaware, not in Massachusetts, as their founding date. Both the links
to the underlying data and the program files used to construct the dataset are available as
requested from the authors.
As a final note, this paper uses a subset of the business registration records we have now
gathered from several states, including California, Texas, Florida, Washington, and New York.
Though our evaluation of Texas, Florida, Washington and New York is at a more preliminary
stage, we have found very similar qualitative findings in terms of the impact of factors
observable at or near the time of registration on subsequent growth outcomes, and the ability of
these models to offer detailed characterization of growth entrepreneurship clusters.

61

TABLE A1
Number of Observations per Year
Year

N*

Share of Total

Cumulative Share

1988

17,613

3.3%

3.3%

1989

15,390

2.8%

6.1%

1990

13,601

2.5%

8.6%

1991

12,838

2.4%

11.0%

1992

13,333

2.5%

13.4%

1993

14,173

2.6%

16.1%

1994

14,903

2.8%

18.8%

1995

15,242

2.8%

21.6%

1996

16,575

3.1%

24.7%

1997

17,320

3.2%

27.9%

1998

17,220

3.2%

31.1%

1999

18,742

3.5%

34.5%

2000

21,374

3.9%

38.5%

2001

18,351

3.4%

41.8%

2002

20,852

3.8%

45.7%

2003

21,962

4.1%

49.8%

2004

24,238

4.5%

54.2%

2005

25,284

4.7%

58.9%

2006

24,692

4.6%

63.5%

2007

25,014

4.6%

68.1%

2008

23,262

4.3%

72.4%

2009

21,841

4.0%

76.4%

2010

23,505

4.3%

80.7%

2011

24,120

4.5%

85.2%

2012

26,745

4.9%

90.1%

2013

27,787

5.1%

95.3%

2014

25,689

4.7%

100.0%

* N is the number of observations after limiting the sample to for-profit firms registered
in Massachusetts and for-profit firms registered in Delaware with their main office in
Massachusetts.
** The year 2014 only includes firms up to those registered on November, 24 of 2014.
62

APPENDIX II. Share of Entrepreneurship Performance by Region
County

Share of Entrepreneurship Performance

Share of Firm Births

Middlesex County

49.0%

29.3%

Suffolk County

17.9%

13.6%

Norfolk County

10.2%

13.4%

Essex County

7.6%

11.3%

Worcester County

5.6%

9.5%

Plymouth County

3.0%

7.1%

Bristol County

2.3%

5.1%

Hampden County

1.7%

4.4%

Berkshire County

0.8%

1.6%

Hampshire County

0.7%

1.4%

Barnstable County

0.7%

1.9%

Nantucket County

0.2%

0.6%

Franklin County

0.1%

0.5%

Dukes County

0.1%

0.4%

63

APPENDIX III. Ranking of Entrepreneurial Quality by City
Rank

City

Quality

Rank

City

Quality

1

CAMBRIDGE

5.772

51

HARVARD

1.316

2

BEDFORD

4.666

52

ARLINGTON

1.302

3

WALTHAM

4.448

53

SOMERVILLE

1.285

4

BURLINGTON

4.320

54

DALTON

1.262

5

LEXINGTON

4.051

55

DANVERS

1.227

6

WOBURN

3.397

56

NORWOOD

1.194

7

MAYNARD

3.392

57

DOVER

1.151

8

BOXBOROUGH

2.936

58

FRANKLIN

1.085

9

FOXBOROUGH

2.707

59

GROTON

1.085

10

LINCOLN

2.617

60

MEDFIELD

1.082

11

HOPKINTON

2.574

61

BERLIN

1.081

12

ANDOVER

2.470

62

TAUNTON

1.080

13

LITTLETON

2.448

63

NEWBURYPORT

1.071

14

SOUTHBOROUGH

2.434

64

SOUTHBRIDGE

1.068

15

BILLERICA

2.433

65

WEST BRIDGEWATER

1.053

16

MARLBOROUGH

2.422

66

PAXTON

1.049

17

CHELMSFORD

2.400

67

SHERBORN

1.044

18

WESTFORD

2.351

68

SHARON

1.024

19

WESTBOROUGH

2.259

69

TOPSFIELD

1.020

20

ACTON

2.219

70

PELHAM

1.017

21

BOLTON

2.023

71

CHESTER

1.016

22

WAKEFIELD

2.022

72

NORWELL

1.005

23

BOSTON

1.984

73

ROCKLAND

1.004

24

WILMINGTON

1.913

74

MEDWAY

0.998

25

HOLLISTON

1.896

75

NEW BRAINTREE

0.996

26

WELLESLEY

1.879

76

AYER

0.978

27

NEWTON

1.874

77

MEDFORD

0.974

28

CONCORD

1.852

78

NEWBURY

0.964

29

SUDBURY

1.811

79

WORTHINGTON

0.951

30

CARLISLE

1.798

80

WINCHESTER

0.938

31

NATICK

1.782

81

ALFORD

0.938

32

WATERTOWN

1.620

82

BRAINTREE

0.930

33

BEVERLY

1.592

83

LUNENBURG

0.926

34

ROYALSTON

1.591

84

MARBLEHEAD

0.920

35

STOW

1.581

85

PEABODY

0.917

36

NEEDHAM

1.578

86

BOXFORD

0.916

37

GOSHEN

1.573

87

GRAFTON

0.912

38

MANSFIELD

1.535

88

AMESBURY

0.911

39

HUDSON

1.527

89

ADAMS

0.895

40

WENHAM

1.475

90

LENOX

0.893

41

AMHERST

1.442

91

DEDHAM

0.888

42

FRAMINGHAM

1.433

92

NORTH ANDOVER

0.888

43

NORTHBOROUGH

1.418

93

LEYDEN

0.881

44

CANTON

1.417

94

SAVOY

0.878

45

BROOKLINE

1.380

95

WALPOLE

0.874

46

WESTWOOD

1.371

96

ASHLAND

0.874

47

BELMONT

1.370

97

MILLIS

0.871

48

WAYLAND

1.333

98

WILLIAMSTOWN

0.867

49

WESTON

1.328

99

HUBBARDSTON

0.861

50

TEWKSBURY

1.320

100

TYRINGHAM

0.861

64

Rank

City

Quality

Rank

City

Quality

101

YARMOUTH

0.854

151

NEW BEDFORD

0.619

102

SANDISFIELD

0.849

152

STONEHAM

0.618

103

GLOUCESTER

0.845

153

AUBURN

0.615

104

LOWELL

0.839

154

GARDNER

0.615

105

UPTON

0.839

155

HALIFAX

0.614

106

MILFORD

0.836

156

HAVERHILL

0.614

107

DUXBURY

0.829

157

MIDDLETON

0.609

108

AVON

0.815

158

ORLEANS

0.604

109

PITTSFIELD

0.809

159

WINCHENDON

0.601

110

CHARLEMONT

0.808

160

SHREWSBURY

0.601

111

ATTLEBORO

0.807

161

FALL RIVER

0.600

112

READING

0.802

162

NORTON

0.599

113

BELCHERTOWN

0.798

163

HANOVER

0.599

114

NORTHFIELD

0.786

164

WILBRAHAM

0.599

115

LYNNFIELD

0.786

165

TOWNSEND

0.598

116

BRIMFIELD

0.776

166

ASHBURNHAM

0.597

117

LAWRENCE

0.764

167

PLYMOUTH

0.597

118

FITCHBURG

0.755

168

NORTH READING

0.596

119

WORCESTER

0.736

169

STOUGHTON

0.595

120

AGAWAM

0.736

170

RAYNHAM

0.591

121

QUINCY

0.733

171

MALDEN

0.587

122

HINGHAM

0.728

172

WEST STOCKBRIDGE

0.585

123

COHASSET

0.721

173

MELROSE

0.584

124

GEORGETOWN

0.721

174

MASHPEE

0.582

125

MARION

0.719

175

MILLBURY

0.579

126

RUSSELL

0.716

176

EASTON

0.576

127

WESTMINSTER

0.709

177

DUDLEY

0.575

128

STURBRIDGE

0.705

178

NORFOLK

0.573

129

NORTHAMPTON

0.697

179

ROWLEY

0.572

130

ROCKPORT

0.695

180

METHUEN

0.567

131

LAKEVILLE

0.688

181

CLINTON

0.565

132

BARNSTABLE

0.688

182

PALMER

0.565

133

SHEFFIELD

0.682

183

NEW ASHFORD

0.563

134

WASHINGTON

0.679

184

STERLING

0.560

135

SCITUATE

0.675

185

SANDWICH

0.552

136

LEOMINSTER

0.674

186

WEYMOUTH

0.549

137

CHELSEA

0.670

187

HOPEDALE

0.545

138

WAREHAM

0.668

188

MILTON

0.542

139

ESSEX

0.663

189

FALMOUTH

0.541

140

HARDWICK

0.660

190

LEE

0.539

141

CHICOPEE

0.657

191

SUNDERLAND

0.538

142

WEST TISBURY

0.655

192

WESTFIELD

0.538

143

SWAMPSCOTT

0.653

193

KINGSTON

0.538

144

GROVELAND

0.652

194

HULL

0.534

145

IPSWICH

0.644

195

WEST SPRINGFIELD

0.533

146

WRENTHAM

0.640

196

LONGMEADOW

0.532

147

PLAINVILLE

0.639

197

DOUGLAS

0.525

148

RANDOLPH

0.634

198

MILLVILLE

0.523

149

CONWAY

0.632

199

HOLYOKE

0.523

150

SALEM

0.620

200

HOLBROOK

0.517

65

Rank

City

Quality

Rank

City

Quality

201

SPRINGFIELD

0.516

251

GREAT BARRINGTON

0.406

202

HANSON

0.515

252

WESTPORT

0.406

203

OXFORD

0.514

253

TYNGSBOROUGH

0.403

204

WESTHAMPTON

0.511

254

CHILMARK

0.402

205

ROCHESTER

0.511

255

LUDLOW

0.401

206

MONTAGUE

0.509

256

BROCKTON

0.401

207

REHOBOTH

0.509

257

SUTTON

0.400

208

WEST BROOKFIELD

0.506

258

LYNN

0.399

209

SOUTHWICK

0.502

259

HARWICH

0.398

210

MARSHFIELD

0.494

260

DRACUT

0.398

211

EASTHAMPTON

0.490

261

SOUTH HADLEY

0.397

212

BOURNE

0.488

262

HADLEY

0.390

213

WEST NEWBURY

0.487

263

FAIRHAVEN

0.389

214

BELLINGHAM

0.485

264

CARVER

0.389

215

MENDON

0.484

265

CHARLTON

0.389

216

TRURO

0.480

266

PLYMPTON

0.388

217

SALISBURY

0.479

267

BRIDGEWATER

0.387

218

RUTLAND

0.478

268

WARREN

0.386

219

DENNIS

0.477

269

EASTHAM

0.382

220

BOYLSTON

0.477

270

WHITMAN

0.382

221

PEPPERELL

0.476

271

NANTUCKET

0.382

222

REVERE

0.471

272

EVERETT

0.382

223

ATHOL

0.469

273

LEICESTER

0.379

224

PEMBROKE

0.467

274

NAHANT

0.378

225

SAUGUS

0.466

275

UXBRIDGE

0.374

226

DEERFIELD

0.464

276

MATTAPOISETT

0.370

227

NORTH ADAMS

0.462

277

CHATHAM

0.368

228

TISBURY

0.460

278

HAWLEY

0.367

229

MONSON

0.457

279

WINTHROP

0.364

230

ABINGTON

0.454

280

SOUTHAMPTON

0.357

231

SOMERSET

0.449

281

GREENFIELD

0.353

232

SHIRLEY

0.449

282

HAMILTON

0.348

233

PROVINCETOWN

0.448

283

STOCKBRIDGE

0.348

234

SWANSEA

0.446

284

HATFIELD

0.347

235

EAST BROOKFIELD

0.446

285

WILLIAMSBURG

0.339

236

HOLDEN

0.444

286

WENDELL

0.339

237

SPENCER

0.442

287

NORTHBRIDGE

0.335

238

MIDDLEBOROUGH

0.437

288

WALES

0.328

239

EDGARTOWN

0.437

289

BREWSTER

0.328

240

WEBSTER

0.434

290

SEEKONK

0.326

241

PETERSHAM

0.432

291

ASHBY

0.324

242

MERRIMAC

0.431

292

WEST BOYLSTON

0.322

243

DUNSTABLE

0.430

293

GRANBY

0.316

244

BARRE

0.429

294

HAMPDEN

0.316

245

LANCASTER

0.429

295

HOLLAND

0.315

246

WARE

0.428

296

DARTMOUTH

0.311

247

MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA

0.422

297

MONTEREY

0.310

248

EAST LONGMEADOW

0.421

298

DIGHTON

0.310

249

BERNARDSTON

0.417

299

FLORIDA

0.309

250

NEW SALEM

0.408

300

NEW MARLBOROUGH

0.307

66

Rank

City

Quality

301

CHESHIRE

0.306

302

BLACKSTONE

0.305

303

LEVERETT

0.302

304

ORANGE

0.301

305

BUCKLAND

0.299

306

ACUSHNET

0.297

307

WELLFLEET

0.293

308

SHUTESBURY

0.293

309

CLARKSBURG

0.291

310

BECKET

0.290

311

AQUINNAH

0.287

312

CHESTERFIELD

0.284

313

BROOKFIELD

0.284

314

HINSDALE

0.281

315

PRINCETON

0.278

316

EAST BRIDGEWATER

0.277

317

PHILLIPSTON

0.271

318

COLRAIN

0.265

319

NORTH ATTLEBOROUGH

0.264

320

RICHMOND

0.262

321

ERVING

0.256

322

EGREMONT

0.256

323

HUNTINGTON

0.253

324

OAKHAM

0.252

325

OAK BLUFFS

0.252

326

MOUNT WASHINGTON

0.249

327

BERKLEY

0.246

328

GILL

0.245

329

LANESBOROUGH

0.243

330

WHATELY

0.241

331

TEMPLETON

0.235

332

NORTH BROOKFIELD

0.235

333

BLANDFORD

0.234

334

WARWICK

0.234

335

ASHFIELD

0.232

336

CUMMINGTON

0.228

337

OTIS

0.228

338

PLAINFIELD

0.227

339

WINDSOR

0.218

340

TOLLAND

0.218

341

GRANVILLE

0.215

342

SHELBURNE

0.212

343

HEATH

0.211

344

MONTGOMERY

0.210

345

HANCOCK

0.204

346

ROWE

0.199

347

PERU

0.193

348

FREETOWN

0.189

349

MIDDLEFIELD

0.146

67

68

