                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND THE QUALITY-FIT TRADEOFF

                                         Peter Arcidiacono
                                         Michael Lovenheim

                                        Working Paper 20962
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20962


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We thank Kate Antonovics, Jivesh D'Sousa, Peter Hinrichs, and Richard Sander for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Peter Arcidiacono and Michael Lovenheim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Affirmative Action and the Quality-Fit Tradeoff
Peter Arcidiacono and Michael Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 20962
February 2015
JEL No. I23,I24,I26,J15

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the literature on affirmative action in undergraduate education and law schools,
focusing in particular on the tradeoff between the quality of an institution and the fit between a school
and a student. We first discuss the conditions under which affirmative action for under-represented
minorities (URM) could help or harm their educational outcomes. We then provide descriptive evidence
on the extent of affirmative action in law schools, as well as a review of the contentious literature on
how affirmative action affects URM student performance in law school. We present a simple selection
model that we argue provides a useful framework for interpreting the disparate findings in this literature.
The paper then turns to a similar discussion of affirmative action in undergraduate admissions, focusing
on evidence of the extent of race-based admissions practices and the effect such preferences have on
the quality of schools in which minority students enroll, graduation rates, college major and earnings.
We pay much attention to the evidence from state-level bans on affirmative action and argue these
bans are very informative about how affirmative action affects URM students. Finally, we discuss
the evidence on "percent plans," which several states have enacted in an attempt to replace affirmative
action.


Peter Arcidiacono
Department of Economics
201A Social Sciences Building
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu

Michael Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu




A data appendix is available at:
see subdir of paper dir
                    Affirmative Action and the Quality-Fit Tradeoff∗

                              Peter Arcidiacono                  Michael Lovenheim

                         Duke University & NBER            Cornell University & NBER

                                                 January 15, 2015




1        Introduction

Race-based affirmative action policies, which seek to provide “affirmative” help to racial minorities,

are among the most contentious policies that exist in US labor and education markets. Proponents

argue that affirmative action helps level the playing field between majority and minority workers

or students. Indeed, the original motivation for affirmative action is the legacy of discrimination in

the U.S., particularly against African Americans. Lyndon Johnson summed it up well in his 1965

commencement address at Howard University, where he states


          “You do not take a person who, for years, has been hobbled by chains and liberate him,

          bring him up to the starting line of a race and then say, ‘You are free to compete with

          all the others,’ and still justly believe that you have been completely fair.”


In this paper we focus on how affirmative action in higher education–and in particular how racial

preferences in admissions–affect the outcomes of minority students.

        While our focus is on higher education, affirmative action began in the United States with

Lyndon Johnson’s 1965 executive order that affected the hiring practices of all federal contractors.
    ∗
        We thank Kate Antonovics, Jivesh D’Sousa, Peter Hinrichs, and Richard Sander for helpful comments.


                                                           1
These regulations have since expanded to many states, and a large number of private employers

have voluntarily enacted affirmative action hiring practices. Despite the fact that the focus of John-

son’s original executive order was on hiring practices of federal contractors, colleges and universities

throughout America quickly adopted these practices as well. The decision to engage in affirmative

action in admissions is not federally-mandated; instead, both the decision to enact race-based affir-

mative action policies and the manner in which minority candidates are given admission preference

are decisions made by each postsecondary institution. As a result of the rapid spread of affirma-

tive action in to the higher education sector, race-based admissions preferences are one of the most

prevalent and contentious fixtures of American postsecondary education.

      As in the labor market, race-based preferences in college admissions evoke fierce and divided

opinions on their merits, divisions that also hold among the Supreme Court justices. Of the three

landmark court decisions on affirmative action that examined the use of applicant race in the admis-

sions process at public universities, two were 5-4 decisions. While the use of explicit quota systems

and point systems for minority applicants were ruled out in Bakke v. California Board of Regents

and Gratz v. Bollinger respectively, Grutter v. Bollinger permitted the consideration of race as one

of many factors in university admissions.1 Writing for the majority that Michigan’s law school ad-

mission process was constitutional, Justice O’Conner states that the constitution “does not prohibit

the law school’s narrowly tailored use of race in admissions decisions to further a compelling interest

in obtaining the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student body.”2 More recently, the

Supreme Court ruled in Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action that a state ban on uni-

versities considering race as part of their admissions process does not violate the Equal Protection

Clause of the US Constitution. Thus, while universities can use race as a factor in admissions as

long as it is “narrowly tailored,” states can prohibit race-based admissions as well, at least among
  1
     In Fisher v. Texas, the Supreme Court ruled 7-1 to remand the case back to the lower court, stating that the
lower court had not applied strict scrutiny.
   2
     Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306 (2003).



                                                       2
public universities.

       Whether many university admissions processes are narrowly tailored in their consideration of

race – particularly at law schools – is debatable. The extent of race-based preferences varies by ethnic

group, with affirmative action appearing to be largest for African Americans relative to Hispanics and

other under-represented groups.3 For example, the average SAT score (Math+Verbal) for African

Americans entering Duke University in 2001 or 2002 was 140 points lower than the average for white

students, or about 1.4 standard deviations below the white mean. For Hispanics, the gap was half

that (Arcidiacono et al. 2011).4

       While Grutter v. Bollinger established that the legality of affirmative action policies is rooted

in institutions’ preferences for having a more diverse student body,5 President Johnson’s quote and

much of the rhetoric surrounding affirmative action focuses on the desire to support the educational

attainment of under-represented minority students. Certainly, the initial impetus for these policies

was the hope that affirmative action could play some role in reducing inequalities in life outcomes

between minority and majority groups.

       While racial preferences in admissions can be argued for based on the basis of remedying past

discrimination or other equity-based reasons, there may be efficiency arguments in its support as

well. Durlauf (2008) states that it is not obvious a priori that racial preferences are inefficient

for two reasons. First, he highlights the fact that racial preferences will be inefficient when there
   3
     There is a myth that the primary beneficiaries of affirmative action in admissions are women. This is true only
to the extent that women are members of particular racial or ethnic groups. There is now a substantial gender gap
in educational attainment between men and women. The gap is particularly large for African Americans, where there
are two African American women enrolled in a four-year college for every African American man. The gender gap
has become so substantial that men are now more likely to receive preferential treatment in admissions than women
(Green et al. 2011). Preferences do, however, exist for athletes and legacies. For example, Espenshade, Chung, and
Walling (2004) find preferences for athletes to be smaller than that for African Americans but similar to that for
Hispanics, with lower (but still significant) preferences for legacies.
   4
     Because the distribution of SAT scores for African Americans lies to the left of that of whites, even without
race-based preferences African Americans would have lower SAT scores than whites within a particular school because
they would more likely be on the margin of being admitted. But, it is certain that the gap would be much smaller
absent race-based admission preferences. Arcidiacono, Khan, and Vigdor (2011) show that legacies have similar SAT
scores to non-legacies. This is actually indicative of legacy preferences following similar arguments: legacies likely
come from advantaged backgrounds so their test score distribution should be to the right of that of non-legacies.
   5
     There is a small literature on the educational and social benefits to majority students of diversity that comes to
mixed conclusions. This evidence is summarized in Arcidiacono, Lovenheim and Zhu (2014).


                                                          3
are complementarities between school quality and student preparation. Second, even if aggregate

human capital would be higher without racial preferences, such admission preferences could increase

the allocative efficiency of human capital across communities. That is, the social returns to raising

human capital among individuals from heavily minority communities may be particularly high. In

such a case, sacrificing productive efficiency in terms of the aggregate amount of human capital

for allocative efficiency in terms of the distribution of human capital across different groups in the

economy may be efficiency enhancing. While we are able to make progress on the first issue, the

second is beyond the scope of this paper and provides an important caveat to our findings.

       In this paper, we critically examine the evidence on how affirmative action in undergraduate

and law school admissions affects both education and labor market outcomes.6 Although the effect

of affirmative action on minority student outcomes is somewhat unrelated to the success of these

policies in meeting institutions’ preferences for ethnic diversity, these are important questions to

consider because they highlight the potential costs or alternative benefits to these diversity goals.

If, indeed, affirmative action harms long-run outcomes of minority students, it suggests that returns

to diversity within an institution would need to be quite large in order to justify these programs.

Conversely, if affirmative action acts to level the playing field, as originally intended, these policies

may be particularly desirable because they reduce inequality and allow schools to act on their

preferences for diversity.

       Revealed preference suggests that more-selective and higher-resource colleges are preferred by

students to their less-selective counterparts.7 One then would suspect that more-selective colleges

also would lead to better student outcomes. In addition, resources such as expenditures per student

are higher at selective colleges, and there is ample evidence that these expenditures translate into,
   6
      We focus on undergraduate and law school admissions due to data availability and corresponding focus of the
literature. There are some papers in the medical literature examining the importance of matching between the race of
the doctor and the race of the patient, but these papers suffer from concerns about identification. See Durlauf (2008)
for a discussion of this work.
    7
      Long (2004) also shows evidence from conditional logit choice models that students place significant and increasing
value on college quality when making admissions decisions.


                                                           4
for example, higher graduation rates. Thus, policies that sort minority students into more selective

schools, which is what affirmative action aims to do, may lead to better educational outcomes for

these students. But, is increasing college quality always beneficial? As a result of affirmative ac-

tion, under-represented minorities, and in particular African Americans, are placed in schools where

their academic preparation is significantly below that of their white counterparts. The mismatch

hypothesis argues that many of the beneficiaries of preferences are so misplaced academically that

they would actually be better off in the absence of affirmative action. Although its antecedents

arose much earlier, this hypothesis was popularized in academia by Sander (2004) and in the main-

stream by Sander and Taylor’s 2012 book Mismatch: How Affirmative Action Hurts Students It’s

Intended to Help, and Why Universities Won’t Admit It. While Sander’s original article focuses on

law school students, his work with Taylor examines the evidence for the mismatch hypothesis for

undergraduates as well.

   At first blush, economists should be very skeptical of the mismatch hypothesis. After all, af-

firmative action just expands the choice set. If an individual believes a particular school would be

too difficult, then the individual could simply attend another school. By revealed preference, the

individual must be better off. Yet, even in the context of rational expectations, where student beliefs

are right on average given their information sets, there are cases where under-represented groups

could be made better off in the absence of affirmative action. This comes about because schools

may have private information about match quality but are letting in lower match quality students

in order to satisfy diversity goals. Thus, the information sets of both schools and students are the

critical components in driving mismatch.

   Ultimately, the effect of affirmative action on student outcomes is an empirical question, and

we evaluate the evidence to date on whether and how affirmative action in admissions helps its




                                                  5
purported beneficiaries.8 Our first goal in what follows is to address the following questions:

   1. Under what conditions can affirmative action actually be bad for its beneficiaries? What are

         the relevant outcome measures in this case?


   2. How can we make the empirical specification flexible enough to allow for the possibility that

         increasing school quality could be welfare-enhancing for some individuals but not for others?

       While the second question may seem obvious given the first, it is surprising that many papers –

even when explicitly testing for mismatch – estimate models that imply attending a more selective

program is good for everyone or good for no one.

       Given the answers to the first two sets of questions, we then turn to what the empirical evidence

has to say about affirmative action more broadly and the quality-fit tradeoff in particular. Focusing

on both undergraduates and law school students, we discuss the research findings on the following

questions:

   3. How extensive are race-based preferences?


   4. What can we learn from the debate over mismatch in law schools? Does it matter for law

         school grades, bar passage, future earnings, or some combination thereof?


   5. For undergraduates, on what margins does affirmative action matter? The extensive margin

         (whether individuals attend college at all) or the intensive margin (where individuals enroll)?


   6. How does affirmative action affect graduation rates, choice of college major, and earnings?


   7. Are “percent plans,” which provide automatic admission to public universities for students

         above a given percentile in class or state rank, a viable alternative to affirmative action?

         What effects do such admissions rules have on student outcomes and how do they compare to

         the estimated effects of affirmative action on those same outcomes?
   8
   See Holzer and Neumark (2000) for a review of the effects of affirmative policies both in education and the labor
market.


                                                         6
    As we will see, there are many ways that the quality-fit tradeoff can manifest itself, but it will

be difficult, if not impossible, to say whether the purported beneficiaries are actually made worse

off under affirmative action. At the same time, there is consistent evidence that the fit between the

student and the university matters, at least across some dimensions. We highlight areas for future

research that can help shed some much needed light on these important and unresolved questions.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we discuss the mismatch hypothesis and

the conditions for it to hold given that affirmative action expands the choice sets under-represented

groups face. Important to this discussion will be the quality of information individuals have about

their prospects for success. In section 3 we discuss ways to empirically test for heterogeneity in the

fit between the school and the student. Section 4 examines mismatch in law school, considering the

initial article by Sander as well as the multiple responses it has generated in light of the issues raised

in sections 2 and 3. Section 5 focuses on mismatch at the undergraduate level, including the effects

of statewide affirmative action bans. Section 6 discusses percent plans, and section 7 concludes.



2    The Quality-Fit Tradeoff

The scope for affirmative action policies to benefit minority students hinges in part on the extent to

which more-selective colleges produce better outcomes for all students than less-selective colleges.

This could be the case because the more selective colleges provide higher monetary inputs and have

higher quality students who in turn generate positive peer effects. We refer to these as “quality

effects.”

    But the match between the college and the student also could be important. More selective

colleges may pitch their material at a higher level, move at a faster pace, and assume that certain

concepts and skills already are known. It then may be optimal for some students to attend a less-

selective college even if a more-selective college is in their choice set. In other words, there may be



                                                    7
an optimal match between the pre-collegiate skills of students and schools of different types that

varies across the student skill distribution. We refer to these as “match effects.”

   The extent to which match and quality effects are important may depend on how the benefits to

the student are measured. For example, science courses may build on past knowledge in ways that

other courses do not. Hence, match effects may be more relevant when considering graduating in

the sciences rather than graduating in the humanities. Whether match or quality effects dominate

may also depend on what part of the college quality distribution is being examined. For example,

among selective colleges match effects may dominate. However, the significantly lower resource levels

that prevail among non-selective colleges may lead quality effects to dominate in this part of the

school quality distribution. Assessing the importance of the fit between the student and the school

thus requires flexibility in how the outcome equation is specified. Namely, the returns to academic

background need to vary in some way with the quality of the college.

   Figure 1 shows one way in which heterogeneity in fit could be modeled. Panel (a) shows a case

where College A produces better outcomes for all individuals. In contrast, Panel (b) shows a case

where the match effects trump quality effects for a part of the skill distribution: higher levels of

academic background are associated with better outcomes at both colleges, but now the college that

maximizes the student’s expected outcome depends on the student’s academic background. College

A is a particularly good fit for someone with a strong academic background. College B, however,

will not be as stimulating for those who are more academically prepared for college, as College B

is geared more towards those with relatively weaker backgrounds. In this example, College B will

result in better outcomes for those who are less academically prepared for college. As we discuss

below, the prior literature on school quality often estimates an average effect that assumes the

relationship between quality and outcomes is monotonic for all students. This assumption usually

is necessitated by data and sample size limitations, but with enough data we could see whether the



                                                  8
                           Figure 1: Heterogeneity in College Benefits


            Outcome

                                                                         College A




                                                                         College B




                                                             Academic Preparation


             (a) College A dominates College B for all levels of academic preparation


            Outcome

                                                                         College A



                                                                          College B




                                                             Academic Preparation


  (b) College A dominates College B for the most academically prepared, College B dominates
                        College A for the least academically prepared


returns to academic background vary across different schools types.



                                                9
3        The Role of Information

When students know their academic backgrounds and how their academic backgrounds translate

into outcomes at different colleges, then students can optimally sort themselves among the colleges to

which they have been admitted. Since racial preferences expand the choice set for under-represented

minorities, when students have all the necessary information – or at least as much information as

those of the colleges themselves – there would seem to be little scope for racial preferences to be

harmful for minorities.9

        As shown in Arcidiacono et al. (2011), when students are lacking information it is possible for

minority students to be made worse off as a result of racial preferences, even when these students

have rational expectations. The idea hinges on students not having full information regarding their

abilities to succeed in school or about the quality of their matches with particular schools. If the

university has private information about the quality of the match but does not reveal this information

to the student, then it is possible that students admitted under affirmative action would have been

better off attending a different school. This could be the case if schools admitted all students who

were a good match as well as some minority students for whom the match quality is lower. Schools

may have incentives to admit this latter group anyway in order to meet diversity goals. Suppose this

latter group of students is the group that is admitted under affirmative action. Admitted minority

students form expectations of their match quality based in part on observed average outcomes for

all minority students admitted to the school and then make enrollment decisions based on the school

that maximizes their expected utility. However, had the school revealed its private information, the

student may have made a different decision.

        Arcidiacono et al. (2011) distinguish between local mismatch and global mismatch. Under
    9
      One place where negative impacts could arise would be through stereotyping which may negatively affect minority
students who would have been admitted without racial preferences. But, those admitted under the preferences would
still be advantaged as they would be pooled with stronger minority students.




                                                         10
local mismatch, the marginal admitted minority student is worse off under racial preferences but

the average benefit for the group is still positive. Under global mismatch, the average benefit for

the group turns negative. In their model, as long as schools face binding capacity constraints,

some racial preferences will be advantageous for minority students. The model permits an interior

optimal amount of racial preferences from the perspective of the minority group. Going past this

point results in local mismatch, with further preferences potentially resulting in global mismatch.

   That schools have private information about the quality of the match with the student is a

necessary condition for mismatch when students have on average correct information. Information

issues become even more salient when the rational expectations assumption is relaxed. Indeed,

there is evidence suggesting that students – at least those from disadvantaged backgrounds – have

surprisingly poor information about their educational prospects. Hoxby and Avery (2013) show that

high-achieving, low-income high school students apply to schools that are very different from their

high income counterparts, often not applying to a single selective institution despite the expected net

costs of at least a set of these institutions being lower than the costs of the non-selective institutions

they attend. Hoxby and Turner (2013) show that simply providing these high-achieving, low-income

students information about their probabilities of admission to different tiers of schools as well as

information about expected costs has significant effects on the types of colleges and universities

these students attended. These students often have no desire to go to the local school but simply

are unaware of the available options. This research demonstrates that considerable search frictions

exist among students (particularly low-income students) in higher education markets. Although

their focus is on students who match to lower-quality schools than they are able to attend, it

demonstrates that students often do not have sufficient information to make informed decisions

about where to attend college.

   Racial preferences add another layer of uncertainty for students, because affected minority stu-



                                                   11
dents may not be aware they are being admitted with worse academic credentials than their peers

as a result of these preferences. Universities generally state that race is one of many factors that

are considered, so students may face significant uncertainty about the degree to which their race

affected whether or not they were admitted. For example, Wightman (1998, page 70) shows that

African American and white students had similar beliefs regarding their law school class rank.10

But, as we will see in Section 4, African American students have significantly lower grades in law

school than their white counterparts.

       Measuring whether affirmative action is harmful to its beneficiaries in a utility sense is a difficult

task. Namely, it must be the case that by providing additional information about the prospects

of success at a particular school, students would make different enrollment decisions. Interventions

like the one used by Hoxby and Turner (2013) are geared towards the very top of the distribution.

There are no interventions of which we are aware that give under-represented groups information

about their prospects of success at different tiers of institutions.

       In the absence of such interventions, researchers are forced to use correlates of match quality to

estimate the extent of mismatch. If students have poor information about their match quality, once

enrolled they may learn about the quality of the match and make adjustments if they determine

that they enrolled in the wrong school. Indeed, using repeated surveys of students at Berea College

that is designed to elicit beliefs about academic ability, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012) show

that most low-income students11 are over-optimistic about their grades when they enter college and

quickly adjust their beliefs when they receive new information in the form of grades. Zafar (2011)

finds similar learning dynamics among students at Northwestern University: students tend to be

overly-optimistic about their major-specific outcomes at first and quickly update their beliefs once
  10
     38% of African American and 34% of white law students expected to be in the top 10% of their class. The similar
percentages for finishing in the top 25% of the class were 77% and 79% for African Americans and whites, respectively.
The survey was conducted in the fall of 1991, and the sample was comprised of law students in their first semester of
law school.
  11
     Berea College is a small liberal arts school in Kentucky that contains a student body comprised almost solely of
students from low-income backgrounds.


                                                         12
they begin to receive grades.

       The main adjustments students can make once they learn about a poor match is to switch to a

less demanding major, transfer schools, or drop out. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012) show

that learning about one’s ability in the first year of college is strongly related to the decision to drop

out, while Zafar (2011) finds that learning is associated with switching majors. A central reason for

the differences in their findings is that dropout rates are extremely low at Northwestern (7%), while

they are much larger at Berea (17%). Thus, these students adjust along different margins, which

highlights the fact that any mismatch from affirmative action likely generates different responses

depending on the characteristics of the school. This prediction has received little attention in the lit-

erature. In Section 5.4, we examine the evidence on college majors, while we discuss the relationship

between affirmative action and college completion in Section 5.3. The effect of affirmative action on

student transferring has not been examined in prior work, and we view this as an important area

for future research.12

       Although examining the relationship between affirmative action and these outcomes is of inde-

pendent interest, it is important to highlight that these measures will be insufficient for establishing

where minorities are actually worse off from affirmative action. For example, suppose we consider

college graduation and could show that students admitted to a very selective school because of af-

firmative action would be more likely to graduate from a lower-tier school. The student may still

have preferred to attend the more selective school even with full knowledge of the lower probability

of graduating. This can occur because the individual may receive additional utility from graduating

from the more selective school. In discussing the evidence on these outcomes, in addition to the

varied identification concerns we highlight, it is important to keep in mind that that the outcomes
  12
    Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2014) provide a descriptive analysis of transferring behavior in Texas and show
transferring prevalence is very high overall, and especially so at low levels of the college quality distribution. These
results suggest that transferring is a margin on which students might adjust to learning about match quality, but no
research currently exists that assesses whether this is the case.




                                                          13
being measured may not be capture all of the relevant aspects of how schooling choices affect utility,

particularly in the long run.



4         The Law School Debate

The discussion over whether affirmative action benefits minority students has been particularly

contentious in the realm of law school admissions. Estimating the effect of affirmative action in law

schools differs from examining this question in the context of undergraduate admissions for several

reasons. First, in contrast to what is seen for undergraduate institutions, affirmative action affects

how many minority students attend law school as virtually all laws schools are selective. Hence, for

law schools, it is not a matter of just where students attend but whether they attend at all. Second,

the data on law schools are not as rich as the data for undergraduates in terms of containing specific

information on schools attended and family background characteristics.

         Weighed against these disadvantages is that to practice law one must take a bar exam. The bar

exam gives a measure of learning that can be compared across law schools, which typically is lacking

in the undergraduate literature.13 While bar passage is not a perfect measure of learning, especially

if lower-ranked law schools teach more to the test than do higher-quality schools, the importance

of passing the bar for one’s legal career makes it a highly relevant measure of legal knowledge that

also relates to the return one can expect on investment in law school. Furthermore, affirmative

action is very aggressive in law school admissions, which makes this field of particular interest in

understanding the effects of racial admissions preferences on student outcomes.

         To illustrate the last point, we present results analyzing data on admissions decisions for Michi-

gan’s law school in 2002, the same year when the Supreme Court took up the Grutter v. Bollinger

case.14 The data contain the applicant’s race/ethnicity, LSAT scores, and undergraduate grades,
    13
     Earnings could be another measure, but affirmative action in the labor market distorts comparisons across
racial/ethnic groups. One caveat with using bar passage is that the difficulty of the exam varies across location.
  14
     These data, along with data in 2003, were obtained by Richard Sander via a Freedom of Information Act request.


                                                        14
as well as whether the applicant was admitted. We create an ‘academic index’ to aggregate LSAT

scores and undergraduate grades into one measure15 and then standardize the measure so that the

mean is zero and has standard deviation one for the applicant pool.

       Figure 2 shows the distribution of the re-normed academic index separately for blacks and whites

based on whether or not they were admitted. For both racial groups, those admitted had significantly

higher index values. However, white students who were rejected generally look academically stronger

than the black students who were admitted. Indeed, black applicants in 2002 were admitted to

Michigan’s law school at a slightly higher rate than white students, 26.9% to 23.3%, despite the

average academic index of black applicants being around 1.5 standard deviations lower than the

mean white applicant.

       More striking is where the black admit distribution lies relative to the white admit distribution.

The median black admit had an academic index at the second percentile of the white distribution,

and the seventy-fifth percentile of the black admit distribution was at the eighth percentile of the

white distribution.16 The difference between the black and white admit distributions is not all

due to affirmative action: if the African American academic index distribution is below the white

distribution, this would produce a difference in the incoming qualifications of black versus white

students even in the absence of affirmative action. However, the fact that these distributions are

almost non-overlapping is suggestive of a large amount of race-based preferences in admissions being

given to African American students. The University of Michigan is by no means an outlier either.

The data show that the extent of preferential admissions for black students is even more pronounced

at other elite public law schools, such as the University of Virginia and the University of Wisconsin.

In both of these cases, the median black admit had an academic index that would place him below
  15
     The formula follows Sander and Bambauer (2012 page 896) and is given by ((LSAT − 120) × 10) + (100 × U GP A).
One concern may be that our results are driven by lower black undergraduate grades due to affirmative action in
undergraduate admissions. Using just the LSAT produces the same patterns.
  16
     If we instead focus on enrollees, the median black enrollee has an academic index less than the first percentile
of the white enrollee distribution. Indeed, no white enrollees had academic indexes that were lower than the 75th
percentile of the black distribution.


                                                         15
Figure 2: Distribution of Academic Indexes for Applicants to Michigan Law by Race and Ac-
cept/Reject Status

              .8
              .6
              .4
              .2
              0




                   -6                 -4                  -2                   0                    2
                                                               x

                                             Black Admit                  Black Reject
                                             White Admit                  White Reject



Data from 2002. Academic index is a weighted average of the applicant’s LSAT score and under-
graduate GPA and is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one for the population of
applicants.


the first percentile of the white admit at the same school.17

       The data also reveal that affirmative action works differently for blacks and Hispanics. While

affirmative action is very much present for Hispanics (the median Hispanic admit at Michigan is

at the 9th percentile of the white admit distribution), the median Hispanic admit is at the 78th

percentile of the black admit distribution. Hispanic admission rates were also lower than those for

blacks, despite having on average better test scores and undergraduate grades.18

       These tabulations indicate that African American students receive a significant amount of pref-
  17
     The median black admit at the University of Texas and the University of North Carolina was below the 2nd and
 th
7 percentile respectively of the white admit distribution. These results refer to two admissions cycles for each school:
2006 and 2007 for Michigan and Wisconsin and 2005 and 2006 for North Carolina, Texas, and Virginia. These data
were obtained by Richard Sander via a Freedom of Information Act request.
  18
     Estimates from a logit model of admission with the right-hand-side variables being LSAT score, undergraduate
grades, and indicators for race/ethnicity categories reveal that the admission advantage for blacks is roughly twice the
advantage for Hispanics.


                                                          16
erential treatment in law school admissions. The extent of affirmative action in law schools is

sufficiently large and the sorting on prior academic credentials is so prevalent that if mismatch is

not present, law schools should be almost perfectly differentiated by average quality differences (as

in Panel (a) of Figure 1). In other words, either the large differences in white and black pre-law

school academic characteristics driven by affirmative action policies lead to mismatch or the effect

of law school quality is ubiquitous. In the former case, affirmative action could lead to negative

effects on African American law students, whereas in the latter case black law students would be

unambiguously better off due to affirmative action because of the positive effects of law school qual-

ity on outcomes. We now turn to a discussion of the often contentious debate about the empirical

support for both of these hypotheses.


4.1     Graduation and Bar Passage

4.1.1    A Framework for Analyzing the Quality-Fit Tradeoff in Law Schools


As we discuss in detail below, the empirical literature examining the returns to law school quality

and the existence or extent of mismatch is extremely contentious. A core source of the disagreement

among studies examining affirmative action in law schools is the difficulty in producing causal

estimates of the effect of attending different-quality law schools on measured outcomes for black

and white students. This difficulty is due to the fact that students select schools and schools select

students based on factors that are both observable and unobservable to researchers. As a result, there

is much concern that the estimates of law school quality are biased by the existence of unobserved

differences in underlying student ability that exist across the school quality distribution.

   Studies of the effect of affirmative action-driven mismatch on student outcomes seek to under-

stand whether any overall positive effects of school quality are outweighed by the effect of lower

academic performance relative to one’s peers. Put differently, the empirical challenge is to under-



                                                  17
stand whether being lower in the academic ability distribution in a school has independent negative

effects on outcomes, and if so how large these effects are in relationship to the gains from attending

a higher quality law school. To fix ideas, denote Yi , Gi , Li , and Xi as individual i’s outcome (such

as bar passage or earnings), normalized law school grades,19 law school quality tier, and other ob-

servable characteristics such as pre-law school academic credentials. Assume that Yi and Gi can be

decomposed as follows:



                                     Y i = α 1 + Gi α 2 + L i α 3 + X i α 4 + ǫ i                                   (1)

                                    Gi = γ 1 + L i γ 2 + X i γ 3 + η i                                              (2)



which can also be expressed as the following reduced form equation:



                                         Y i = δ1 + L i δ2 + Xi δ3 + µi .                                           (3)



If mismatch negatively influences post-graduation outcomes, then 0 > δ2 , where δ2 = α3 + α2 γ2 .

Taken together, equations (1)-(3) show that we can break out the effect of law school tier into

two components: the direct effect and the indirect effect through law school grades,20 where the

first effect is expected to be positive and the second negative. Thus, if we can identify δ2 and test

whether it is greater than zero, it amounts to a test that matching effects are larger than college

quality effects.

    Virtually all models that researchers have used to test for mismatch in law schools are variants of

equations (1)-(2) or (3), with different assumptions regarding the distribution of the errors. There
  19
     By normalized grades we mean grades have been normalized to have zero mean within each school. This can
alternatively be interpreted as a measure of student relative rank within each school.
  20
     Some researchers, (e.g., Ho 2005) have raised concerns about controlling for law school grades in the outcome
equations because they are themselves affected by law school quality. Rosenbaum (1984) shows that controlling for
a variable that is affected by the treatment can produced biased treatment effect estimates. However, he also shows
that in a selection-on-observables setting, both the treatment and the mediating variable coefficients are identified as
long as the observable characteristics are sufficient to account for selection into the treatment.



                                                          18
are two issues with this approach. First, it is restrictive in such a way that precludes the bottom

panel of Figure 1. Namely, everyone is either hurt or helped by attending an elite school: the test

for mismatch does not depend on the match between the school and the student. Hence, the tests

in the literature are generally attempts to measure average effects of law school quality, with the

average effects possibly varying by race.

   This important caveat aside, the second issue is overcoming the selection problem. We now

consider the barriers to recovering unbiased estimates of δ2 , or alternatively α3 and α2 γ2 . For

simplicity, we focus the discussion on identifying δ2 , but the mechanical relationship between δ2 ,

α2 and γ3 means that this discussion generalizes to these other parameters as well. The underlying

difficulty with identifying δ2 is that law schools have access to information about students that are

unobservable to researchers and that also are likely to affect student outcomes. Thus students who

are similar in terms of observables but who go to law schools of differing quality likely also differ

in terms of these unobservable factors: the students attending more-elite law schools have higher

unobserved ability, conditional on observed ability measures.

   In this setting with selection-on-unobservables across law school quality tiers, researchers have

used several methods to identify net effect of quality and matching. One way to proceed is to use

what we term a “within-race estimator,” comparing outcomes among URM students at different law

school quality tiers after adjusting for observed ability measures. To the extent there is overlap in

observed ability across quality tiers, however, it is likely the case that unobserved ability is higher

among students in the higher quality tier, biasing δ2 upward. Hence, the within-race estimator likely

provides an over-estimate of the gains to attending a more prestigious law school.

   Another way to proceed is to combine within-race estimators in a difference-in-difference setting.

This method ostensibly uses whites as a control group for selection amongst URM students. Whether

such a comparison is valid and the direction of any bias rests heavily on assumptions about how



                                                  19
the joint distribution of observed and unobserved ability differ across groups. This difference-in-

difference method can be used to see whether matching effects are important when the selection on

unobservable ability is the same across races for each quality tier. Then, the whites can be used

as a control group to purge the bias of the within-URM estimates because the bias in δ2 among

whites will be identical to the bias for non-whites. This is, to be sure, a very strong assumption,

and if it is violated estimates of mismatch from equations (1)-(2) or (3) will be biased as well.

Here, the bias can go in either direction. First, imagine that URM students have higher unobserved

ability than whites (conditional on observed ability). Then, the tier effects will be biased upward

more for minority students than for white students, which will lead one to overstate mismatch when

comparing white versus minority students. Conversely, if unobservables among URM students are

worse than for whites conditional on observed ability, then the difference-in-difference estimator will

understate the extent of mismatch. Note that this is also only a test of whether matching effects

matter as the coefficient on tier itself is biased upward for the reasons described above.

   A third method of identifying the net effect of quality and matching is what we term the “cross-

race estimator.” This method compares outcomes of black students to white students unconditional

on quality tier. More formally, the cross-race estimator can be written as:



                                 Yi = β1 + Blacki β2 + Xi β3 + ωi ,                                (4)



where Black is an indicator for whether the student is African American. Conditional on observed

ability, the mismatch hypothesis predicts that black students will have worse outcomes than whites

(i.e., β2 < 0). This model identifies mismatch as long as the distribution of unobservables among

African American students is the same as the distribution of unobservables among white students.

As Rothstein and Yoon (2009) argue, it is likely that black students have lower unobserved ability

than white students based on the fact that they tend to perform worse than white students at the


                                                  20
same school and with the same admissions credentials. In this case, β2 will be biased downward,

which will overstate the importance of matching.

       As this discussion highlights, the validity of the different approaches to measuring quality and

matching effects in law school rely strongly on the underlying assumptions about how student

unobserved ability is distributed across college quality tiers, across racial groups within each tier,

and across racial groups. Due to these identification concerns, no estimate of the extent of mismatch

is perfect. However, we can use this framework to guide our interpretation of the differences in results

across the methods used, which will help us synthesize this contentious literature. We now turn to

a discussion of this literature, beginning with the seminal work of Sander (2004).


4.1.2      Sander (2004)


The law school debate began with Sander (2004), who argued that large admission preferences

resulted in blacks learning less in law school and consequently failing the bar at a higher rate.21

Sander speculated that these learning effects were sufficiently large to actually result in fewer black

lawyers than if racial preferences were not in place. He also argued that the loss of black lawyers

occurs despite racial preferences increasing the number of black students who enroll in law schools

as i) those students who are at the margin of being admitted have a relatively low probability of

passing the bar exam and ii) being severely mismatched results in low bar passage rates.

       Using data from the Law School Admission Council Bar Passage Study (BPS),22 Sander (2004)

shows that, aside from those attending historically black universities, black students perform very

poorly in law school in terms of grade point average. In particular, the bottom decile of the grade

distribution contains between 44 and 52 percent of black students, depending on law school tier.23
  21
     Most of this literature focuses on black-white differences due to affirmative action. To our knowledge, there has
been little attention paid to mismatch effects among Hispanic students in law school.
  22
     This data set follows 1991 law school matriculants. Participation in the study was high for both law schools
and their students: 95% of law schools participated and 80% of the students signed consent forms. The primary
disadvantage of the data is that school quality was aggregated into six broad tiers.
  23
     Recall that black students had similar expectations to white students with regard to their expected law school class



                                                           21
Since grades are a relative measure of performance and since there are large differences in entering

credentials between blacks and whites, it is perhaps not surprising that black students are more

likely to be at the bottom of the GPA distribution. Indeed, using 1995 National Survey data that

includes school identifiers, Sander (2004) shows that the relative rank of one’s undergraduate GPA

and LSAT score within a school are strongly predictive of law school GPA. This finding suggests

that policies designed to bring lower-ranked students into more elite schools could lead to them to

perform substantially worse relative to their peers. While Sander (2004) does not explicitly estimate

equation (2), this evidence forms the basis of his argument that γ2 is both negative and sizable in

magnitude.

    Sander estimates equation (1) using the BPS data. While he estimates versions of equation (1)

for both law school graduation and first-time bar passage, he focuses on the bar passage results.

The resulting literature also focuses on this outcome, so we focus our attention on bar passage. The

estimated coefficients on (normalized) law school grades, α2 , and tier, α3 , are positive. Furthermore,

conditioning on law school grades and tier leads to no effects of race on bar passage. This drives the

remainder of Sander’s analysis that race is not relevant for bar passage. Sander’s approach here is a

mixture between the within-race and cross-race estimators. The estimates of α2 and α3 are mostly

identified off of white students, because they comprise the majority of his sample. For the reasons

described in the previous section, these coefficients are likely biased upward. Including an indicator

for Black is in the spirit of the cross-race estimator, but how the biases on α2 and α3 combine with

bias on the Black indicator due to differences in observables across racial groups is unclear. As a

result, signing the bias in this regression on the Black coefficient is very difficult.

    Sander then breaks out bar passage rates by LSAT scores bins for both blacks and whites.

Within each bin, white students are more likely to pass the bar. Since Sander finds no race effects
rank. To the extent that these subjective expectations reflect actual beliefs, the results suggest black students were
either unaware of the extent of affirmative action or unaware of how credentials translate into law school performance.




                                                          22
on bar passage, he uses this to justify the assumption that black students would pass pass the bar

within each of these bins at the same rate as whites had affirmative action not been present. He

then conducts a decomposition analysis that estimates what first-time bar passage rates for blacks

would have looked like absent racial preferences. This is done by assuming that all within-LSAT

bin differences between blacks and whites are due to mismatch effects. The results of this exercise

suggest that over 45% of the black bar failure rate (or about 57% of the difference in the black-

white failure rate) is due to mismatch.24 This finding implies that attending a higher-tiered law

school lowers the probability of passing the bar on the first try, particularly for less-academically-

qualified students. The decomposition estimates thus point to a substantial amount of mismatch

from affirmative action that worsens the long-run outcomes of many black law students.

       Sander argues that the reason for this finding is that affirmative action results in black students

attending schools where they lack the necessary academic preparation, which in turn lowers the

quality of their education. For several reasons, however, his estimates likely overstate the amount

of mismatch. First, because black students have lower academic index values than whites overall,

this is likely the case within each bin as well. As a result, even within LSAT bins, the black and

white students are unlikely to have the same academic ability levels. Second, the assumptions that

underlie this approach are identical to those that support the cross-race estimator, as Sander is

assuming that there are no other factors (such as unobserved ability) that would drive differences

in bar passage rates within each LSAT bin. Similar to the cross-race estimator, this leads to an

upwardly-biased estimate of mismatch.

       Note that Sander does not estimate (2), but he does do so in his response to Ho (2005a). In

Sander (2005a), the estimated coefficient on tier in equation (2) for first-time bar passage, γ2 , is

sufficiently negative that 0 > α2 + α3 γ2 . This is surprising for two reasons. First, because the
  24
    The other reason African American students fail the bar less is because they are more likely to have lower academic
index levels. As Sander (2004) highlights, even taking his calculations at face value, eliminating affirmative action
could not close the black-white bar passage gap.



                                                          23
estimates are identified predominantly off of whites because they comprise the majority of the

sample, they are within-race estimates. As discussed above, such estimates typically are biased

away from finding mismatch effects. Second, because whites are the majority of the sample, the

results imply that the negative net tier effects are also present for whites. Taken at face value, the

estimates in Sander (2004) suggest that attending a more elite law school lowers one’s chances of

passing the bar regardless of one’s entering credentials or race. The specification thus only allows

for two possibilities: everyone benefits from attending a more elite school or no one benefits. A

problematic conclusion one could draw from Sander’s results is that everyone is harmed by going

to a more elite law school, as the negative effect on GPA swamps the positive direct effect of school

quality. Furthermore, if there are cross-race differences in mismatch effects, generalizing these

estimates to a sample of African American students could yield misleading conclusions about the

extent of mismatch.

       All subsequent law school mismatch studies are subject to this same criticism that they imply

everyone is either helped or harmed by attending a more elite school. The exception is one part of

the analysis in Sander (2005b). Here, Sander allows curvature in the relationship between grades

and outcomes. He bins percentile class rank and, within each bin and law school tier combination,

estimates the joint probability of graduating and passing the bar on the first attempt. The results

reveal a substantial penalty for finishing at the bottom of the class across law school tiers. This

suggests the possibility of increasing eliteness being beneficial up to a point. As long as a student

is reasonably competitive, the student can reap the benefits of the elite education. Hence, for the

objectives of maximizing black bar passage, there may be an optimal affirmative action policy that

falls in between the current policy and race-blind admissions.25
  25
   This point is not explored further in Sander (2005b), as this piece was primarily a reply to criticisms levied against
Sander (2004).




                                                           24
4.1.3    The Ensuing Debate


The difficulties posed by selection-on-unobservables in identifying mismatch effects in law school

has led to a vigorous and often contentious debate about the validity of Sander’s conclusions. Much

of the ensuing work on law school mismatch focuses on identifying the effect of law school tier net

of the grade effect (i.e., δ2 from equation (2)). A negative estimate of the effect of quality tier in

such a model provides evidence of mismatch. While examining the net effect of tier sidesteps the

difficulties associated with the endogeneity of relative law school grades, these analyses face similar

identification concerns related to selection-on-unobservables that form the basis for many of the

objections to the findings in Sander (2004).

    Rothstein and Yoon (2009) is the only other paper to pursue black-white comparisons in order to

assess mismatch effects. They estimate probit models of bar passage on observed students credentials

as well as an indicator for whether the student is black, akin to equation (4). Estimates of this

model show that blacks are much less likely to graduate and to pass the bar even conditional on

the observables, which is consistent with the mismatch hypothesis. However, at the bottom of the

credential distribution there is very little overlap in credentials between black and white students

due to racial preferences affecting the extensive margin. Those white students with poor credentials

are likely to have stronger unobservables than similarly-credentialed black students, else they would

not have been accepted to any law school. To address this concern, Rothstein and Yoon (2009)

report estimates using both white and minority students that focus only on the top four quintiles

of the academic index, which is where the white and black academic index distributions have the

most overlap. Examining the top four quintiles only removes the negative effect of tier on law school

graduation and cuts the effect on bar passage by more than half, rendering it insignificant.26 The

problem with focusing on the top four quintiles, however, is that three quarters of the black students
  26
     However, their estimate still is negative and sizable in magnitude, on the order of 3 percentage points. Furthermore,
the 95% confidence interval cannot rule out large mismatch effects.



                                                           25
fall in this bottom quintile (Rothstein and Yoon 2009, page 18), and it is these students who are

most at risk of being mismatched.

   Rothstein and Yoon (2009) also estimate equation (3) separately by race, which is the within-

race model. This is also the strategy pursued by Ho (2005) and one of the strategies in Ayres and

Brooks (2005) and Williams (2013). Rothstein and Yoon (2009) argue that this model provides

a lower bound of the extent of mismatch, similar the arguments described above. Ho (2005) and

Rothstein and Yoon (2009) both find estimates that suggest law school tier has no effect on eventual

bar passage using the within-race analysis. Because these findings are likely to be heavily influenced

by selection-on-unobservables, they are not necessarily inconsistent with those in Sander (2004).

Indeed, he finds evidence of mismatch in models that are biased towards finding mismatch, and the

within-race estimates find no effect of law school quality tier in models that are biased against finding

mismatch effects. A sensible reading of this evidence suggests the correct answer is somewhere in

between, which would indicate modest mismatch effects exist.

   Note that Rothstein and Yoon (2009) do not find quality tier effects for black students, while

Sander (2005a) does. Part of this is due to the differences in their dependent variables. Rothstein

and Yoon (2009) examine eventual bar passage, while Sander (2004) examines bar passage on the

first try. There is evidence that the black-white gap in first time bar passage is larger than the gap

in eventual passage (Williams 2013). This is an important distinction, however, as failing the bar on

the first try has substantial costs in terms of increased study time, reducing earnings, and putting

lawyers at a competitive disadvantage in the labor market. It is thus not surprising that Rothstein

and Yoon find smaller mismatch effects than Sander, given that they are examining an outcome

that has a smaller racial gap associated with it.

   Another strategy pursued by Rothstein and Yoon (2009) is the across-race difference-in-difference

approach discussed above. They estimate equation (3) separately for white and black students, and



                                                    26
then they test for equality of the δ2 coefficients across groups. What is striking is that positive effects

of law school quality emerge for whites but not for blacks. This suggests either that (i) selection

on unobservables is present for whites but not for blacks or (ii) matching effects are effectively

canceling out quality effects for blacks. Under the assumption that selection on unobservables

is similar for blacks and whites, however, these estimates are consistent with mismatch: African

American students at selective law schools are about 2.5 percentage points less likely to pass the

bar than white students at selective law schools.

       Williams (2013) argues that their results further understate mismatch due to the noisiness of

the law school tier measure as well as their focus on eventual rather than on earlier bar passage.

Williams (2013) finds negative effects of selectivity on both first-time and eventual bar passage,

although only the former are statistically different from zero. Additionally, the estimated effects

increase when the top two tiers are compared to the bottom two tiers as opposed to comparing the

top two tiers to the bottom four, as in Rothstein and Yoon (2009). One caveat is that historically

black colleges and universities are in this bottom tier and may operate differently from traditional

law school environments.27

       As a way of mitigating differences in unobservables among black students attending different law

school tiers, Ayres and Brooks (2005) and Williams (2013) pursue an identification strategy in the

spirit of Dale and Krueger (2002).28 Namely, comparisons are made between black students who

attended their first-choice law school and those who reported being admitted to their first-choice

law school but attending their second-choice (or lower-quality) law school,29 either due to cost

or distance considerations. The descriptive statistics reveal that black students who attend their

first-choice school have similar credentials and background characteristics to those who attend their
  27
     Ayres and Brooks (2005) remove these schools in their analysis of eventual bar passage and positive effects of
selectivity for blacks when tier is included linearly. Sander (2004) also includes tier in this way. In both cases, it is
more appropriate to have only two tiers or dummy out the effects of each tier.
  28
     See Section 5.5 for a more complete description of this methodology.
  29
     For ease of exposition, we refer to these students as attending their second choice school even though the school
they attend could be even further down their list.


                                                           27
second choice. However, first-choice students placed more importance on academic reputation and

less importance on cost than second-choice students. Second-choice students then attended schools

that were relatively less selective. A core assumption underlying this method is that students who

were admitted to the same types of schools but who attend schools of differing quality have the

same unobservable characteristics.

       Results using this identification strategy point towards small positive effects of attending a more

selective school on graduation that often are not statistically significant. But, both Ayres and

Brooks (2005) and Williams (2013) find that black students who attend their second choice (and

thus lower-quality) school are more likely to pass the bar the first time they take it, which is evidence

consistent with mismatch. Ayres and Brooks (2005) find insignificant effects for passing the bar at

a later date, however. Consistent with earlier bar passage results, estimated mismatch effects on the

bar exam are strongest earlier on in the career. One interpretation of this finding is that the negative

effects of mismatch will be undone over time, but the time pattern of mismatch is important because

of the costs associated with delaying bar passage.30

       The law school debate over Sander (2004) has been especially contentious. We find the evidence

suggesting that shifting African Americans to less-selective schools would increase bar passage rates,

particularly for first-time passage, to be fairly convincing. This is especially the case since the low

quality of the data would tend to bias estimates away from finding mismatch. On the other hand, an

argument could be made that the data are too noisy and provide sufficiently imprecise information

on actual law school quality that they preclude one from drawing any concrete conclusions regarding

mismatch. Regardless, the law school debate makes clear that this is a question that merits further

attention, where more definitive answers could be answered with better data. Our hope is that

better data sets soon will become available.31
  30
     Williams (2013) also argues that the measurement error in the law school tier variable results in attenuation
bias. Hence he instrumented for law school tier with the second choice variable, resulting in massive mismatch effects.
However, the estimated effects are so large as to not be plausible.
  31
     In Sander v. State Bar of California, the California Supreme Court ruled unanimously in favor of Sander’s petition


                                                          28
4.2    Labor Market Outcomes

Sander (2004) also argued that affirmative action lowers the earnings of black lawyers, using data

from After the JD (AJD). In 2002, the AJD surveyed those who became lawyers (i.e. passed the

bar) in 2000.32 As with bar passage and graduation, the mechanism for the earnings result is that

attending a more elite school has a positive direct effect on earnings but also a negative indirect

effect through law school grades. Sander argues that the negative indirect effect is stronger than the

positive direct effect, again assuming that differences in normalized law school grades will disappear

after affirmative action is eliminated. That this impact still is present even after selecting on bar

passage, which itself appears to be affected by mismatch, is notable.

    Rothstein and Yoon (2009) is one of the few studies that also addresses the earnings question,

using data from the BPS dataset. The BPS followed a sub-sample of the initial participants four to

six months after they graduated from law school. Using the same identification strategies they used

for bar passage, Rothstein and Yoon find higher earnings for blacks from attending more selective

schools.33

    Beyond the differences in identification strategies, a potential way to reconcile the two sets of

results comes from Lehmann (2013). Lehmann develops a model of hiring and promotion when firms

face diversity pressures. Using the AJD, Lehmann shows that black lawyers have better early labor

market outcomes, consistent with a model where the cheapest way to satisfy diversity pressures

is with newly-minted lawyers. After hiring, however, black lawyers receive worse tasks and are

less likely to be promoted. Lehmann’s results point to the difficulty of comparing black and white

outcomes when affirmative action is present in the labor market, as well as pointing out that these
for access to a de-identified version of public law school admission data, stating “We conclude that under the common
law right of public access, there is a sufficient public interest in the information contained in the admissions database
such that the State Bar is required to provide access to it if the information can be provided in a form that protects
the privacy of applicants and if no countervailing interest outweighs the public’s interest in disclosure.”
  32
     The AJD has the actual school that the lawyer attended. However, law school grades are self-reported in bins, so
adjustments need to be made to renormalize them.
  33
     They also find that black students at elite schools were also more satisfied with their jobs than matched students
of either race at less-elite institutions.


                                                           29
sorts of comparisons may change with the age of the cohort.


4.3      The extensive margin

In contrast to undergraduate institutions, almost all law schools are selective. Hence, an affirmative

action ban may result in some minority law school applicants, who would have been admitted prior

to the ban, being unable to obtain admission to any law school. Assuming that the number of

black applicants would remain unchanged and that their admissions and application behavior would

now match those of whites with similar LSAT scores and grades after an affirmative action ban,

Wightman (2003) estimates a 14.1% drop in the number of black applicants who would be admitted

to law school if an an affirmative action ban were passed that was based on applications for law

schools admissions in 2001. This is the number Sander (2004) uses in his calculation of the extensive

margin.

       Both Chambers et al. (2005) and Rothstein and Yoon (2008) argue that this number is too low.

Rothstein and Yoon (2008) use a grid model for 1990-91 and show there would be a 60% drop in

law school enrollees, with a 90% drop at the most-selective schools. Chambers et al. (2005) extend

the grid model in Wightman (2003) to other years, showing that in 2003 and 2004, the most recent

years available at the time, the decline would be much higher, at 32.5% in 2004.34 Chambers et al.

(2005) also argue that the drop in admissions may translate into lower take up rates, but there are

no data to provide support for or against this claim.

       There are at least two reasons, however, why estimates of the extensive margin may be over-

stated. First, the grid model assumes after a ban that black applications will look like white

applications. But, the least selective law schools are historically black institutions, which are likely
  34
    Sander (2005b) argues that those two years are outliers driven by a surge of white applications, looking over the
previous ten years suggests that the 14.1% number is representative. The magnitude of the extensive margin may
depend on whether what was happening in 2003 and 2004 reflects permanent or temporary change in application
behavior.




                                                         30
more appealing to black applicants than white applicants.35 How historically black institutions

would respond to a surge in black applications following an affirmative ban is an open question.36

Second, universities may respond to affirmative action bans by looking at other ways of increasing

diversity by, for example, putting more weight on characteristics that are correlated with particular

races.37 Yagan (2014) provides evidence of this, looking at law school applications from an elite

college to UC Berkeley and UCLA before and after Proposition 209, which banned the use of racial

preferences in admissions. Yagan shows that although admissions probabilities fell substantially for

black applicants after Proposition 209, black applicants still had an advantage in admissions over

white applicants after controlling for a set of observed credentials. Long and Tienda (2008) show

qualitatively similar results in Texas.



5         Undergraduate decisions and outcomes

5.1        The Extent of Racial Preferences

Unlike in the law school setting, affirmative action is present only at a subset of all undergraduate

institutions. In The Shape of the River, Bowen and Bok (1998) argue that only 20 to 30% of four-

year colleges practice racial preferences, as most schools simply are not selective. These results are

consistent with Kane (1998) and Arcidiacono (2005), who both estimate models of admissions using

nationally-representative data in which students self-report where they have been admitted. Both

find that racial preferences are large at the top schools, with little scope for racial preferences at the

bottom schools.

         At these top schools, however, racial preferences result in substantial differences in academic
    35
     Rothstein and Yoon (2008) predict an 84% drop in minority enrollees at HBCUs, which they acknowledge is too
high. However, they argue that the movement towards HBCUs would come in part from other law schools resulting
in those schools being even less diverse.
  36
     Of course, having the extensive margin being somewhat removed due to historically black institutions may be
unsatisfying, harkening back to ‘separate but equal’ education.
  37
     See Chan and Eyster (2003) and Fryer, Loury, and Yuret (2008) for models of how these adjustments could occur
in equilibrium.


                                                       31
backgrounds between majority and minority enrollees.38 Using the College and Beyond data set,

which focuses on a set of highly-selective colleges,39 Arcidiacono, Khan, and Vigdor (2011) show

within-school SAT score gaps of at least 140 points.40

    It is typically difficult to get information on the accept-reject decisions of universities. But there

are data from the University of California (UC) system, acquired under a Freedom of Information

Act request, that can be used to open the black box of university admissions. This individual-

level data set covers applicants from the years 1992 to 2006 and follows these individuals through to

graduation.41 While missing many covariates that are likely of importance (such as gender), the data

contain a continuous measure of academic preparation. Namely, they include an academic index,

which is a weighted average of the student’s SAT score and high school grades.42 We standardize

the academic index so that it has zero mean and standard deviation one for the set of individuals

that applied to a UC school during this period.

    The data show that half of the minority applicants who applied to UC Berkeley were admitted

compared to 35% of white applicants. Minority applicants to UC Berkeley had significantly higher

probabilities of being admitted despite academic indices that were almost one standard deviation

lower than white applicants. Figure 3 shows the academic index distribution for those admitted

and rejected by UC Berkeley for both minority and white applicants. For both minority and white

students, admits have academic indices on average around one standard deviation higher than

rejects. But the median white reject has an academic index higher than the median minority admit.

In fact, the median minority admit’s academic index is at the seventh percentile of the white admit
  38
     Kane (1998) points out that even in the absences of racial preferences minorities would on average have lower
test scores within each school given that lower minority test scores would place them more on the margin of being
admitted. Given the magnitude of the differences in the entering credential of enrollees, however, it is clear that racial
preferences at top schools are large.
  39
     This is the same data set as used in The Shape of the River.
  40
     The SAT score here includes only the verbal and math sections.
  41
     The year the individual applied is given only by its three-year interval. In 1998, Proposition 209 was implemented,
which banned the use of racial preferences in California. Hence, two (three) three-year periods are offered before (after)
the implementation of Proposition 209. See Antonovics and Sander (2013) for a fuller description of the data.
  42
     The SAT score is rescaled on a range from 0 to 600 and high school grades are rescaled from 0 to 400. The two
numbers are then added together.


                                                           32
Figure 3: Distribution of Academic Indexes for Applicants to UC Berkeley by Minority and Ac-
cept/Reject Status

            .8
            .6
            .4
            .2
            0




                 -6                 -4                -2                  0                   2
                                                   Academic Index

                                         Minority, Admit                Minority, Reject
                                         White, Admit                   White, Reject



Data source: UCOP, years 1995-1997. Academic index is a weighted average of the student’s SAT
score and high school GPA and is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one for the
population of applicants.


distribution.

    To further demonstrate the extent of racial preferences at UC Berkeley during this period, Figure

4 compares the academic index distribution for minority admits at UC Berkeley to the academic

index distribution for whites who applied to any UC school. The distributions look remarkably

similar: randomly drawing from the pool of white students who applied to any UC school would

produce an academic index distribution similar to that of minority admits at UC Berkeley.43

    As shown in Antonovics and Backes (2014), UC Berkeley had the largest racial preferences in

the UC system. After conditioning on a set of observables, minorities had increased chances of
  43
     Looking at enrollees instead of admits shifts the distribution of academic indexes to the left, with the median
minority index falling by 0.24 standard deviations. This would place the median minority enrollee at Berkeley below
the 9th percentile of white enrollees at Berkeley.




                                                        33
Figure 4: Distribution of Academic Indexes for Minority Berkeley Admits and White UC Applicants


           .5
           .4
           .3
           .2
           .1
           0




                  -4                -2               0                   2                  4
                                              Academic Index

                                Minority, Admit Berkeley             White, Apply UC



Data source: UCOP, years 1995-1997. Academic index is a weighted average of the student’s SAT
score and high school GPA and is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one for the
population of applicants.


admission at the top four UC schools, ranging from 40% at UC Berkeley to 21% at UC San Diego.

Minority advantages were smaller at the next set of schools, likely for two reasons. First, there is less

scope for racial preferences at the bottom set of schools. For example, for those who applied to UC

Santa Cruz in this period, both whites and minorities had an over 80% chance of being admitted.

Second, selection on unobservables is likely stronger at more elite schools as a result of minorities

being aware of affirmative action. Those applying to the bottom schools probably were aware that

their chances of admission were lower at UC Berkeley, despite racial preferences.

   Dillon and Smith (2013) provide some additional information on how affirmative action affects

sorting using NLSY97 data. Their paper is focused on characterizing the extent of academic mis-

match more generally, which they define as differences between student rank on the Armed Services



                                                   34
Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) test given to NLSY97 respondents and college rank on an

index of quality constructed from several measures of institutional characteristics. This analysis

has the value of being nationally-representative, although their small sample precludes them from

examining mismatch along the college quality spectrum.

       While the aim of Dillon and Smith (2013) is measuring and characterizing overall mismatch in

higher education, they show some evidence that speaks directly to mismatch that might be caused

by affirmative action. In particular, they show that despite the clustering of black students in

lower-quality schools, they are much more likely to be “over-matched” and less likely to be “under-

matched” than whites.44 This is somewhat mechanical, as blacks have lower test scores and hence

are naturally more likely to be over-matched than under-matched relative to whites. Surprisingly,

Dillon and Smith (2013) also show that black students are no more likely than whites to be over-

matched or under-matched given the same test scores and high school grades. However, this finding

only holds when focusing on students at four-year schools. When two-year students are included,

blacks are more likely to be over-matched than whites conditional on credentials. It is difficult to

fully explain this result with the evidence given in their paper, but one likely explanation is that

more black students are over-matched at two-year schools and non-selective four-year schools relative

to white students.45

       The findings of Dillon and Smith of no over-match among black students stands in contrast to

much of the prior literature. In particular, Bowen and Bok (1998) provide extensive evidence of

over-match among African American students. It thus is instructive to understand why these studies

differ in their conclusions. One core difference between them is that Dillon and Smith consider the

entire distribution of colleges, while Bowen and Box examine just elite schools. Arcidiacono, Khan,
  44
     “Over-matched” (“under-matched”) is defined as the ASVAB rank being more than 20 points below (above) the
college rank.
  45
     Because Dillon and Smith categorize a student as overmatched if he or she has an ASVAB score that is 20 percentile
points below the mean of the school he or she is attending, it is entirely possible that black students are over-matched
at community colleges.



                                                          35
and Vigdor (2011) show how the share of black students varies with the average SAT score of the

school using data from U.S. News & World Report for 1991. Figure 5 is reproduced from their paper.

The figure shows a U-shaped pattern, where the lowest and highest quality schools, as measured by

the average SAT scores of their student body, have the highest share of black students. Because of

this feature of how African Americans sort into different-quality postsecondary schools, it is possible

for there to be little over-match among blacks across the whole four-year quality distribution while

still exhibiting over-match among the more-elite schools. It also is important to highlight that

Bowen and Bok use older data (their most recent cohorts matriculated in 1989), and the extent of

mismatch may have changed over time. This discussion makes clear that much more work needs to

be done to understand the extent of over-match among African Americans across the postsecondary

quality distribution.

   The U-shaped curve shown in Figure 5 is of interest in its own right, and it is useful to consider

what factors might cause this pattern. First, affirmative action at the top schools can lower the share

of black students in the schools just below them. To the extent that the fall in the black share at this

next set of schools makes them less attractive to black students (for example, they are perceived

as not having a critical mass), these students may choose to attend lower-quality schools where,

conditional on their credentials, they are undermatched. Another possibility is that the middle-tier

schools practice less affirmative action. Third, black students may be less-informed on average about

their college possibilities. As illustrated by Hoxby and Avery (2013), those who are economically-

disadvantaged seem to make poorer college choices than their wealthier counterparts. Economically-

disadvantaged blacks may then choose colleges at the bottom of the quality distribution even though

they would have been a better match for a school in the middle of the quality distribution.

   Regardless of the reasons for the U-shaped pattern, the removal of affirmative action would

affect the sorting of black students into selective colleges. By altering minority college enrollment



                                                  36
                   Figure 5: College percent Black as a function of average SAT score
          .12
          .1
     Share Black
       .08.06
          .04




                     600              800            1000              1200             1400
                                            Average SAT score




Data Source: America’s Best Colleges produced by U.S. News & World Report for 1991




                                                  37
behavior, removing or restricting racial preferences could impact minority graduation rates, major

choices and the returns to college that they experience in the labor market. Below, we discuss

what is known about how affirmative action policies and affirmative action bans affect each of these

outcomes, as well as highlight questions that remain for future research.


5.2      Enrollments

Before discussing the effects of affirmative action policies on longer-run outcomes such as college

completion and wages, we provide a summary of the evidence on how affirmative action affects

minority enrollment behavior, both overall and across the higher education quality distribution.

Many of the effects of affirmative action on student outcomes flow through changes in whether and

where students enroll, and thus understanding the effect of racial admissions preferences on minority

enrollment is an important first step in thinking about these broader outcomes.

       Figures 3 and 4 are suggest that affirmative action policies act to sort minority students to

more selective schools, which implies that repealing them will lower minority representation at these

schools. Structural models of how students sort into schools by Arcidiacono (2005) and Howell

(2010) have been used to predict how the removal of affirmative action affects both the extensive

margin (whether students enroll at all) and the intensive margin (where they enroll). Both of

these papers have individuals make their application decisions based on expectations regarding their

probabilities of admittance. These models predict substantial reductions in the share of minority

students attending the most-selective schools following a ban but, because many schools are non-

selective, they predict little effect on the share of minorities enrolled in four-year colleges overall.46

       Recent affirmative action bans allow us to address how affirmative action affects enrollment

decisions directly. The enactment of these bans provides quasi-experimental variation in affirmative
  46
     Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2008) calibrate a general equilibrium model of how students sort into colleges when
colleges are differentiated only in terms of quality (as in Panel (a) of Figure 1). In their model, schools adjust their
admissions decisions in reaction to an affirmative action ban so as to attain more diversity by weighting characteristics
correlated with race more heavily. They too show substantial predicted reductions in enrollments at top tier colleges.


                                                           38
action policies, and a large portion of studies on which we will focus in this and subsequent sections

examines these policy changes. Table 1 shows the timing of the bans in each state as well as the

source of each ban’s enactment. The bans come from a mix of sources, ranging from voter initiatives

to executive orders and court rulings. The variation in time and location of these bans provides

useful variation with which to identify the effect of affirmative action policies on college outcomes.

Importantly, these bans only affect public universities, so private schools in these states can continue

to practice race-based affirmative action.

      Consistent with the structural predictions, the general consensus from empirical analyses of affir-

mative action bans is that elimination of race-based preferences reduced under-represented minority

student enrollment at flagship and elite public schools but had little impact on the overall likelihood

of four-year college enrollment. Kain, O’Brien and Jargowsky (2005) examine enrollment behavior

among Texas public college attendees between 1991-2002. They show evidence that when affirmative

action was banned in 1997, minority enrollment dropped substantially at the state flagship schools

– University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M-College Station. In the two years post-Hopwood,47

the number of black students enrolling at UT-Austin dropped to 68% of the pre-Hopwood level and

dropped to 72% of the pre-ban level at Texas A&M. Hispanic enrollment also declined by 6 and 25

percent of the pre-ban levels at UT-Austin and Texas A&M, respectively. However, white enrollment

jumped by 7% at these schools, which is consistent with affirmative action bans reducing enrollment

levels among under-represented minorities at elite public schools when race-based admission policies

are eliminated. Long and Tienda (2008) complement these results using administrative data from

the pre- and post-ban eras at Texas A&M and UT-Austin. They estimate probit regressions of

admission at these schools and show that post-Hopwood, these schools no longer gave independent

weight to race and ethnicity in admissions.

      Hinrichs (2012) and Backes (2012) exploit the timing of affirmative action bans across several
 47
      Hopwood v. Texas is the court case that led to the affirmative action ban in Texas.


                                                          39
of the states shown in Table 1 to estimate difference-in-difference models of college enrollment.

Due to their use of plausibly exogenous affirmative action variation, these are the most informative

estimates of how affirmative action affects flagship enrollment among under-represented minority

students. Using data from the American Community Survey and the Current Population Survey,

Hinrichs (2012) shows that affirmative action bans had no overall effect on the likelihood minor-

ity students attended any college or attended a four-year college. However, with IPEDS data on

college enrollment by race and institution, he shows bans led to large declines in black and His-

panic enrollment shares at more elite universities. In particular, enrollment by black students at

US News top-50 ranked schools declined by 1.6% and Hispanic enrollment at these schools dropped

by 1.8%. Because these declines include private schools that were not subject to these bans, these

results suggest the affected minority students did not just shift enrollment to other schools of sim-

ilar quality that were still practicing affirmative action. Furthermore, he shows that the effects on

enrollment were larger at schools that had lower admissions rates and higher SAT scores. Overall,

these estimates indicate that banning affirmative action had large impacts on the quality of schools

in which under-represented minority students enroll. Backes (2012) shows very similar results using

an expanded time frame and a more detailed set of institutional quality measures.

       Research on enrollment responses to affirmative action bans also shows that most of the en-

rollment effect came from changes in admissions behavior: application patterns among minority

students changed little following affirmative action bans (Card and Krueger, 2005; Antonovics and

Backes, 2013).48 Thus, affirmative action bans alter admissions rules such that minority students

are less likely to gain admittance to more elite in-state, public schools. This reduces the quality of

schools these students attend, although it does not affect the likelihood under-represented minority
  48
    Long (2004) compares changes in SAT score-sending rates among white and minority students in the late 1990s
and finds some evidence of a relative decline in minority applications to the top in-state institutions, especially in
California. However, he also shows similar patterns in applications to private and out-of-state colleges, which is
inconsistent with these patterns being driven by affirmative action changes.




                                                         40
students enroll in a four-year college. In what follows, we discuss the potential effects of this type

of re-sorting on college graduation, college major, and labor market returns to college investment.

   An important caveat to all of these studies is that the measured effects are in an environment

where racial preferences are still in place at all private schools and at public schools in states that

do not have bans. A universal ban on racial preferences would likely have much different effects,

for example, on the share of minorities at flagship universities than a local ban (a ban on racial

preferences at state institutions). Minorities admitted to the flagship school under a universal ban

will have fewer options than those admitted under a local ban, suggesting minority students admitted

to the flagship would be more likely to attend under a universal ban than a local ban.


5.3   Graduation

Affirmative action policies can influence graduation rates through two conflicting mechanisms. As

discussed in Section 5.2, race-based admissions policies can have a sizable influence on the distri-

bution of minority students across schools of differing quality. The Texas and California experience

with banning affirmative action had a large impact on the representation of minority students at

the more selective, in-state universities. The mismatch hypothesis predicts that banning race-based

admissions could increase the rate at which they graduate from college. This would occur because

students are now better matched academically for the schools in which they enroll.

   However, there also is a growing literature (discussed below) suggesting that college quality and

collegiate resources that are strongly correlated with measures of college quality exert an independent

influence on students’ abilities to obtain a college degree. If such college quality effects are large

for students affected by race-based admissions policies, then affirmative action policies could raise

collegiate attainment among under-represented minority students.




                                                  41
5.3.1    Graduation and College Quality


We begin this section with an overview of the literature on the effect of college quality on BA

completion. Table 2 shows six-year graduation rates across different higher education sectors in the

United States for the 2011-2012 school year. We split the four-year higher education sector into

four mutually exclusive and exhaustive groups: flagship public universities,49 non-flagship public

universities, highly-selective private schools, and less-selective private schools. The highly selective

private schools are the top-65 private universities and colleges according to the 2012 US News and

World Report rankings as well as the top-50 liberal arts schools. We have chosen to categorize

the higher education market in this way because these sectors represent the broad choices students

face when deciding what type of college to attend. The differences across the tiers are substantial:

public flagships and elite privates have six-year graduation rates of 70.2% and 86.8%, respectively,

compared to between 44-48% in the other two sectors. These differences are particularly pronounced

for Hispanic and black graduation rates, which highlights the potential importance of school quality

for these groups. In addition, the table shows resource differences across sectors in terms of student-

faculty ratios, per-student expenditures and faculty salaries. For all measures, the highly-selective

private schools have much higher resource levels than any other sector, with public flagships also

having substantially more resources than lower-ranked public and private schools. Thus, affirmative

action bans that re-sort minority students from flagship universities to non-flagship public schools

will in effect reduce the amount of postsecondary resources to which these students have access,

which in turn could lead to worse postsecondary outcomes.

    The graduation rate differences across sectors shown in Table 2 also reflect factors that make

it difficult to identify the causal effect of college quality on graduation. Due to the nature of how

students select into different quality tiers as a function of pre-collegiate academic training, the
  49
     The flagship public schools are straightforward to identify. See Lovenheim and Reynolds (2013) for a description
of this classification.



                                                         42
most academically qualified students sort into the highest-quality schools. The outcome differences

across school types thus could reflect prior academic training, and it therefore would be incorrect

to extrapolate these graduation rates to students who were admitted under an affirmative action

policy. Additionally, it is possible that collegiate resources have heterogeneous effects on students

with different pre-collegiate academic abilities, which forms the basis of the mismatch hypothesis.

    The literature on the effect of college quality on graduation rates attempts to control for dif-

ferences in the pre-existing academic capabilities of students in order to isolate the role of college

quality.50 Although not without its difficulties in terms of causal identification due to the college

selection process, prior work shows consistent evidence that college quality has a large and positive

effect on the likelihood a student graduates from a four-year school on average.51

    Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) show evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey

of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72) and the National Educational Longitudinal Study of

1988 (NELS:88) that once one controls for an extensive set of student background characteristics,

including high school test scores, large completion differences across college quality tiers still remain.

The NLS72 and NELS:88 datasets are nationally-representative and follow the high school classes

of 1972 and 1992, respectively, as they transition to college and then into the workforce. Their

categorization of schools follows closely with the one presented in Table 2, and their estimates

indicate that students beginning college at a top-50 public school or at an elite private school

are significantly more likely to obtain a BA within 8 years than are students who begin college

at less-selective four-year public schools. Furthermore, this gap grew substantially across cohorts,
   50
      In this literature, the terms “college quality,” ”college resources” and ”college selectivity” are used interchangeably.
We follow that convention here.
   51
      Prior research also has addressed the question of whether starting college in a two-year school versus in a four-year
school affects the likelihood of BA receipt. Rouse (1995) shows evidence from community college openings that some
students are diverted from a four-year school and are less likely to complete a BA as a result. Using matching methods
to help account for the non-random selection of students across school sectors and the non-overlap in observable
characteristics between two- and four-year students, Long and Kurlaender (2009), Reynolds (2012) and Doyle (2009)
all report large negative effects of two-year attendance on eventual BA receipt. Because most affirmative action
policies affect admission and enrollment at four-year schools due to the open-enrollment nature of community colleges,
we restrict our attention to the literature that focuses on that sector.



                                                             43
suggesting that college quality is becoming more important over time.

       Bound and Turner (2007) use a different and novel source of variation in school quality derived

from population variation to identify the role of collegiate resources on graduation that is less prone

to the biases associated with the selection-on-observables approach. Their insight is that relatively

large cohorts of students represent a demand shock for college. Since the supply of spaces at higher-

resource schools tends to be inelastic, and since state funding responds to demand increases with

long lags, students born in larger cohorts are less likely to attend a selective school and probably

experience lower resources when they are there. They term this phenomenon “cohort crowding.”

They show that the elasticity of college graduation with respect to cohort birth cohort size is

smaller than the elasticity of college enrollment with respect to cohort birth cohort size. This

finding is driven by some combination of students in larger cohorts attending less-selective colleges

and with per-student resources declining at less-selective schools when there is a positive demand

shock. Regardless of which effect dominates, both factors point towards resources mattering for

degree attainment.52

       Another source of variation researchers have used to inform the question of how college quality

affects college graduation rates is state merit aid systems. State merit aid programs are prevalent

and growing in the US, and they offer higher-performing students scholarships to attend college in-

state. Cohodes and Goodman (2014) study the Massachusetts Adams Scholarship that provides free

tuition (but not fees) for high-performing students in Massachusetts. Using a regression discontinuity

design surrounding the state test score eligibility cutoffs, they show that becoming eligible for this

scholarship reduced college quality by shifting students from higher-quality private schools to lower-

quality public universities. They also show BA attainment rates within four years declined by 1.7
  52
    One objection to their approach is that students from larger cohorts may experience crowding in elementary and
secondary schools that makes them less academically prepared for college. Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010)
conduct a similar analysis in which they control for student pre-collegiate test scores. Their findings are very similar,
which suggests reduced pre-collegiate training is not driving the cohort crowding result.




                                                           44
percentage points, which is consistent with declining school quality on average worsening college

outcomes.53

       While the estimates in Cohodes and Goodman (2014) also could be driven by changes in family

budgets and the fact that treated students are more likely to go to school closer to home and maintain

their high school peer groups, they show evidence that it is the highest-scoring students whose BA

attainment is most affected. Since these are the students who are most likely to experience a decline

in college quality due to the scholarship, their results are consistent with an important role for

college quality in driving college completion. Cohodes and Goodman (2014) also may be picking up

matching effects, as students who are qualified to receive the merit aid program may be the most

likely to benefit from attending a higher-quality college.


5.3.2      Graduation and Fit


This research on the graduation effects of college quality examines average effects, but average

effects may not be relevant for all students if there is significant mismatch. Several papers in the

literature have examined the empirical relevance of “mismatch,” particularly along racial/ethnic

lines. Loury and Garman (1995) provide one of the first analyses of the effect of mismatch amongst

whites and blacks using data from the NLS72. Using selection-on-observables models that attempt

to control for selection using SAT scores, parental income and education, and student demographic

variables, they examine whether black and white students are more or less likely to graduate if

they are “better matched” to their college in terms of their own SAT score being closer to the

college median. Consistent with Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010), they find college quality

has a sizable average impact on the likelihood of obtaining a BA for both blacks and whites, but
  53
     The finding that state merit aid reduces BA attainment is far from universal in this literature. Fitzpatrick and
Jones (2013) and Sjoquist and Winters (2012) find that the implementation of a state merit aid program does not
affect graduation rates, while Scott-Clayton (2011) shows positive effects of state merit aid on collegiate attainment.
A major difference between these studies is in the quality of schools students would attend in the absence of merit aid.
These differences likely drive much of the heterogeneity in findings in this literature, although no work has directly
tested this hypothesis.



                                                          45
lower-SAT whites and blacks both are less likely to graduate when they attend a higher-SAT school.

This penalty is particularly large for black students. The authors interpret these results as evidence

of mismatch, as less academically prepared students are less likely to get a four year degree when

they attend a higher resource school, despite the higher level of resources they experience there.

       Light and Strayer (2000, 2002) provide some additional evidence on the extent of mismatch

using data from the NLSY79. They model college graduation as a two-stage process: in the first

stage, students decide whether to go to college and which college type to attend, and in the second

stage they make a graduation decision. They estimate these two stages simultaneously and allow for

correlations of the error terms across equations. This method explicitly allows for unobservables to

influence both enrollment and completion. The results from Light and Strayer (2000) show that the

predicted likelihood of graduation among the lowest-quartile AFQT students declines monotonically

as college quality increases. As student academic ability rises, this pattern largely reverses.54 These

results again suggest that policies that induce less-academically prepared students to attend higher-

quality schools might be counter-productive in terms of graduation. In a related paper using similar

methods, Light and Strayer (2002) find similar patterns. Here, minority status has a positive effect

on graduation rates, a positive intercept regardless on the what college the student attends. Light

and Strayer (2002) argue that this positive effect may be result of affirmative action programs

being successful. However, this ignores the effect of minority status on college quality, the primary

channel through which racial preferences affect outcomes. And here, the results indicate match

effects are important and generally dominate quality effects. That the minority intercept is positive

may instead reflect higher returns to a college degree for African Americans.55
  54
     The reversal is not perfect. A surprising finding of Light and Strayer (2000, 2002) is that schools in the second
lowest quartile are associated with the highest graduation rates, though the standard errors are large.
  55
     Both Arcidiacono (2005) and Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2010) find that African Americans receive a larger
wage bump from college graduation than whites.




                                                         46
5.3.3    Evidence from Affirmative Action Bans


The recent affirmative action bans make it possible to directly test how affirmative action affects

graduation rates. Hinrichs (2012) examines the effect of affirmative action bans for public postsec-

ondary schools that were enacted in California (1998), Florida (2001), Texas (1997) and Washing-

ton (1999). Using American Community Survey data from 2005-2007 that links each respondent

to whether an affirmative action ban was in place in his state of birth when he was 18, Hinrichs

(2012) estimates difference-in-difference models that examine how ban enactments change the BA

attainment rate of minority students. He finds no effect: his preferred specification produces a

coefficient on the ban that is small in absolute value and is not statistically significant. His esti-

mates are precise enough that he can rule out effects larger than 0.8 of a percentage point (or 7%

relative to the sample mean) decline in BA attainment rates. In followup papers, Backes (2012) and

Hinrichs (forthcoming) examine the question of how affirmative action bans affect completion using

institutional data from IPEDS.56 Backes (2012) examines two additional states, Georgia (2002)57

and Michigan (2004), focusing on six-year graduation rates at public schools. He finds a significant

negative graduation effect on the share of public school graduates who are black, but the magnitude

is very small.58 Hinrichs (forthcoming) examines both four and six-year graduation rates, where the

dependent variable is the share of blacks (or Hispanics) who graduated from a particular type of

institution. Considering all institutions, no negative effects were found for either blacks or Hispan-

ics. Backes (2012) and Hinrichs (forthcoming) also look at the share of graduates of particular races

at selective colleges. Consistent with the findings on enrollment, the share of graduates who are

under-represented minorities at selective colleges falls. These estimates thus point to little impact
  56
      A potential issue with using IPEDS for this question is that some minority students may react to a ban by
attending college out of state.
   57
      There is some ambiguity about how to treat Georgia’s affirmative action policy change, as only the University of
Georgia eliminated racial admissions preferences.
   58
      Note that by focusing on public schools a possible substitution from public to private schools that can still use
affirmative action is ignored.




                                                          47
of affirmative action bans on minority graduation rates.

       Cortes (2010) analyzes the effect of the Texas affirmative action ban using data from six public

universities of differing quality in Texas. In particular, her data contain the two flagship universities

in Texas as well as a set of less-selective public schools and two private schools. The identifica-

tion strategy employed is to compare changes in six-year graduation rates among those in the top

decile of their high school class to changes among lower-ranked students in a difference-in-difference

framework. The argument for this methodology is based on the fact that the Texas Top 10% rule

guaranteed admissions to any public Texas university for students in the top 10% of her high school

class,59 and students in the top 10% were highly likely to be admitted to Texas A&M or UT-Austin

prior to the affirmative action ban. The results indicate that, after the ban, minority students in

Texas were between 2.7 and 4.0 percentage points less likely to earn a BA within six years. However,

these effects are due predominantly to an increase in graduation rates among those in the top decile

(who are assumed to be untreated by the ban) rather than a decline among lower-ranked students.

This pattern is more consistent with the top 10% rule positively impacting top-decile students than

with the affirmative action ban driving a decline in completion rates for lower-ranked students.

       Arcidiacono, Aucejo, Coate, and Hotz (2014) examine how the affirmative action ban in Califor-

nia affected five-year graduation rates, paying particular attention to issues of the match between

the student and the school. They show graduation rates for under-represented minorities in the UC

system increased by over four percentage points after the ban. They then decompose this change

into three parts: improvement in the fit between the student and the school, selection into the UC

system as minorities were a smaller share of the student body after the ban, and gains due to uni-

versities responding to the ban by changing how academic preparation translates into graduation.

Their model allows the returns to academic preparation to vary across campuses, consistent with
  59
    We discuss the Texas top 10% rule as well as other related “percent plans” as a replacement for affirmative action
in Section 6.




                                                         48
Figure 1. The results show patterns consistent with the bottom panel of Figure 1: the most selective

schools have the highest graduation rates for the most prepared students, while the least selective

schools in the system had the highest graduation rates for the least prepared students. Reshuffling

minority students within the system according to their sorting patterns after the ban results in

graduation gains for minority students between 0.1 and 1.2 percentage points, depending on the

controls for selection.60 Substantially higher gains are found for those in the bottom quartile of the

minority preparation distribution, where the resulting improvements in fit improve graduation rates

by between 0.8 and 2.2 percentage points. At the same time, these students are also the ones most

likely not to be admitted to any school in the system in the presence of a ban.

       The results of Arcidiacono, Aucejo, Coate, and Hotz (2014) also suggest that universities may

respond to affirmative action bans by focusing more resources on ensuring that the minority students

they do have actually graduate. Their lower bound estimates suggest that, conditional on both

observed and unobserved ability, students had significantly higher probabilities of graduating after

the ban. Antonovics and Backes (2014) show further evidence of endogenous institutional responses

to affirmative action bans. In the UC system, one of the responses to the ban was to adjust

the admissions weights placed on different background characteristics in diversity-enhancing ways.

Universities also may adjust how they recruit students and how they invest in students conditional

on arrival, as occurred in Texas with the Century and Longhorn scholarship programs that were

implemented post-Hopwood.61 Such changes may provide additional support for minority students

at more elite schools after affirmative action bans are implemented.

       Fit seems to be more important as the graduation window shortens. Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and

Hotz (2013) show that minority four-year graduation rates in the UC system are highest at UC
  60
     The smallest results are for the baseline case that only controls for selection on observables. Larger results are
found when controls similar to those used in Dale and Krueger (2002) are used. See Section 5.5 for a discussion of
Dale and Krueger (2002).
  61
     See Andrews, Ranchhod and Sathy (2010) for a description of these programs and their effect on minority enroll-
ment.



                                                          49
Santa Cruz despite minorities at UC Santa Cruz having substantially worse academic backgrounds

than those at places like UC Berkeley and UCLA. This pattern does not show up in the raw

data for five-year graduation rates, suggesting that match effects may affect time to degree as well

as completion rates. Arcidiacono and Koedel (2014) examine eight-year graduation rates in the

Missouri system. While there is some evidence that fit matters when comparing the most-selective

schools in the system to moderately selective schools, there are a set of schools at the bottom of

the quality distribution that appear to be worse for all students. This may be the result of quality

effects dominating any match effects at the bottom of the school quality distribution or because of

the wide graduation rate window considered in this study.

   In sum, the evidence suggests that 1) increasing college quality positively affects graduation rates

on average, 2) these positive effects turn negative for those with relatively low levels of academic

preparation, and 3) affirmative action bans have had little effect on the overall graduation rates

of minority students. These results are consistent with offsetting influences of quality effects and

match effects. Given that more selective schools have an overall positive effect on graduation, racial

preferences that are milder than those currently in place, at least at the very best schools, could

result in higher graduation rates for minority students, taking advantage of the higher resources

associated with more selective schools without being so aggressive such that match effects degrade

educational outcomes. However, the estimated graduation gains from milder preferences at the

best schools are small. As Arcidiacono and Koedel (2014) note, substantially higher gains could be

achieved from policies that lead to college quality increases among minority students attending the

very bottom schools.




                                                 50
5.4      Choice of major

Many studies have documented substantial differences in the monetary returns to different majors.62

Relatively few studies have analyzed how the fit between the student and the school affects one’s

choice of major, however, but it is here where fit may be the most important. This is in part due

to the very different demands placed on students in different majors. Majors in STEM (science,

technology, engineering, and math) as well as in economics have very different grading distributions

(Sabot and Wakeman-Linn 1991, Johnson 2003) and are associated with more study time (Brint,

Cantwell, and Saxena 2012, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2011).

      Differences in grading standards and study time have disproportionate effects on those who are

at the bottom of the preparation distribution. Within colleges, there is massive sorting surrounding

who persists in majors in the sciences, with those who have higher SAT scores (and in particular

SAT math scores) being much more likely to persist in the sciences (Arcidiacono 2004, Arcidiacono,

Aucejo, and Hotz 2013).

      Since affirmative action results in minority students being relatively less-prepared than their

non-minority counterparts within a given school, differences in expectations across fields can result

in minorities shifting away from the sciences over the course of their college career. Using data

on Duke students, Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Spenner (2012) showed that, conditional on gender,

African Americans were more likely than white students to have an initial major in the sciences.

However, their probability of finishing a major in the sciences was much lower. For example, of

those who expressed an initial interest in the sciences, 54% of African American males finished in

the humanities or social sciences compared to 8% of white males. Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Spenner

show that this entire racial gap can be accounted for by controlling for academic background: there

are no differences in major switching patterns across races once one accounts for differences in
 62
      See Altonji, Blom, and Meghir (2012) for a recent review.




                                                          51
academic background.

    What the Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Spenner study cannot do is say whether the African American

students at Duke would have been more likely to persist in science majors had they attended a less-

selective school. That is, is it relative preparation or absolute preparation that matters for obtaining

a science degree? Smyth and McArdle (2004) use the College and Beyond data63 and estimate

models of graduating in a science field, controlling both for the difference between the individual’s

SAT math score and the average SAT score of their school as well as the average SAT score of

the school itself.64 Smyth and McArdle (2004) find support for relative preparation mattering for

attaining a STEM degree: the total effect of college quality (the direct effect and the effect through

relative preparation) on STEM attainment is negative.

    Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz (2013) also explore the issue of institutional fit but allow sufficient

flexibility such that better students may see higher probabilities of graduating in the sciences at

better schools, consistent with the bottom panel of Figure 1. They use data from the cohorts of

students applying to the University of California system between 1995 and 1997. These data show

substantial within-school gaps in SAT scores between minority students who start in the sciences

and finish in the sciences and minority students who start in the sciences but finish outside of the

sciences, gaps that are much smaller for non-minority students.65 For example, at UC Berkeley the

gap is 105 points for minority students and only 21 points for non-minority students. The probability

of graduating with a science degree conditional on starting in the sciences at UC Berkeley is 61%

for non-minority students, but just over half that (31%) for minority students.
  63
     This is the same data used in Bowen and Bok’s seminal book The Shape of the River and in Dale and Krueger
(2002).
  64
     Smyth and McArdle’s study was motivated by Elliot et al. (1996), who examine data from eleven colleges of
varying selectivity. At each of the schools in their data, individuals who graduate are divided by their tercile of the
school’s SAT math score distribution. They find that the share of science degrees awarded to each tercile was very
similar across institutions despite large differences in the average SAT math scores of the schools, with the top tercile
generally producing over half the science graduates. While more selective schools also produced more science graduates
overall, the net effect is still that attending a less-selective institution makes persisting in the sciences more likely. A
caveat with this study is that it focuses on college graduates, and dropout rates may differ across the institutions.
  65
     Finishing in the sciences and graduation probabilities both refer to five-year graduation rates.



                                                            52
       Graduating in the sciences with a low SAT score is difficult at UC Berkeley, but would these same

students have a higher probability of graduating in the sciences from a school like UC Riverside?

The answer appears to be yes. Denote the median SAT score for minorities at Berkeley as A. The

minority students below this score who are interested in the sciences have a five-year graduation rate

in the sciences of 13%. Now consider minority students at Riverside, again with an initial interest

in the sciences, who have SAT scores below A.66 Their five-year graduation rate in the sciences is

20%, despite likely having lower SAT scores overall and likely having a worse academic record.67

       Arcidiacono, Aucejo and Hotz estimate a model of major choice, controlling for some observed

preparation measures as well as Dale and Krueger (2002) controls, where schools differ in their

major-specific returns to academic preparation. Hence, as in Figure 1, it is possible for the most-

prepared students to be best matched at the most-selective schools and less-prepared students to

be best matched at less-selective schools. Estimates of the model reveal exactly this pattern. After

accounting for selection, the vast majority of minority students, who are coming in with significantly

worse preparation than their non-minority counterparts, would have higher graduation probabilities

in the sciences had they attended a less-selective school in the UC system. On the other hand, non-

minority students are generally well-matched: a much smaller share would see higher graduation

probabilities in the sciences had they attended a less-selective school.68

       Note that the studies discussed above have focused on selective schools. Arcidiacono (2004,

2005) both analyze the choice of college and major using the NLS72 data set and come to a different

conclusion on how college quality and the choice of major interact. Namely, increasing college quality

makes majoring in the sciences more attractive. There are two reasons why we do not put as much

weight on these studies in terms of how college quality interacts with major choice. First, they placed
  66
     87% of entering minority science majors at Riverside have SAT scores below A.
  67
     Note that the overall graduation rate for this group is higher at Berkeley. Berkeley does an excellent job at
graduating minority students, just not in the sciences.
  68
     Indeed, Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz find that non-minority students in the UC system would have had lower
graduation rates in the sciences had they been assigned to schools like their minority counterparts.



                                                       53
considerable structure on how college quality and major choice interacted by constraining college

quality to make particular majors more or less attractive for all students as opposed to allowing for

the complementarities discussed in Section 2. As the discussion of Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz

(2013) suggests, mismatch only becomes an issue when one’s preparation is severely behind one’s

peers.69 Second, there are no controls for intended major, and those who intend to major in the

sciences are on average stronger students and therefore more likely to attend higher-quality colleges.

       But it is possible that the difference in results are is partly driven by the national data used

in Arcidiacono (2004, 2005). Arcidiacono and Koedel (2014) find that the lowest-quality four-

year institutions in the Missouri system have very few if any STEM majors. It may be the case

that colleges quality effects dominate at the bottom of the distribution, whereby better schools are

better for everyone, while matching effects are more important at the top of the distribution. The

affirmative action debate has typically focused on racial preferences at the very best institutions,

but preferences may be most beneficial further down the college quality distribution.


5.5      Labor Market Outcomes

Ultimately, when assessing the impact of affirmative action on minority students, we care about

how their long-run life outcomes are affected. An important component of such outcomes is labor

market performance, such as earnings, wages, and the likelihood of employment. Affirmative ac-

tion will potentially affect labor market outcomes through its influence on the myriad of collegiate

outcomes considered above: quality of schools attended, the likelihood of graduation, and choice

of major. Affirmative action policies also could have direct effects on labor market outcomes that

work through employer beliefs. As shown by Coate and Loury (1993), affirmative action can lead

to employers developing “negative stereotypes” about minority workers that lower their returns to
  69
    Note then that it is not just a matter of being a small fish in a big pond as Gladwell (2013) suggests, but how
well one is prepared for the material being taught.




                                                        54
a given educational investment. In equilibrium, employers will believe minority workers to be less

productive, will pay them less, and thus will lower the incentive for these workers to invest in labor

market skills (including education). If employers develop beliefs about worker productivity that are

a function of school attended and race, then such an equilibrium could arise due to affirmative action

in the higher education market. Indeed, the concern that employers will treat under-represented

minority workers from elite schools differently because of affirmative action is a core argument oppo-

nents of affirmative action adduce against these policies. Furthermore, affirmative action could have

important distributional consequences for minority workers, with affirmative action bans potentially

influencing wages among very high-skilled minorities.

   The results from affirmative action bans discussed in Section 5.2. highlight that a primary effect

of affirmative action on minority students is to induce higher rates of attendance at more elite

schools. With little effect on overall graduation rates, the effect of affirmative action in admissions

on earnings will flow predominantly through the choice of major and college quality.

   We begin our discussion by considering the returns to college quality in general. This is a

growing area of research that has made many recent advances due to growing data quality that

allow one to link students’ K-12 education records to higher education records and future earnings.

As in the estimation of college quality effects on higher BA attainment rates, the struggle in all

studies on the returns to college quality is to deal with the fact that students with higher pre-

collegiate academic ability that is independently valued in the labor market are more likely to sort

into higher-quality schools. Put differently, student sorting across the quality distribution of the

higher education market is highly non-random, and even when the characteristics of students at

different types of schools overlap we must still be concerned about why they wound up in different

institutions and whether these differences are correlated with unobserved attributes that will drive

labor market outcomes. The literature to date has used three methods to address this endogeneity



                                                  55
concern: selection on observables, regression discontinuity using admissions rules, and matching

based on students with similar application and admissions histories. We discuss each of these in

turn below, and we also point interested readers to the thoughtful review provided in Hoxby (2009).

       The largest group of studies uses student observable characteristics to control for the differences

across students in underlying earnings potential across the higher education quality distribution.

In early work on this question, Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg (1999) use the rich demographic and

pre-collegiate test score data in the NLS72 and High School and Beyond (HSB) data sets to estimate

wage and earnings premiums for those who attend schools from different higher education sectors.70

Their results indicate that students attending a high-quality public university (defined as being most

or highly competitive in the Barron’s ratings) earn as much as 25% more than those attending a

low-quality one (defined as being less- or non-competitive). In addition to the concern that there is

selection on unobservable characteristics, such as student motivation, there is a concern that OLS

models will produce misleading estimates because of limited overlap in the observable characteristics

of students attending schools of differing quality.

       If there was full sorting on background characteristics, then the only way to adjust for differences

in background characteristics across schools would be to impose a potentially restrictive functional

form assumption. This issue is taken up directly in Black and Smith (2004). They use the National

Longitudinal Study of 1979, which similar to NLS72 and HSB, contains detailed background and

pre-collegiate cognitive skill measures, and they estimate matching models that allow them to both

assess the degree of common support across the distribution of college quality and to examine

how sensitive the results are to excluding the non-overlapping set.71 Their results demonstrate

a surprising amount of overlap in the propensity score distributions of the likelihood of being in
  70
     Note that the student need not graduate from college to be included in the sample.
  71
     Black and Smith (2004) measure college quality using an index based on average faculty salaries in 1997, average
SAT score of the entering class in 1990 and the average first-year retention rate in 1990. Black and Smith (2006) use a
more extensive set of institutional characteristics to measure college quality, again showing significant college quality
effects.



                                                           56
the top versus the bottom quartile of college quality as a function of the observables. They find a

sizable effect of college quality: going from the bottom to the top quartile of college quality increases

wages by 14% for men and 8% for women.72 Although these estimates are difficult to compare with

Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg (1999) due to differences in the way they measure school quality and

not separating public and private schools, they both indicate substantial returns to attending a

higher-quality college.

       Arcidiacono (2005) is the only study that links racial preferences in admissions to future earn-

ings. Using data from the NLS72, he estimates a structural model where students first decide the

set of colleges to which they will apply given expectations about their probabilities of admission,

financial aid conditional on admission, enrollment and major choice decisions, and future earnings.

Arcidiacono’s results on earnings show small returns to college quality as measured by the average

SAT math score of the student body, particularly after allowing for the errors in the various parts of

the model (applications, admissions, earnings, etc.) to be correlated.73 However, as pointed out by

Black and Smith (2004, 2006), using only one noisy measure of college quality may bias downward

the estimated returns.

       Arcidiacono’s model is estimated in a regime where racial preferences are present. The struc-

tural parameter estimates are then used to forecast how black student decisions over applications,

enrollment, and major choice would change if they faced the admission and/or financial aid rules of

whites. The effects of removing racial preferences in admissions on expected black earnings, even

among those most likely to attend a selective college, were negative but quite small. This is due to

racial preferences in admissions having little effect on enrollment and the low estimated returns to

college quality.74
  72
     These are similar to the OLS estimates, and for both men and women the effects grow substantially, to 25% and
16%, when the estimation sample is restricted to the “thick support region,” where students are most similar in terms
of observables across school types.
  73
     Similar low returns, albeit with the same data set, are found in Arcidiacono (2004).
  74
     Arcidiacono (2005) finds slightly larger negative effects from removing racial preferences in financial aid as racial
preferences in financial aid affect whether black students attend college at all. He estimates that the returns to college


                                                           57
    These results are based on older cohorts who graduated from college in the 1970s and 1980s. It

thus is important to consider some more recent evidence. Long (2010b) shows suggestive evidence

that the returns to college quality has increased over time. He estimates the effect of college quality

in the NLS72, HSB and NELS:88 surveys, and he shows that the effect on earnings of a one standard

deviation increase in quality has grown from 2.6% to 4.8% across cohorts. However, this change was

not statistically different from zero. Interestingly, the return to college quality for African American

students in NELS:88 dropped to zero from the 7.5% estimate in HSB. Thus, the increasing returns

do not appear to be uniformly distributed across students, and if the returns to quality have dropped

for black students this has important implications for how affirmative action changes have affected

the returns to education for this group.

    Evidence from the most recent cohorts comes from Texas, where it is possible to link students’

K-12 records to higher education outcomes and labor market earnings starting from the 1994 high

school graduating cohort (Andrews, Li and Lovenheim, forthcoming). Andrews, Li and Lovenheim

(forthcoming) is distinguished by the large volume of student high school test score controls that the

longitudinal datasets used in other work do not have and by the large sample sizes that provide more

statistical power. They estimate OLS models of the effect of UT-Austin and Texas A&M-College

Station graduation on earnings relative to earnings from graduates at other four-year schools in

Texas. These estimates are similar to those from prior work, suggesting an earnings premium from

UT-Austin of 11.5% and from Texas A&M of 21%. For black and Hispanic students, however, the

returns to UT-Austin are small, while the returns to Texas A&M are about 20%. Furthermore, they

estimate quantile treatment effects that show how college quality shifts the earnings distribution.

At UT-Austin, there is a wide distribution, with earnings at the top of the distribution shifting out

much more than at the bottom. The effect of Texas A&M on the earnings distribution is much
are significantly higher for blacks than whites given the same background characteristics. Racial preferences in financial
aid have the added advantage that mismatch effects are unlikely to result.




                                                           58
more constant. These results may be consistent with the bottom panel of Figure 1 if the quantiles

correlate strongly with academic preparation, which would explain the lower returns at UT-Austin

for blacks and Hispanics. Alternatively, the wide distribution at UT-Austin may simply reflect

UT-Austin being a risky proposition regardless of where one lies in the preparation distribution.

       Overall, the evidence from studies that rely on student observable characteristics to account

for selection into schools of differing quality points towards significant effects of college quality on

earnings. However, there is much concern that despite the large volume of information contained in

the conditioning sets used, there still is residual selection on unobserved characteristics that could

exert an independent influence on labor market outcomes. Hoekstra (2009) takes a unique approach

to solving this identification problem by using an admission cutoff rule at a large flagship university

based on SAT scores and GPA. Students are assigned a score based on a combination of SAT and

GPA, and admission rules use a cutoff for each SAT-GPA combination that form the basis of a

regression discontinuity (RD) design. He shows that students attending the flagship because they

score just above the cutoff earn 25% more than those who do not attend because they are just below.

A complication with this study is that he does not observe what happened to students who do not

attend the flagship, so the counterfactual is difficult to assess. However, in terms of affirmative

action, this paper is relevant for two reasons. First, the effect is focused on the students at the

margin of being academically eligible for admission at a flagship university, and under-represented

minority students who are impacted by affirmative action rules are more likely to be in this group.

Second, the correct counterfactual when thinking about imposing stronger or weaker admissions

requirements is what students would do if not admitted. Thus, Hoekstra’s results are applicable

when attempting to predict the policy effect on earnings of imposing higher admissions requirements

for a marginally-admitted group.75 However, an important caveat to his findings with respect to
  75
     Zimmerman (forthcoming) shows a similarly-sized effect on earnings using an admission cutoff rule for a low-
selectivity school in Florida. This finding suggests that earnings returns to college are not limited to the high-quality
schools, but we focus this discussion on the flagship and selective schools because these are the schools whose minority



                                                           59
affirmative action is that he focuses only on white students; it is unclear whether one can generalize

his findings to other racial and ethnic groups.

    The final method researchers have used to identify the effect of college quality on earnings is

through a matching technique that compares earnings across students who attend different-quality

universities but who applied to and were admitted to the same set of schools. Dale and Krueger

(2002) were the first to implement this method using College and Beyond and NELS:88 data, and the

motivation is that the student unobservable qualities one might be concerned about in the selection-

on-observable studies are contained in the application and admission set. They show that once one

conditions on the application and admissions sets, there is no evidence of an earnings return to

college quality. This finding is re-confirmed in a follow-up study (Dale and Krueger, 2014), however

both papers find sizable college quality effects for students from low-income families. To the extent

under-represented minority students are more likely to be from lower-income families, these results

suggest college quality may still be an important component of future earnings for this group. This

methodology has several appealing attributes, most notably that it is comparing students who are

very similar in terms of the types of schools they express a desire to attend and the types of schools

to which they are academically eligible to attend.76 But, this method also has generated controversy

because of the concern over what is driving the residual selection. That is, why do two different

students who have identical choice sets choose schools of different quality? Some of the potential

explanations could be the types of unobservables this model is designed to overcome (e.g., differences

in student motivation). Or, there could be differences in match quality that are highly important

in this context, driven by differences in schools’ focus in terms of academic area or other attributes

students value. Finally, the differences in college quality within matched sets, particularly at the

top of the quality distribution, tend to be small. It could be the case that the effects of college
enrollments are most affected by affirmative action.
  76
     Indeed, Dale and Krueger (2014) shows positive returns for minorities for the most recent cohort. However, similar
positive findings are not found for the older cohort.



                                                          60
quality are non-linear in means, which could complicate comparisons across very similar schools.

      Our conclusion from this literature is that, on the whole, the evidence supports the claim that

there are significant returns to college quality. Even Dale and Krueger (2002) show sizable effects for

low-income students. The estimates are particularly large when examining the elite public schools,

which typically are state flagship universities. Table 2 shows that these schools have substantially

higher resources and higher graduation rates, both overall and for minority students. It is reasonable

to conclude that these higher resources allow these schools to have a larger effect on human capital

than lower-resource schools. A prediction that stems directly from this evidence and from the

enrollment effects discussed in Section 5.2 is that affirmative action likely raises the earnings of

minority students due to its importance in driving minority enrollment in selective universities and

the substantial earnings returns that tend to follow.

      At the same time, many of the results in this literature do not speak that closely to the question

of how admitting lower-ability minority applicants through affirmative action affects their future

earnings. More broadly, this literature has not explored how the match between the school and the

student affects the returns to college quality. This is an important hole in the returns to college

quality research and is thus a ripe area for future research. The methods used by some of the more

prominent papers in this literature, namely Dale and Krueger (2002; 2014) and Hoekstra (2009), are

particularly ill-suited for this task. In the case of Dale and Krueger, due to the noisiness of college

quality measures and the fact the students’ first and second choices do not differ in terms of measured

quality by that much, any mismatch differences across first and second choice schools are likely to

be small. With respect to Hoekstra (2009), his estimates are identified off of academically-marginal

students whose outside options are worse in terms of quality. While minority students are more

likely to be academically marginal, the existence of affirmative action policies makes their outside

options far better than an observationally-equivalent white student.77 These studies also generally
 77
      Hoekstra focuses only on white students in his analysis, so he cannot test this hypothesis.


                                                           61
focus on earnings not conditional on graduation.78 Since college quality overall has a positive effect

on graduation rates, this may be the channel through which it influences earnings. But as we saw in

Section 5.3.1, higher graduation probabilities from attending a higher quality college may not result

if the student is significantly underprepared relative to his peers.


5.6      Summary of the Evidence

This section reviewed the large literature on the varied returns to college quality as well as the

evidence on how affirmative action bans affect student outcomes. Given the quantity of research

discussed, we briefly summarize the lessons learned from this research and highlight some remaining

research questions. First, we find the research rather clear in showing that, on average, there is a

positive return to college quality in terms of the likelihood of graduation as well as of subsequent

earnings. The identification strategies supporting these conclusions are all imperfect, but sizable

effects have been found using a variety of methods, time periods, and data sources.

       The literature is much less clear about how the match between the school and students affects

these outcomes more generally and how affirmative action impacts these outcomes specifically. The

research using affirmative action bans is certainly the most straightforward to interpret, and this

work shows no effect of these bans on the likelihood of graduation. This is a surprising result,

because these studies demonstrate that affirmative action bans significantly reduce college quality

for African American and Hispanic students. These results can be reconciled by the changes in

matching effects from the bans canceling out the college quality effects, though more evidence is

needed. There is also a lack of understanding of how universities might respond to changes in

affirmative action policies. If universities shift resources to under-represented minority students in

order to compensate for externally-imposed admission constraints, this could have sizable impacts
  78
   An exception is Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (forthcoming), which examines college quality earnings premiums
among graduates.




                                                    62
on student outcomes. No research exists that examines institutional responses to affirmative action

bans, which is a notable gap in the literature. In addition, there is no work estimating how affirmative

action bans influence earnings. Understanding how these bans influence earnings may yield some

insight into how affirmative action policies affect long-run outcomes, and this line of inquiry thus is

ripe for future study.

    As noted above, graduation is an imperfect measure of how affirmative action impacts students

because they can adjust to along other margins. Changing majors is a one of the central ways

in which students can compensate for for a poor academic match. The evidences suggests that

relatively less-prepared students are likely to switch into less-demanding majors. Furthermore, if

these students had gone to slightly lower-quality schools, they would have had a better chance of

completing the more difficult major. The central question that arises from this research is what are

the returns to majors versus school quality, and how do the returns to major and school combinations

differ across different student types. It is extremely difficult to identify the returns to college majors

and to major-school choice combinations.79 Nonetheless, Gemici and Wiswall (2014) suggest that

choice of major has become more important over time and this is an important are of future research.



6     Percent Plans as an Alternative to Affirmative Action

In the wake of court decisions and voter referendums eliminating affirmative action in higher edu-

cation (see Table 1), states have been increasingly turning to “percent plans” in order to achieve

diversity goals.80 Percent plans guarantee admission to a set of schools to students who are in
   79
      This is not the case in other countries where admissions to school-major combinations are sometimes a reflection
of only test score imply regression discontinuity methods may be employed. See, for example, Hastings, Neilson, and
Zimmerman (2014) and Kirkeboen, Leuven, and Mogstad (2014). The usefulness of discontinuities is limited to local
effects when matching effects are present, though.
   80
      This section examines percent plans as a method for states to achieve diversity goals in lieu of race-based affirmative
action. If the goal is instead to better the schooling outcomes of minority students, they have a much larger set
of policies with which to work, including financial aid, income supports for low-income families, college counseling,
information dissemination, and investments in minority students’ education at younger ages. There are large literatures
examining the effects of each of these policies that are beyond the scope of this review.




                                                             63
the top X percent of their high school class. The idea behind such rules is that high schools tend

to be ethnically and racially segregated, and so a percent plan will necessarily expand access to

low-income minority students who are in heavily non-white schools. The most prominent percent

plan is in Texas. The “Texas Top Ten Percent Rule” went in to effect in 1998, and it guaranteed

all students in the top 10% of their high school class automatic admission to any public college or

university in Texas. California also has an admission policy in which any student in the top 9%

of their class or in the top 9% of students overall in the state are guaranteed admission to some

University of California campus.81

       In this section, we provide a brief overview of the evidence on how these percent plans affect

student outcomes in terms of enrollment and graduation, and we discuss evidence on some of the

unintended consequences of these rules that policymakers need to consider when deciding on whether

to replace existing affirmative action policies with a percent plan. Most of the evidence comes from

studying the Texas Top Ten Percent Rule, so we focus our discussion there. Kain, O’Brien and

Jargowsky (2005) examine eight cohorts of college students in Texas that span the pre-ban period,

the two years the ban was in effect, and the Top Ten Percent Rule implementation period. They

show that the enrollment declines among African Americans at UT-Austin and Texas A&M-College

Station post-Hopwood discussed in Section 5.2 were partially reversed after the Top Ten Percent

Rule was implemented. However, black enrollment at the flagship schools still remained 14% below

the pre-ban levels. Among Hispanic students, enrollments at UT-Austin fully recovered relative to

pre-ban levels and at Texas A&M it remained at about 20% below the pre-ban level. Overall, the

evidence suggests that the Texas Top 10% Rule went some way to undoing the declines in minority
  81
     The percent plan in California originally considered only those in the top 4% of their graduating class or in the top
12.5% of students in the state. These admission rules were changed for the incoming class of 2012. The within-school
ranking in California is based on GPA, while the statewide rankings are based on an academic index, which is a
weighted average of SAT/ACT score and high school GPA. Florida has a percent plan as well, called the Talented 20.
Under this plan, which was enacted in 2000, the top 20% of students in each high school class who complete a college
preparatory curriculum are guaranteed admission to at least one of the public universities in Florida, but in practice
this program does not bind.




                                                           64
enrollment at Texas Flagship Universities after affirmative action was banned, but the recovery was

not full, especially for African Americans. The enrollment patterns also show a large increase in

white enrollment at these 3 schools, jumping 27% after the implementation of the Top 10% Rule.

   Long (2004b) argues that enrollment trends are misleading because they are confounded by

growing minority populations within the state. He performs simulations of enrollment probabilities

using the NELS:88 survey and shows that percent plans are unlikely to affect minority enrollment

for two reasons. First, most minority students in the top decile of their class are admitted to the

state flagship anyway. Second, under-represented minority students are not concentrated enough in

most areas and they are unlikely to be in the top portion of their high schools for this policy to have

large effects on their enrollment patterns.

   A source of variation that is increasingly being exploited to identify the effects of percent plans

on students is the discontinuity in access to flagship universities that occurs just above the rank

cutoff. This methodology is not subject to the criticisms outlined in Long (2004b), but they do

have the drawback that the estimates are only local to the specific cutoff. Thus, these studies do

not tell us the overall effect of percent plans on the composition of the student body; they only

can inform how students respond when given admission guarantees to flagship schools. They are

informative about how students respond to admission guarantees, but the estimates are too local to

tell us much about the overall impacts of percent plans on the state postsecondary system (or on

flagship schools, per se).

   There are two studies that have used regression discontinuity methods to study the Texas Top

Ten Percent Rule, and they come to somewhat different conclusions. Niu and Tienda (2010) use

data from the Texas Higher Education Opportunity Project (THEOP), a state-representative, lon-

gitudinal survey of Texas public high school students that began in 2002. Class ranks were verified

using transcripts among those who persist in the survey to the second follow-up. The main finding



                                                  65
is a 12-14 percentage point increase in the likelihood of Hispanic students who are just over the 10

percent rank cutoff enrolling in one of the two Texas flagships. Students at predominantly minority

schools also experience a jump of 14 percentage points in the likelihood of enrolling in a flagship

at the cutoff. White students and students in majority white schools are unaffected, as are African

American students. This evidence is consistent with the tabulations in Kain, O’Brien and Jargowsky

(2005), which shows Hispanic enrollment at Texas flagships increased substantially after the Top

Ten Percent rule was implemented relative to enrollment in the ban years.

       Daugherty, Martorell and McFarlin (2014) examine how the cutoff not only affects whether

students attend the flagship school, but also how it affects attendance patterns at other schools.

They match six cohorts of students to a large, un-named district in Texas and estimate regression

discontinuity models using administrative data on class rank that is linked to college enrollment

outcomes both within and outside of Texas. They show that, while being in the top ten percent

increases the likelihood students enroll in a state flagship, it displaces enrollment in private and

out-of-state universities. As a result, students just above and below the top ten percent cutoff

experience the same level of college quality.82 Interestingly, they also find no effect on the likelihood

of enrollment, even though the baseline enrollment rate in college is only 30% in the study’s district

(and is only 58% among those in the top decile of class rank). This finding highlights the fact that

percent plans influence where students attend, not whether they attend at all, similar to affirmative

action policies more generally.

       The findings of this paper are relevant for affirmative action policy, as they suggest that ex-

panding admission preferences at any one school (or among a small number of schools) may simply

re-sort students among similar-quality institutions. This is perhaps an explanation for the lack of

graduation effects found in the studies examining affirmative action bans discussed in Section 5.3.3.
  82
     Daugherty, Martorell and McFarlin (2014) also highlight that they use class rank at the end of 11th grade, which
is the relevant rank for college applications, while Niu and Tienda (2010) use the rank at the end of 12th grade. They
show evidence that this difference can account for the different findings across the two studies.



                                                         66
Furthermore, this study seemingly conflicts with the findings in Hoekstra (2009). Hoekstra finds

large effects of attending the state flagship on earnings using an admission discontinuity. While a full

understanding of why the findings differ is difficult (and is a ripe area for further research), the expla-

nation likely is related to the fact that the students in the Daugherty, Martorell and McFarlin (2014)

study are not marginal for admission to the state flagship in terms of academic quality. Indeed, it

was highly likely they would have been admitted prior to the Top 10% Rule. In the Hoekstra study,

the students who are barely admitted are marginal for enrollment by design, so their alternatives

are very likely to be lower-quality institutions. This difference highlights the limited applicability of

the results in Hoekstra (2009) for affirmative action, as most under-represented minority students

admitted under affirmative action will have access to an array of similarly-competitive schools.

   In addition to the direct effects on which types of schools students attend, percent plans can have

general equilibrium effects that often are not intended by policy makers. A prime example is found

in Cullen, Long and Reback (2012), who show that a small but non-trivial proportion of student

transfers across high schools after the Top Ten Percent Rule was implemented were to improve their

chances of being in the top 10%. Not only does this strategic behavior reduce the high school quality

students experience, it also can undo the effectiveness of the percent plan by displacing minority

students with non-minority transfer students. Long, Saenz and Tienda (2010) show that the Top

Ten Percent Rule expanded access to flagships geographically, with a large drop in the proportion of

minority students from “feeder” schools and a higher percentage coming from rural towns and small

cities. Thus, the percent plan in Texas altered the composition of minority students, the effects

of which on the academic attainment of these students or on their peers at flagship universities

currently is not known. In addition, percent plans can alter grading incentives placed on schools

and/or specific teachers, can alter the distribution of resources in schools to students of different

ability levels, and can affect student effort incentives for those close to the percentile cutoff. The



                                                    67
existence and extent of these effects on students and schools has not been studied previously, and

we view these as important questions for future research.



7    Conclusion

Intense debate continues in the United States over the role of affirmative action in college and

graduate school admissions. Although the Supreme Court has ruled that the constitutional basis

for affirmative action must be rooted in schools’ preferences for a diverse student body, the original

impetus for these policies and much of the resulting focus among policy-makers and researchers

alike is on whether and how affirmative action “levels the playing field” between under-represented

minority and white students. Of central importance, then, is how racial preferences in college and

graduate school admissions influence students’ long-run educational and labor market outcomes,

relative to a counterfactual of race-neutral admissions.

    From a policy perspective, understanding the extent and effect of affirmative action policies

is of primary importance. The literature clearly shows positive average effects of college quality

on a host of outcomes. This suggests that mild racial preferences will have a positive impact on

minority outcomes. The issue is whether racial preferences in their current form are so strong

that mismatch effects may arise. At more selective undergraduate schools and among virtually

all law schools, affirmative action is practiced extensively, particularly for African Americans, and

leads to substantial differences in the academic backgrounds of minority and majority students.

These differences are particularly striking in law schools, where the median black admit may have

credentials that are below that of the first percentile of white admits.

    As we argue throughout this paper, the net impact of racial preferences come down to whether

the strength of the overall college quality effect is larger or smaller than any match effects. If

matching effects are dominant given the current levels of racial preferences, then the dual goals of



                                                  68
affirmative action of generating a diverse student body and supporting the educational attainment

of minority students may be at odds with one another. Large matching effects would support the

need for more policy consideration of what the optimal amount of affirmative action is at different

school types in order to balance the negative matching effects with institutional diversity goals.

Conversely, absent matching effects, these policy goals can be complementary.

       The evidence suggests that racial preferences are so aggressive that reshuffling some African

American students to less-selective schools would improve some outcomes due to match effects dom-

inating quality effects. The existing evidence indicates that such match effects may be particularly

relevant for first-time bar passage and among undergraduates majoring in STEM fields. However,

shifting minority undergraduates to low-resource non-selective schools ultimately may undo any

gains from higher match quality, and shifting minorities out of law schools altogether could lead to

worse labor market outcomes among these students than had they been admitted to some law school.

Alternatively, schools that wish to practice extensive affirmative action could provide targeted ser-

vices to these students in order to overcome any mismatch induced by their admission policies, such

as offering tutoring and remedial classes. While the evidence on targeted college services is scant,83

it is plausible such interventions could be successful in mitigating any negative match effects. The

extent to which schools can successfully target services to less-academically-prepared students is an

important question for future research.

       The past several decades have witnessed a revolution in data availability, with many states

as well as the federal government making data available to researchers that permit one to follow

students from their K-12 education, through college and into the workforce. These data sets have

immense potential to inform most education policy debates, and using these data to study the
  83
     The existing research has suffered from identification issues surrounding student selection into the college services
being offered. Abrams and Jernigan (1984) and Chaney et al. (1998) find positive effects of targeted services to
lower-performing students. However, neither study can credibly separate student selection into the program from the
effects of the program on student outcomes themselves, and neither focuses on students impacted by affirmative action.




                                                           69
effects of affirmative action on long-run outcomes would be quite fruitful. This paper outlines many

of the gaps in our current knowledge and the difficulty in credibly disentangling the relevance of

fit versus mismatch as they relate to affirmative action. We are hopeful that these longitudinal

administrative data sets will allow us to gain new insights into the effects of affirmative action on

minority educational and labor market outcomes in the near future.

    Administrative data would also permit more exploration of how racial preferences in college

admissions affects other margins, such as pre-college investment decisions. If, in equilibrium, affir-

mative action leads employers to believe minority students graduating from more elite schools are

lower-productivity, affirmative action may induce lower minority effort (Coate and Loury, 1993).

Conversely, affirmative action bans could lower minority human capital investment by making it

less likely they will be admitted to higher-quality colleges that may have higher returns. Caldwell

(2010) and Furstenberg (2010) find evidence that Proposition 209 increased the test racial test score

gap, consistent with affirmative action raising effort levels among minority students, a result also

supported by Hickman (2013).84 In contrast, Antonovics and Backes (2014) do not find a widening

score gap after Proposition 209 using arguably better data. But in all cases the data is sufficiently

poor that, in our view, the question is unsettled. We view this as an important topic for future

research.




  84
     This is an emerging literature and none of these studies were published at the time of this writing. Some exper-
imental work has also found evidence suggesting affirmative action can raise investment incentives. See for example
Schotter and Weight (1992), Calsamiglia, Franke, and Rey-Biel (2013), and Cotton, Hickman, and Price (2014). How
these experiments translate into student investment decisions and on what margins student are affected are open
questions.


                                                         70
References

[1] Abrams, Helene G. and Louise Podojil Jernigan (1984). “Academic Support Services and the

   Success of High-Risk College Students.” American Education Research Journal 21(2): 261-274.


[2] Alon, Sigal, and Marta Tienda (2005). “Assessing the ‘Mismatch’ Hypothesis: Differentials in

   College Graduation Rates by Institutional Selectivity.” Sociology of Education 78(4): 294–315.


[3] Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li and Michael F. Lovenheim (2014). “Heterogeneous Paths Through

   College: Detailed Patterns and Relationships with Graduation and Earnings.” Economics of

   Education Review 42: 93-108.


[4] Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li and Michael F. Lovenheim (forthcoming). “Quantile Treatment

   Effects of College Quality on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources.


[5] Andrews, Rodney J., Vimal Ranchhod and Viji Sathy (2010). “Estimating the Responsiveness

   of College Applications to the Likelihood of Acceptance and Financial Assistance: Evidence

   from Texas.” Economics of Education Review 29(1): 104-115.


[6] Antonovics, Kate and Richard H. Sander (2013). “Affirmative Action Bans and the Chilling

   Effect.”American Law and Economics Review 15(1): 252-99.


[7] Antonovics, Kate and Ben Backes (2013) “Were Minority Students Discouraged From Applying

   to University of California Campuses After the Affirmative Action Ban?” Education Finance

   and Policy 8(2): 208-50.


[8] Antonovics, Kate and Ben Backes (2014a) “The Effect of Banning Affirmative Action on College

   Admissions Rules and Student Quality.” Journal of Human Resources 49(2).




                                              71
 [9] Antonovics, Kate and Ben Backes (2014b) “The Effect of Banning Affirmative Action on Human

    Capital Accumulation Prior to College Entry.” IZA Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Article

    5.


[10] Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom and Costas Meghir (2012). “Heterogeneity in Human Capital

    Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers.” Annual Review of Eco-

    nomics Vol. 4: 185-223.


[11] Arcidiacono, Peter (2004). “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major,” Journal of

    Econometrics, Vol. 121, Nos. 1-2, 343-375.


[12] Arcidiacono, Peter (2005) “Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission and

    Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?’ Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 5, 1477-1524.


[13] Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Patrick Coate, and V. Joseph Hotz (2014) “Affirmative

    Action and University Fit: Evidence from Proposition 209”, IZA Journal of Labor Economics,

    Vol. 6, Article 3.


[14] Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Hanming Fang, and Kenneth Spenner (2011) “Does Affir-

    mative Action Lead to Mismatch? A New Test and Evidence”, Quantitative Economics, Vol.

    2, No. 3, 303-333.


[15] Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, and V. Joesph Hotz (2013) “University Differences in the

    Graduation of Minorities in STEM Fields: Evidence from California”, NBER working paper

    #18799.


[16] Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Andrew Hussey, and Kenneth Spenner (2013) “Racial

    Segregation Patterns in Selective Universities”, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 56, 1039-

    1060.



                                                 72
[17] Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, and Kenneth Spenner (2012) “What Happens After En-

    rollment? An Analysis of the Time Path of Racial Differences in GPA and Major Choice” IZA

    Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, Article 5.


[18] Arcidiacono, Peter, Pat Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo (2010) “Beyond Signaling and Human Capital:

    Education and the Revelation of Ability” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

    2(4): 76-104.


[19] Arcidiacono, Peter, Shakeeb Khan, and Jacob Vigdor (2011) “Representation versus Assimila-

    tion: How do Preferences in College Admissions Affect Social Interactions?” Journal of Public

    Economics, Vol. 95, Nos. 1-2, 1-15.


[20] Arcidiacono, Peter and Cory Koedel (2014) “Race and College Success: Evidence from Mis-

    souri” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(3): 20-57


[21] Arcidiacono, Peter, Michael Lovenheim, and Maria Zhu (2014) “Affirmative Action in Under-

    graduate Education.” Working Paper.


[22] Arcidiacono, Peter and Jacob Vigdor (2010) “Does the River Spill Over? Estimating the

    Economic Returns to Attending a Racially Diverse College” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 47, No. 3.


[23] Ayres, Ian and Richard Brooks (2005) “Does Affirmative Action Reduce the Number of Black

    Lawyers?” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 57, No. 6, 1807-1854.


[24] Baker, S., Mayer, A., and S.L. Puller (2011) “Do More Diverse Environments Increase the

    Diversity of Subsequent Interaction? Evidence from Random Dorm Assignment” Economics

    Letters, 110: 110-112.


[25] Backes, Ben (2012). “Do Affirmative Action Bans Lower Minority College Enrollment and

    Attainment?” Journal of Human Resources, 47(2): 435-455.


                                               73
[26] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. (2004). “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of

    College Quality? Evidence from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121: 99-124.


[27] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. (2006). “Estimating the Returns to College Quality with

    Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 701-728.


[28] Bound, John and Sarah Turner (2007). “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate

    Attainment.” Journal of Public Economics 91: 877–899.


[29] Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner. (2010). “Why have College Completion

    Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources.”

    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129–157.


[30] Bowen, W.; and Bok, D. (1998). The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of Consid-

    ering Race in College and University Admissions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


[31] Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (1999). “Does It Pay to Attend

    an Elite Private College? Cross-Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings.”

    Journal of Human Resources. 34(1): 104-123.


[32] Brint, Steven, Allison M. Cantwell, and Preeta Saxena (2011). “Disciplinary Categories, Ma-

    jors, and Undergraduate Academic Experiences: Rethinking Bok’s ‘Underachieving Colleges’

    Thesis.” Research in Higher Education. 53:1-25.


[33] Camargo, B., Stinebrickner, R., and T. Stinebrickner (2010) “Interracial Friendships in Col-

    lege,” Journal of Labor Economics 156(1): 106-129.


[34] Caldwell, Ronald C., Jr. (2010). “The Effects of University Affirmative Action Policies on the

    Human Capital Development of Minority Children: Do Expectations Matter?” Working Paper.




                                                74
[35] Card, David and Alan Krueger (2005). “Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Affect

    Highly Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.” Industrial and

    Labor Relations Review. 58(3): 416-434.


[36] Calsamiglia, Caterina, Jorg Franke, and Pedro Rey-Biel (2013). “The Incentive Effects of Af-

    firmative Action in a Real-effort Tournament.” Journal of Public Economics, 98:15-31.


[37] Chambers, David L., Timothy T. Clydesdale, William C. Kidder, and Richard O. Lempert

    (2005). “The Real Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in American Law Schools: An

    Empirical Critique of Richard Sander’s Study.” Stanford Law Review 57(6): 1855-1898.


[38] Chan, Jimmy and Erik Eyster (2003). “Does Banning Affirmative Action Lower College Student

    Quality?” American Economic Review. 93(3): 858-872.


[39] Chaney, Bradford, Lana D. Muraskin, Margaret W. Cahalan, and David Goodwin (1998).

    “Helping the Progress of Disadvantaged Students in Higher Education: The Federal Student

    Support Services Program.” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 20(3): 197-215.


[40] Clotfelter, Charles T., Hellen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor (2012). “The Aftermath of Accel-

    erating Algebra: Evidence from a District Policy Initiative.” NBER working paper #18161.


[41] Coate, Stephen and Glenn C. Loury (1993). “Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Neg-

    ative Stereotypes?” American Economic Review. 83(5): 1220-1240.


[42] Cohodes, Sarah and Joshua Goodman (2014). “Merit Aid, College Quality and College Comple-

    tion: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy.” American Economic Journal:

    Applied Economics 6(4): 251-285.


[43] Cortes, Kalena E. (2010) “Do Bans on Affirmative Action Hurt Minority Students? Evidence

    from the Texas Top 10% Plan.” Economics of Education Review 29(6): 1110-1124.


                                               75
[44] Cotton, Christopher, Brent R. Hickman, and Joseph P. Price (2014). “Affirmative Action and

    Human Capital Investment: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” NBER working

    paper #20397.


[45] Cullen, Julie Berry, Mark C. Long and Randall Reback (2012). “Jockeying for Position: Strate-

    gic High School Choice Under Texas’ Top Ten Percent Plan.” Journal of Public Economics 92:

    32-48.


[46] Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger (2002). “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More

    Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” Quarterly

    Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.


[47] Dale, Stacy, and Alan B. Krueger (2014). “Estimating the Return to College Selectivity over

    the Career Using Administrative Earnings Data.” Journal of Human Resource 49(2): 323-358.


[48] Daugherty, Lindsay, Francisco Martorell and Isaac McFarlin, Jr. (2012). “Percent Plans, Auto-

    matic Admissions, and College Outcomes.” IZA Journal of Labor Economics 3(10).


[49] Dickson, Lisa M. (2006). “Does Ending Affirmative Action in College Admissions Lower the

    Percent of Minority Students Applying to College?” Economics of Education Review 25(1):

    109-119.


[50] Dillon, Eleanor and Jeffrey Smith (2013). “The Determinants of Mismatch Between Students

    and Colleges.” NBER Working Paper No. 19286.


[51] Doyle, William R. (2009). “The Effect of Community College Enrollment on Bachelor’s Degree

    Completion.” Economics of Education Review 28(2): 199-206.


[52] Durlauf, Steven N. (2008). “Affirmative Action, Meritocracy, and Efficiency.” Politics, Philos-

    ophy, & Economics 7: 131-158.


                                                76
[53] Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg (2008). “Diversity and Affirmative Action in

    Higher Education.” Journal of Public Economic Theory 10(4): 474-501.


[54] Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004). “Admission Preferences for Minority Students, Ath-

    letes, and Legacies at Elite Universities.” Social Science Quarterly, 85(5): 1422-1446.


[55] Fitzpatrick, Maria D. and Damon Jones (2012). “Higher Education, Merit-Based Scholarships

    and Post-Baccalaureate Migration.” NBER Working Paper #18530.


[56] Fryer, Roland G. Jr., Glenn C. Loury, and Tolga Yuret (2008). “An Economic Analysis of Color-

    Blind Affirmative Action.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2): 319-355.


[57] Furstenberg, Eric (2010). “College admissions reform and racial SAT score gaps: an empirical

    analysis”, working paper.


[58] Gemici, Ahu, and Matt Wiswall (2014). “Evolution of Gender Differences in Post-Secondary

    Human Capital Investments: College Majors” International Economic Review, 55(1):137-85.


[59] Gladwell, Malcolm (2013). David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling

    Giants. Little, Brown, and Company.


[60] Green, Kenneth C., Scott Jaschik, and Doug Lederman (2011). “The 2011 Inside Higher Ed

    Survey of College & University Admissions Directors” Inside Higher Ed.


[61] Hastings, Justine, Christopher Neilson, and Seth Zimmerman (2014). “Are Some Degrees Worth

    More Than Others? Evidence From College Admission Cutoffs in Chile”, NBER working paper

    #19241.


[62] Hickman, Brent R. (2013). “Pre-College Human capital Investment and Affirmative Action: A

    Structural Policy Analysis of US College Admissions.” Working Paper.




                                                77
[63] Hinrichs, Peter. (2012). “The Effects of Affirmative Action Bans on College Enrollment, Edu-

    cational Attainment, and the Demographic Composition of Universities.” Review of Economics

    and Statistics 94(3): 712-722.


[64] Hinrichs, P. (Forthcoming). “Affirmative Action Bans and College Graduation Rates.” Eco-

    nomics of Education Review


[65] Ho, Daniel E. (2005a) “Why Affirmative Action Does Not Cause Black Students to Fail the

    Bar”, Yale Law Journal Vol. 114, No. 8, 1997-2004.


[66] Ho, Daniel E. (2005b) “Affirmative Action’s Affirmative Actions: A Reply to Sander”, Yale

    Law Journal Vol. 114, No. 8.


[67] Hoekstra, Mark (2009). “The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings:

    A Discontinuity-Based Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 717-724.


[68] Holzer, Harry and David Neumark (2000). “Assessing Affirmative Action.” Journal of Economic

    Literature 38(3): 483-568.


[69] Howell, Jessica S. (2010). “Assessing the Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in Higher

    Education.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(1): 113-166.


[70] Hoxby, Caroline M. (2009). “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges.” Journal of Eco-

    nomic Perspectives. 23(4): 95-118.


[71] Hoxby, Caroline and Christopher Avery (2013). “The Missing ‘One-Offs’: The Hidden Supply of

    High-Achieving, Low Income Students.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring: 1-65.


[72] Hoxby, Caroline and Sarah Turner (2013). “Expanding College Opportunities for High-

    Achieving, Low Income Students”, working paper.




                                               78
[73] Johnson, Valen (2003). Grade Inflation: A Crisis in College Education, Springer-Verklag New

    York, Inc., New York, NY.


[74] Kain, John F., Daniel M. O’Brien and Paul A. Jargowsky (2005). “Hopwood and

    the Top 10 Percent Law:        How They Have Affected the College Enrollment Deci-

    sions of Texas High School Graduates.” Report to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation:

    http://www.utdallas.edu/research/tsp-erc/pdf/wp kain 2005 hopwood top 10 percent.pdf


[75] Kane, Thomas J. (1998). “Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admission,” in The Black-

    White Test Score Gap, ed. by C. Jencks and M. Phillips. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution,

    431456.


[76] Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse (1995). “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-

    Year College.” American Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.


[77] Kirkeboen, Lars, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad (2014). “Field of Study, Earnings, and

    Self-Selection,” NBER Working Paper #20816.


[78] Lehmann, Jee-Yeon K. (2013). “Job Assignment and Promotion Under Statistical Discrimina-

    tion: Evidence from the Early Careers of Lawyers”, working paper.


[79] Light, Audrey and Wayne Strayer (2000). “Determinants of College Completion: School Quality

    or Student Ability?” Journal of Human Resources 35(2): 299-332.


[80] Light, Audrey and Wayne Strayer (2002). “From Bakke to Hopwood: Does Race Affect College

    Attendance and Completion?” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1): 34-44.


[81] Long, Bridget Terry (2004). “How Have College Decisions Changed over Time? An Application

    of the Conditional Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 271-296.




                                               79
[82] Long, Bridget Terry and Michal Kurlaender (2009). “Do Community Colleges Provide a Viable

    Pathway to a Baccalaureate Degree?” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(1): 30-53.


[83] Long, Mark C. (2004a). “College Applications and the Effect of Affirmative Action.” Journal

    of Econometrics 121(1-2): 319-342.


[84] Long, Mark C. (2004b). “Race and College Admission: An Alternative to Affirmative Action?”

    The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4): 1020-1033.


[85] Long, Mark C. (2007). “Affirmative Action and its Alternatives in Public Universities: What

    Do We Know?” Public Administration Review 67(1): 311-325.


[86] Long, Mark C. (2010a). “Affirmative Action at Nearby Colleges: Temporal and Regional

    Changes.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Contributions) 10(1), Article

    65.


[87] Long, Mark C. (2010b). “Changes in the Returns to Education and College Quality.” Economics

    of Education Review 29(3): 338-347.


[88] Long, Mark C., Victor Saenz, and Marta Tienda (2010). “Policy Transparency and College

    Enrollment: Did the Texas Top Ten Percent Law Broaden Access to the Public Flagships?”

    The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 627(1): 82-105.


[89] Long, Mark C. and Marta Tienda (2008). “Winners and Losers: Changes in Texas University

    Admissions Post-Hopwood.” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 30(3): 255-280.


[90] Lott, J.R. (2011). “Peer Effects in Affirmative Action: Evidence from Law Student Perfor-

    mance.” International Review of Law and Economics 31(1): 1-15.


[91] Loury, Linda Datcher and David Garman (1995). “College Selectivity and Earnings.” Journal

    of Labor Economics 13(2): 289-308.

                                              80
[92] Luppino, Marc and Richard H. Sander (2012). “College Major Competitiveness and Attrition

    from the Sciences,” working paper.


[93] Niu, Sunny Xinchun and Marta Tienda (2010). “The Impact of the Texas Top Ten Percent Law

    on College Enrollment: A Regression Discontinuity Approach.” Journal of Policy Analysis and

    Management 29(1): 84-110.


[94] Reynolds, C. Lockwood (2012). “Where to Attend? Estimating the Effects of Beginning College

    at a Two-year Institution.” Economics of Education Review 31(4): 345-362.


[95] Rosenbaum, Paul R. (1984). “The Consquences of Adjustment for a Concomitant Variable That

    Has Been Affected by the Treatment” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A 147(5):

    656-666.


[96] Rothstein, Jesse and Albert Yoon (2008). “Affirmative Action in Law School Admissions: What

    Do Racial Preferences Do?” University of Chicago Law Review Vol. 75.


[97] Rothstein, Jesse and Albert Yoon (2009). “Mismatch in Law School.” working paper.


[98] Sabot, Richard and John Wakeman-Linn (1991). “Grade Inflation and Course Choice.” Journal

    of Economic Perspectives 5(1): 159-170.


[99] Sander, Richard H. (2004). “A Systematic Analysis of Affirmative Action in American Law

    Schools.” Stanford Law Review 57(2): 367-483.


[100] Sander, Richard H. (2005a). “Mismeasuring the Mismatch: A Response to Ho.” The Yale Law

    Journal 114(8): 2005-2010.


[101] Sander, Richard H. (2005b). “A Reply to Critics”, Stanford Law Review 57(6): 1963-2016.




                                               81
[102] Sander, Richard H. and Jane Bambauer (2012). “The Secret to My Success: How Status,

    Eliteness, and School Performance Shape Legal Careers.” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies

    9(4): 893-930.


[103] Sander, Richard H. and Stuart Taylor Jr. (2012). Mismatch: How Affirmative Action Hurts

    Students It’s Intended to Help, and Why Universities Won’t Admit It, Basic Books.


[104] Schotter, Andrew, and Keith Weigelt (1992). “Asymmetric Tournaments, Equal Opportunity

    Laws, and Affirmative Action: Some Experimental Results.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

    107(2):511-539.


[105] Scott-Clayton, Judith (2011). “On Money and Motivation: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis of

    Financial Incentives for College Achievement.” Journal of Human Resources 46(3): 614-636.


[106] Sjoquist, David J. and John V. Winters (2012). “State Merit-Based Financial Aid Programs

    and College Attainment.” IZA Discussion Paper #6801.


[107] Smyth, F.L., and J.J. McArdle (2004). “Ethnic and Gender Differences in Science Graduation

    at Selective Colleges with Implications for Admission Policy and College Choice.” Research in

    Higher Education 45(5): 353-381.


[108] Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner (2011). “Math or Science? Using Longitudinal

    Expectations Data to Examine the Process of Choosing a College Major.” NBER Working Paper

    #16869.


[109] Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner (2012). “Learning about Academic Ability

    and the College Dropout Decision.” Journal of Labor Economics 30(4): 707-748.


[110] Wightman, Linda F. (1998). “LSAC National Bar Passage Study”, Law School Admission

    Council, Newton PA.


                                               82
[111] Wightman, Linda F. (2003). “The Consequences of Race-Blindness: Revisiting Prediction

    Models with Current Law School Data.” Journal of Legal Education 53(2): 229-253.


[112] Williams, Doug (2013). “Do Racial Preferences Affect Minority Learning in Law Schools?.”

    Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 10(2): 171-195.


[113] Yagan,   Danny (2014). “Affirmative Action Bans and Black Admission Outcomes:

    Selection-Corrected Estimates from UC Law Schools” UC Berkely Working Paper:

    http://eml.berkeley.edu/∼yagan/AffirmativeAction.pdf


[114] Zafar, Basit (2011). “How Do College Students Form Expectations?” Journal of Labor Eco-

    nomics 29(2): 301-348.


[115] Zimmerman, Seth (forthcoming). “The Returns to College Admission for Academically

    Marginal Students.” Journal of Labor Economics.




                                               83
             Table 1: Affirmative Action Bans in Undergraduate Admissions by State
    State                  Year of Enactment         Source of Ban
    Texas                        1997∗               Court Ruling: Hopwood v. Texas
    California                    1998               Voter Initiative (Prop. 209)
    Washington                    1999               Voter Initiative (Initiative 200)
    Florida                       2001               Executive Order 99-281
    Georgia∗∗                     2002               Court Ruling: Johnson v. University of Georgia
    Michigan∗∗∗                   2006               Voter Initiative (Proposition 2)
    Arizona                       2010               Voter Initiative (Proposition 107)
    New Hampshire                 2012               Legislative Act (HB 623)
    Oklahoma                      2013               Voter Initiative (State Question 759)
     *
       The affirmative action ban in Texas was overturned in 2003 by the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals.
     **
        This ruling only affects the University of Georgia. The race-based admission system used was ruled
       unconstitutional, but other public institutions in Georgia still consider race in admissions.
     ***
         In July 2011, the Michigan affirmative action ban was ruled unconstitutional by the 6th Circuit Court
       of Appeals. The case was argued in front of the Supreme Court in October 2013, but no decision has
       been made on the constitutionality of this law.


                  Table 2: Median Institutional Characteristics by College Quality Tier
College                                           Flagship     Non-Flagship        Highly-Selective       Less-Selective
Characteristic                                     Public         Public               Private               Private
Six-Year Graduation Rate                            0.702         0.444                 0.868                 0.484
Black Six-Year Graduation Rate                      0.598          0.333                0.810                 0.333
Hispanic Six-Year Graduation Rate                   0.670          0.393                0.818                 0.417
White Six-Year Graduation Rate                     0.715           0.460                0.869                 0.514
Student-Faculty Ratio                               11.59          13.84                 6.36                 13.48
Per-Student Expenditure                            39,685         15,741               54,028                17,232
Per-Student Instructional Expenditure              12,081          6,054               20,478                 5,433
Faculty Salaries                                   91,177         65,961               96,101                54,520
  Source: 2011-2012 IPEDS data. The per-student expenditures and student-faculty ratios use all student enrollments,
  not just undergraduates. Faculty salaries and student-faculty ratios use all instructional staff, which includes non-tenure
  track lecturers.




                                                         84
