                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          ESTIMATING THE PRODUCTION FUNCTION FOR HUMAN CAPITAL:
           RESULTS FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROL TRIAL IN COLOMBIA

                                        Orazio Attanasio
                                          Sarah Cattan
                                        Emla Fitzsimons
                                         Costas Meghir
                                       Marta Rubio-Codina

                                      Working Paper 20965
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20965

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 20138
                             February 2015, Revised May 2019


We are grateful to four anonymous referees and the editor for detailed comments. We have
benefited from extensive discussions with Don Andrews, Joe Altonji and James Heckman. We
are grateful to Sally Grantham McGregor who participated in designing and implementing the
experiment we describe here. We also thank participants at the NBER Summer Institute,
Barcelona GSE Summer Forum and Montreal CIREQ Applied Microeconomics on Fertility and
Child Development and seminars at Stanford University, University of Chicago, Oxford
University, Cornell University, Bristol University and the Institute for Fiscal Studies for their
comments. We are grateful to the Economic and Social Research Council (Grant ES/G015953/1),
the Inter-American Development Bank, the International Growth Centre, and the World Bank for
funding the intervention and data collection. Some of this research was financed by the European
Research Council's Advanced Grant 249612 and by the Grand Challenges Canada Prime Award
0072- 03 (sub-award reference number 560450). Sarah Cattan gratefully acknowledges financial
assistance from the British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship pf140104, as well as from the
European Research Council's Grant Agreement No. 240910. We thank the NIH for funding under
grant R01 HD072120 as well as the Cowles foundation and the ISPS at Yale for financial
assistance. All errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20965.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Orazio Attanasio, Sarah Cattan, Emla Fitzsimons, Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-
Codina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Production Function for Human Capital: Results from a Randomized Control
Trial in Colombia
Orazio Attanasio, Sarah Cattan, Emla Fitzsimons, Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-Codina
NBER Working Paper No. 20965
February 2015
JEL No. H31,I24,I25,I28,I3,J38,O1,O15,O54

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the channels through which a randomized early childhood intervention in Colombia
led to significant gains in cognitive and socio-emotional skills among a sample of disadvantaged
children aged 12 to 24 months at baseline. We estimate the determinants of parents' material and
time investments in these children and evaluate the impact of the treatment on such investments.
We then estimate the production functions for cognitive and socio-emotional skills. The effects of
the program can be explained by increases in parental investments, emphasizing the importance
of parenting interventions at an early age.


Orazio Attanasio                                Costas Meghir
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University College London                       Yale University
Gower Street                                    37 Hillhouse Avenue
London WC1E 6BT                                 New Haven, CT 06511
United Kingdom                                  and IZA
and NBER                                        and also NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk                           c.meghir@yale.edu

Sarah Cattan                                    Marta Rubio-Codina
Institute for Fiscal Studies                    Inter-American Development Bank
7 Ridgmount Street                              Social Protection and Health Division
London, WC1E 7AE                                Washington, DC 20577
United Kingdom                                  martarubio@iadb.org
sarah_c@ifs.org.uk

Emla Fitzsimons
Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgmount St
London, WC1E 7AE
United Kingdom
e.fitzsimons@ioe.ac.uk



An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20965
1    Introduction

The first five years of life lay the basis for lifelong outcomes (Almond and Currie,
2011). Due to rapid brain development and its malleability during the early years
(Knudsen, 2004; Knudsen et al., 2006), investments during this period play a crucial
role in the process of human capital accumulation. At this time however, many chil-
dren are exposed to risk factors such as poverty, malnutrition and non-stimulating
home environments preventing them from reaching their full potential, particularly in
developing countries (Black et al., 2016; Grantham-McGregor et al., 2007; Lu et al.,
2016). Thus children from poor backgrounds accumulate developmental deficits from
a very early age (Lancet, 2016; Rubio-Codina et al., 2015). These factors are likely to
play an important role in the intergenerational transmission of poverty.
    There is increasing evidence that early childhood interventions can help overcome
these detrimental factors and have positive effects on children’s development in both
the short- and long-term. Examples include the Jamaica study (Grantham-McGregor
et al. (1991), Walker et al. (2011) and Gertler et al. (2014)), the Perry Preschool pro-
gram (Heckman et al., 2010) and the Abecedarian experiment (Campbell and Ramey
(1994), Campbell et al. (2014)). In Attanasio et al. (2014), we present the impacts of
an 18-month long early childhood intervention in Colombia targeted at disadvantaged
children aged 12-24 months old at baseline and evaluated by a randomized controlled
trial. The intervention was based on the Jamaican model of psychosocial stimulation
via weekly home visits based on the curriculum now known as “Reach-up and Learn”,
and also offered micronutrient supplementation. However, unlike the Jamaican pro-
gram, it was designed to be scalable by training local women involved in the imple-
mentation of a large welfare program to administer the weekly home visits.
    Attanasio et al. (2014) shows that stimulation led to highly significant improvements
in cognition and language development measured immediately following the end of

                                            1
the intervention1 , and that micronutrient supplementation did not affect any outcome
observed in the data. The paper also reported impacts on two raw measures of the
home learning environment (measured by the Family Care Indicators). However, it
did not put these results together into a model of cognitive and socio-emotional skill
production that would allow assessing the (joint) role of parental investments and of
the intervention in shaping child development in the earliest of years.
   Building on these results, the main aim of this paper is to understand how the
stimulation component of the intervention led to improvements in child development,
described by both cognitive and socioemotional skills. For example, it could have led
parents to make greater material and time investments in their children. But it could
also have changed the production function for child skills, through the direct effect of
the home visits as a new input or by changing the effectiveness of parental inputs. In
what follows, we build a model of parental investments, taken as endogenous, and child
skill formation to tease out the relative importance of these different mechanisms, a
crucial step to better focus and increase the sustainability of interventions in the future.
In so doing we also provide some of the first estimated models of parental investments
and human capital production functions at such an early age in a context of poverty
in a developing country.
   We start by estimating the determinants of parental investments and assessing how
the intervention changed parental choices. Indeed the way parents respond to such
programs, which can be seen as a type of in-kind transfer, is an open question: the
intervention could lead parents to reinforce their engagement with the child or instead
crowd-out their investments. Gelber and Isen (2010), for example, provide evidence
that the US early childhood program Head Start led to an increase in parental involve-
ment, thus crowding-in household resources. In our treatment of the question here, we
   1
     Using the Bayley (2006) scale of infant development, cognition improved by 26% of a Standard
Deviation (SD) (p-value 0.002) and receptive language by 22% of a SD (p-value 0.032). These reported
p-values are adjusted for testing 12 hypotheses.

                                                 2
exploit the experimental variation induced by the RCT and distinguish between mate-
rial investments (e.g. books and toys around the house) and quality time investments
(e.g. time spent by an adult in the household on education activities with the child).2
    We then estimate production functions for child cognitive and socio-emotional skills.
The main inputs we specify are baseline child skills, maternal skills, and material and
quality time investments, which we treat as endogenous. Within this framework, we
quantify by how much changes in parental investments contributed to improving child
outcomes in the treatment group. We also test whether the intervention shifted the
production function or otherwise changed its parameters, which, as discussed above,
could reflect the direct effect of the stimulation provided by the home visitors or a
change in the productivity of inputs.
    The two waves of data we use were collected just before and just after the inter-
vention and contain rich measures of child development, maternal skills and parental
investments. Importantly, we collect information on materials and activities that have
an educational aspect, thus enabling a clear interpretation of parental behavior as in-
vestments in their children. To our knowledge, our sample is one of the largest ever
collected with this type of data in the literature evaluating stimulation programs. Even
with such rich data however, estimating the parameters governing the skill formation
process remains challenging for two reasons. First, inputs and outputs are likely to
be measured with error. Second, inputs, especially investments, can be endogenous, if
parental decisions respond to shocks or inputs that are unobserved to the econometri-
cian. To deal with the measurement error issue, we use dynamic latent factor models
as in Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010). To
deal with the possible econometric endogeneity of investments, we use an instrumental
variable strategy, adapted to the latent factor structure of the model.

   2
     See DelBoca et al. (2014) for a structural model of household choices and child development based
on the PSID Child Development Supplement data and also including time and resource investments.

                                                  3
    The estimates of the investment functions reveal important information about some
of the drivers of developmental inequality: children with better initial cognitive skills
receive more investments and, crucially, mothers with higher skill levels invest more in
their children given the child’s skills. In line with the existing literature, we find that
a child’s current stock of skills fosters the development of future skills, although we
do find mean reversion.3 Second, parental investments and in particular our measure
of material investments are an important determinant of future cognitive and socio-
emotional skills. This becomes even more evident once we control for the endogeneity
of such investments in line with results from Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010)
and Attanasio et al. (2017) in very different contexts.4
    With respect to the mechanisms underlying the impacts, we find that the inter-
vention significantly increased parental investments among treated families compared
to non-treated ones. This increase is the dominant reason underlying the observed
impacts. The direct effect of the intervention, instead, is both small and insignificant.
These two findings mean that the gains in cognitive and socio-emotional skills among
children who received the intervention are mainly explained by changes in parental
investments and imply that having the home visitor merely interact with the child for
an hour a week, without trying to strengthen parenting practices, would have been
unlikely to benefit children.
    Beyond revealing important aspects of the process of human capital accumulation
   3
      These features of the technology of skill formation are often referred to as self-productivity and
cross-productivity (Cunha et al., 2006).
    4
      The former use the children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, a longitudinal
panel following the children of a representative sample of women born between 1956 and 1964 in
the US. The latter use the Young Lives Survey for India, a longitudinal survey following the lives
of children in two age-groups: a Younger Cohort of 2,000 children who were aged between 6 and 18
months when Round 1 of the survey was carried out in 2002, and an Older Cohort of 1,000 children
then aged between 7.5 and 8.5 years. The survey was carried out again in late 2006 and in 2009
(when the younger children were about 8, the same age as the Older Cohort when the research started
in 2002). See also Helmers and Patnam (2011) for the estimation of a linear production function in
India. Finally, and also in line with the existing literature, we find that current skills and parental
investments are complementary in the production of future skills, meaning that returns to investments
are higher for children with better initial conditions.

                                                   4
and parental investments at a very early age, the importance of our results lie in
two key findings. First, parents reinforce interventions by investing more not less -
there is crowding in of material and time resources. Second, the intervention works
because of the increase in parental investments and there is little evidence of a direct
effect. If the intervention did not induce parents to invest more, it would have had
no discernible effect. This, together with the mean reversion result that governs the
longer-term impact of the intervention, emphasizes the key importance of improving
parenting practices for the success and longer term sustainability of early childhood
interventions.
   Along with Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) and a few other papers (Attana-
sio, Meghir, and Santiago, 2012; Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan, 2012; Todd and Wolpin,
2006), our paper illustrates how data from randomized trials can be profitably com-
bined with behavioral models to go beyond the estimation of experimentally induced
treatment effects and interpret the mechanisms underlying them. While there is a large
literature evaluating the impact of early childhood interventions on child development,
our paper innovates by complementing the information obtained from the RCT of a
specific intervention with a model of skill formation and parental investment in order
to understand the mechanisms behind the observed impacts.
   In this sense, our paper shares the motivation of Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev
(2013) who document the channels through which the Perry Pre-School Program pro-
duced gains in adult outcomes. But our focus and methodology are different: Heckman,
Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) perform a mediation analysis that decomposes linearly the
treatment effects on adult outcomes into components attributable to early changes in
different personality traits. Instead, we use a model in which parents make investment
choices and human capital accumulates according to a production function, so as to
interpret and explain the impacts induced by a successful intervention.
   The focus of our intervention is also different. Unlike the Jamaican intervention,

                                           5
which targeted malnourished children, and the Perry Preschool Program, which tar-
geted children with specifically low cognition, we target a broader population. Our
subjects are drawn from the beneficiaries of the Colombian Conditional Cash Transfer
(CCT) program Familias en Acción, which covers the poorest 20% of the population.5
In this sense, our program has the potential to serve as a model for early childhood
policy that could be broadly implemented alongside CCT programs or other welfare
programs targeting poor families.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some background on the in-
tervention. Section 3 describes the data and the factor model approach we take to
extract error-free measures of children’s skills, parental skills and investments. Section
4 discusses the short-term impacts of the intervention and some suggestive evidence
of its underlying mechanisms. Section 5 presents our theoretical framework and its
empirical implementation. Section 6 presents the estimates of the model and discusses
their implications for our understanding of the intervention. Section 7 concludes.


2       Background on the intervention and its evaluation

The early childhood program analyzed in this paper was targeted at children aged
between 12 and 24 months living in families receiving the Colombian CCT program,
which targets the poorest 20% of households in the country. The intervention lasted
18 months, starting in early 2010. Appendix A contains a detailed description of the
program’s design, implementation and delivery. Here we summarize the key aspects.
    The program was implemented in semi-urban municipalities in three regions of
central Colombia, covering an area around the size of California. It had two compo-
nents: psychosocial stimulation and micronutrient supplementation. The stimulation
curriculum was based on the Jamaican home visiting model, which obtained positive

    5
        See Attanasio et al. (2010) for a description and evaluation of that program.

                                                     6
short- and long-term effects (Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991), Walker et al. (2006,
2011) and Gertler et al. (2014)). The protocols designed by Grantham-McGregor et al.
(1991) for Jamaica were adapted to be culturally appropriate for Colombia. The aims
of the home visits were to improve the quality of maternal-child interactions and to as-
sist mothers to participate in developmentally-appropriate learning activities, centered
around daily routines and using household resources as learning tools.
    We implement two key innovations vis-a-vis the Jamaican intervention with scala-
bility and sustainability in mind. Indeed our program was specifically designed to go
beyond the earlier small scale and tightly supervised efficacy trials. The first was that
the intervention was implemented on a much larger scale than in Jamaica, covering
a large part of the country and obtaining much larger sample sizes. The second was
that the intervention was designed to be delivered by women drawn from the local
community, with no specific prior professional experience.
    To this end, home visitors were drawn from a network of local women, created
by the administrative set-up of the CCT program. Every 50-60 beneficiaries elect
a representative who is in charge of organizing social activities and acts as mediators
between them and the program administrators. These women, known as Madre Lı́deres
(MLs), are beneficiaries of the program themselves. Given they are selected by their
peers, one can deduce that they enjoy the trust of the community and are probably
more entrepreneurial and proactive than the average beneficiary. In terms of specific
characteristics they are on average about 10 years older (37) and have about one more
year of education (8.5) than the subject mothers. Their score on a vocabulary test is
slightly higher than that of the mothers.6 Finally, as mentioned in the introduction,
another distinct feature of our intervention is that we targeted a more general poor
population, namely the beneficiaries of the CCT program, which in Colombia is offered

   6
    To measure vocabulary, we use the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). The scores of the
MLs was 28.2 versus 26.9 for the subject mothers in our sample. The difference has a p-value of 0.061.

                                                  7
to the 20% poorest segment of the population, as compared to the extreme disadvantage
of the malnourished population targeted by the Jamaican experiment.
    The intervention was evaluated through a cluster randomized controlled trial in-
volving the random allocation of 96 municipalities across central Colombia. After first
stratifying into three large regions, 32 municipalities in each were randomly assigned
to one of 4 groups: (i) psychosocial stimulation, (ii) micronutrient supplementation,
(iii) both, and (iv) control. In each municipality, 3 MLs were selected and the children
aged 12-24 months of the beneficiary households represented by each of these MLs
were recruited to the study. There was a total of 1,429 children living in 96 towns
in central Colombia. Possibly because the MLs are such trusted figures in their com-
munities, compliance was high and the average number of home visits made was 63,
which is 81% of those scheduled. The attrition rate between baseline and follow-up
was around 10% across treatment arms, and the difference in loss among the groups
was not statistically significant.7
    As reported in Attanasio et al. (2014), there was no significant impact of micronutri-
ent supplementation on any child developmental outcomes. In this paper, therefore, we
focus on the psychosocial stimulation arm of the program and we refer to the “treated”
group as those children who received the stimulation component of the intervention
(groups i and iii) and to the “control” group as those children who did not (groups ii
and iv).
    Individuals randomized into our intervention were all eligible for and receiving sub-
sidies from the CCT program. On average, households had been part of the CCT
program for 21 months at baseline. This feature is common between treatment and
control communities, but it is true that the context in which our program was imple-
mented and in particular the existence of the CCT may be a factor in how effective
   7
     As we explain in Section 3.1, our data at baseline and at follow-up come from a household survey
and from direct assessments administered to children in a community centre. The attrition rate for
the household survey was 6.9%. The attrition rate for the direct assessments was 10.7%.

                                                 8
the program was. This, of course, is related to the more general issue of extrapolating
the effects of the program to other contexts outside the support of the data. Nev-
ertheless, CCT programs are quite common in low-and-middle income countries and
consequently the context is directly relevant to many other countries besides Colombia.
   Finally, a frequently asked question is whether the intervention is just “teaching to
the test” without leading to genuine advances in cognition. First, implementation of the
curriculum has been shown to have long-run effects on cognition (Walker et al., 2005,
2011) and labour market outcomes (Gertler et al., 2014). This in itself is evidence that
it can induce deep changes in achievement rather than just teach children to remember a
few activities and perform better on a test. More generally, the intervention curriculum
emphasizes cognitive, language and socio-emotional development through play and the
promotion of mother-child interactions. While some of the play activities specifically
address the type of cognitive and fine motor skills (building towers with blocks, tracing
lines) and concepts (shapes, sizes, colors) that are assessed in developmental tests, the
focus is on learning through play in a supportive and stimulating environment. Activ-
ities are introduced progressively and in developmental order to facilitate scaffolding
- i.e. increasing or decreasing the challenge based on the child’s performance - and
there is a strong emphasis on praising attempts and not only successes. The approach
is aimed at promoting attention to task, perseverance and self-esteem; similarly, there
is a strong focus on labelling the environment and looking at picture books together,
which are activities that enrich vocabulary and promote bonding, attention (i.e. fol-
lowing a story) and other cognitive abilities (i.e. linking concepts, understanding cause
and effect relations). All of these skills are associated with improved school readiness,
school attainment and other outcomes linked to socio-economic success in life.




                                           9
3      Data and measurement system

In this section, we describe the data we use, which was collected around the evaluation
of the parenting intervention mentioned above. We then discuss an effective way of
extracting the relevant information from such rich data with a measurement system
that explicitly takes into account the relationship between relevant factors and available
measures and the presence of measurement error.


3.1     Data

The main data we use in this paper comes from two rounds of data collection: before
the intervention started (baseline) and just after it ended 18 months later (follow-up).
In each round, information was collected in two ways: via a household survey in the
home and via tests directly administered to children in a community centre. At the
end of the paper, we also briefly discuss results from a second follow up (FU2), two
years after the end of the intervention, although we do not use those data here.
      The household surveys contain information on an extensive set of socio-economic
and demographic characteristics, alongside a wealth of information around parenting,
parental characteristics and maternal skills, including mothers’ years of education,
verbal ability, IQ, depressive symptoms and knowledge of child development. Among
others, we administered among mothers the Raven’s progressive matrices to test for
IQ and the CES-D 10-item scale to assess depressive symptoms.
      To measure children’s developmental outcomes, we collected data based both on
maternal reports and on direct assessment of the child. The measures of child devel-
opment that we collected in the home setting via maternal report include: language
development (that is, the number of words and complex sentences the child can say)
using the vocabulary checklists in the Spanish Short-Forms of the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventories I and II (MacArthur); child temperament

                                           10
using Bates’ Infant Characteristics Questionnaire (ICQ); and the attentional focusing
and inhibitory control scales of the short versions of the Early Children’s Behavior
Questionnaire (ECBQ). All of these were measured using age-appropriate items pre-
and post-intervention, with the exception of the ECBQ which was administered at
follow-up only. In addition to these assessments via maternal reports, trained psychol-
ogists administered the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development III (Bayley)
in community centres.8 These direct assessments of the child took place over an av-
erage period of 1.5 hours and were aimed at measuring children’s cognitive, language
and motor development in depth.
   The household surveys also contain detailed information on parental investments.
We used a slightly modified version of the UNICEF Family Care Indicators (FCI)
(Frongillo, Sywulka, and Kariger, 2003) which is based both on interviewer observations
and maternal reports of the home environment. Specifically, this instrument includes
interviewer observations of the types and numbers of play materials around the home
and maternal reports of the types and frequency of play activities performed by the
primary caregiver or any other adult older than 15 with the child in the last 3 days.
   Examples of play materials include toys designed for learning shapes, toys that
induce physical movement, coloring books, and picture books. Examples of play activ-
ities include reading or looking at picture books together, telling stories, and labelling
items in the home. Importantly therefore, the instrument affords the possibility of
distinguishing between parental investments in ‘materials’ and in ‘quality time’, which
are likely to have different costs and perhaps different (but possibly complementary)
effects on child development.
   As we want to assess the role of parental investment and distinguish it from the di-
rect role that the intervention might play on child development, in measuring materials

   8
    See Jackson-Maldonado et al. (2012) for MacArthur-Bates scales, Bates et al. (1979) for the ICQ
and Putnam et al. (2006) for ECBQ and Bayley (2006).

                                                11
we instructed the data collectors to gather separate information about those materials
(such as certain books and toys) that were directly provided by the intervention. When
estimating the distribution of the factors measuring the two different types of parental
investments, we use the measures that are not linked directly to the intervention.
      Finally, in addition to the survey data collected around the evaluation of the inter-
vention, we also use additional data sources to obtain information on municipality-level
variables that we use as instruments. In particular, we use data on prices (of toys and
food) and on maternal childhood exposure to violence. Appendix B provides details
on all the measures of child development, maternal skills and parental investments col-
lected as part of the survey and describes the auxiliary data sources we use to construct
our instruments.
      Appendix Table A.1 reports the baseline characteristics of children, their mothers
and their households. At baseline, the children are on average aged 18 months. About
10% of them were born premature and 14% of them were stunted. On average, their
mothers are 26 years old, have about 7.5 years of education and two-thirds of them
are either married or cohabiting. There were no compromises to the randomization
protocol and hence there is no reason to believe there is any bias. Most baseline char-
acteristics are very well balanced including the baseline skills of the children. Although
the mean of a few characteristics is significantly different between treated and controls
when tested individually (specifically among CESD scale items), none of these differ-
ences are significant at all when we allow for multiple hypothesis testing using the
Romano and Wolf (2005) procedure.


3.2     Factor Models and the measurement system

Our main aim is to interpret the experimental results within the context of a model of
parental investments and human capital production functions. To fix ideas, suppose



                                             12
we wish to estimate a production function for child skills:


                              θt+1 = ft+1 (θt , It+1 , Pt , Xt , ηt+1 )                           (1)


where θt and θt+1 are vectors of the child’s skills at t and t + 1 respectively, It+1 are
parental investments that occur between the realizations of θt and θt+1 , Pt are ma-
ternal skills measured at baseline, Xt is a vector of baseline household characteristics,
such as household composition and ηt+1 are random shocks to child development. The
production function allows us to understand the pathways through which the exper-
iment might affect outcomes: changes in parental investments and/or changes in the
production function ft+1 (·), reflecting, for example, better use of parental inputs.9
    As Cunha and Heckman (2008) explain, an important obstacle to estimating such
a function is that the skills and investments are inherently unobservable. The various
measures described in Section 3.1 can be viewed as error ridden indicators for these
underlying latent factors. Using any one set of these measures in place of the latent
factors could lead to severely biased results, whether the model is linear or not. We
thus follow the approach of Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010)10
and develop a measurement system linking the observed measures to latent factors and
estimate the distribution of such factors.
    Suppose we have Mθkt measures of child’s skill θtk of type k (e.g. cognitive or socio-
emotional skills) in period t. Moreover, we also have MPk measures of maternal skills
P k of type k. Finally, we have MIτ t measures of parental investments Itτ of type τ (e.g.

   9
      We use maternal skills as measured at baseline. However, we find no evidence of a treatment
impact on any measures of cognitive skills or socio-emotional skills of the mother (the main primary
caregiver in most households in our sample). This is in line with psychological evidence indicating
that cognition (as measured by IQ) is rank stable by the age of 10 (Almlund et al., 2011). While it is
more plausible that the intervention could have changed maternal socio-emotional skills, we find no
such evidence. Had these maternal measures changed they could have been an additional channel of
impact.
   10
      More broadly this approach relates to the identification and estimation of nonlinear models with
classical measurement error (Schennach, 2004, 2007).

                                                   13
time or material investments) made between t − 1 and t. We denote mθkjt the j-th
measure of child’s skill of type k at t, mPkj the j-th measure of maternal skill of type
k, and mIτ jt the j-th measure of parental investment of type τ at t. As we estimate a
different joint distribution of latent factors for the control and treated groups, in what
follows we index the measures and latent factors by the treatment subscript d, where
d = 0 refers to the control group (no home visits) and d = 1 refers to the treatment
group (some home visits).
    As is common in the psychometric literature, we assume a dedicated measurement
system, that is one in which each measure only proxies one factor (Gorsuch, 1983,
2003). Although it is not necessary for identification, we maintain this assumption
because it makes the interpretation of the latent factors more transparent and we find
clear support for such a system in the data (see Appendix C). Assuming each measure is
additively separable in the (log) of the latent factor it proxies,11 we write the following
system of equations mapping the j-th measure observed at some date t to the k-th
latent (unobserved) factor for that date:


                                mθkjdt = µθkjt + αkjt
                                                  θ       k
                                                      ln θdt + θkjt                                (2)

                                mPkjd = µPkj + αkj
                                                P
                                                   ln Pdk + Pkj                                    (3)

                                mIτ jdt = µIτ jt + ατI jt ln Idt
                                                              τ
                                                                 + Iτ jt                           (4)


where the terms µθkjt , µPkj and µIτ jt are intercepts, the terms αkjt
                                                                   θ      P
                                                                       , αkj and ατI jt are factor
loadings, and the terms θkjt , Pkj and Iτ jt are mean zero measurement error terms which
are assumed independent of the latent factors and of each other.12
  11
      The measurement equations are specified in terms of the log latent factors. This ensures that the
factors themselves only take positive values as required by the model.
   12
      The assumption that the errors are independent of each other can be relaxed somewhat. Some
of the child cognitive outcomes, for example, are based on child level observations and are collected
by a trained psychologist in community centers, while others are based on maternal reports and are
collected in the home (on a different day) by a different interviewer. However, it is certainly possible
that measurement errors are correlated, even in this case from say child behavior, the implications of

                                                   14
    An assumption we have made in writing the system above is that the measurement
system is invariant between treated and controls. This implies that any differences in
the distribution of observed measures between the control and treated groups result
from differences in the distribution of the latent factors only. As we show in Appendix
D, none of our results are sensitive to whether we allow for the measurement treatment
to be affected by the treatment or not.
    Because the latent factors are unobserved, identification requires normalizations to
set their scale and location (Anderson and Rubin, 1956). We set the scale of the factors
by setting the factor loading on one of the measures (say the first) of each latent factor
                θ      P
to 1, that is: αk1t = αk1 = ατI 1t = 1, ∀t, τ = {M, T } and k = {C, S}. When it comes
to the child’s skills, we normalize the factor loading on the same measures at baseline
and follow-up.13 We set the location of all the factors by fixing the mean of the latent
factors in logs to 0 for the control group; the difference between the treatment group’s
location and that of the control group (which is set to zero) is taken to be the average
effect of the treatment.
    With the assumptions and normalizations already made and based on the Kotlarski
theorem and further extensions, Cunha et al. (2010) show that both the distribution of
measurement errors and the latent factor distribution are non-parametrically identified
so long as we have at least three measures with nonzero factor loadings corresponding
to each latent factor.14 While these assumptions are sufficient for identification, some
of them could be relaxed as shown in Cunha et al. (2010).15 For instance, the same
measure could be allowed to load on several factors, provided there are some dedicated
measures. It would also be possible to allow measurement error to be correlated across

which should be studied in future research.
    13
       For cognitive skills, we define the scale based on the Bayley cognitive score both at baseline and
follow-up. For socio-emotional skills, we normalize the factor loadings on the item measuring difficulty
in child’s temperament in the ICQ.
    14
       See also Schennach (2004), Schennach (2007), Hu and Schennach (2008), Carneiro, Hansen, and
Heckman (2003), Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) and Cunha and Heckman (2008).
    15
       See also Carneiro et al. (2003) and Cunha and Heckman (2008)

                                                   15
measures of the same factor, as long as there is one measure whose error is independent
from those of other measures of the same factor.
      A question of practical importance relates to the scale of the latent factors and
what they actually mean for measures of interest such as earnings. This is the issue of
anchoring discussed in Cunha et al. (2010) who provide a theoretical treatment.16 In
our paper, we normalize the cognitive factor in both periods to the Bayley cognitive
scale. This has a cardinal interpretation (the number of tasks completed correctly),
and the same test is applied across different ages (up until 42 months), allowing for
comparability. For socio-emotional skills we also normalize to the same ICQ item
(whether the child is difficult) in both periods. The lack of long-term longitudinal data
prevents us from converting these units to future earnings or other adult outcomes of
interest.


3.3     Specification of the measurement system

To implement the measurement system above, we first perform an exploratory factor
analysis, reported in Appendix C, to identify in a preliminary step the relevant mea-
sures and their allocation to factors. We then allocate measures observed in the data
to particular factors, as is shown in Table 1. The factor loading on the first measure is
normalized to one and thus this measure defines the scale of the latent factor.
      As reflected in the table, we did not necessarily use the same set of measures of the
child’s skill at baseline and at follow-up, the main reason being that we only included
age-appropriate items that provide relevant information about the latent skill. For
example, the MacArthur item measuring the number of complex phrases a child can

  16
      Cunha et al. (2010) provide a general theoretical treatment of anchoring and in their main empir-
ical results they anchor the measure of skills measured at the oldest age to years of education. They
then assume that the same anchoring scale applies to measures of cognition and socio-emotional skill
measured at earlier ages. Nielsen (2015) discusses using ordinal tests scores to measure achievement
gaps, and Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016) discuss how rescaling in a multiperiod production function
can lead to biases in the estimation of the substitution elasticity.

                                                  16
                                                   Table 1: Measurement system

 Latent factor                                             Measurement                                 Survey            % Signal
                                                                                                                  Controls      Treated
                               Bayley: cognitive                                                         FU          78%          79%
                               Bayley: receptive language                                                FU          75%          76%
 Child’s cognitive skills      Bayley: expressive language                                               FU          78%          79%
          C
 at FU (θt+1 )                 Bayley: fine motor                                                        FU          59%          61%
                               MacArthur: words the child can say                                        FU          64%          65%
                               MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                              FU          52%          54%
                               Bayley: cognitive                                                         BA          70%          70%
                               Bayley: receptive language                                                BA          73%          72%
 Child’s cognitive skills
                               Bayley: expressive language                                               BA          75%          74%
 at BA (θtC )
                               Bayley: fine motor                                                        BA          60%          59%
                               MacArthur: words the child can say                                        BA          45%          44%
                               ICQ: difficult (-)                                                        FU          74%          71%
 Child’s                       ICQ: unsociable (-)                                                       FU          33%          30%
 socio-emotional skills        ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                                      FU          59%          55%
         S
 at FU (θt+1 )                 ECBQ: inhibitory control                                                  FU          73%          69%
                               ECBQ: attentional focusing                                                FU          27%          24%
                               ICQ:   difficult (-)                                                      BA          68%          71%
 Child’s
                               ICQ:   unsociable (-)                                                     BA          28%          31%
 socio-emotional skills
                               ICQ:   unadaptable (-)                                                    BA          35%          38%
 at BA (θtS )
                               ICQ:   unstoppable (-)                                                    BA          22%          25%
                               FCI:   no.   of   different types of play materials                       FU          94%          97%
                               FCI:   no.   of   coloring and drawing books                              FU          17%          29%
 Material investment at
                               FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn movement                                  FU          61%          76%
 FU (ItM )
                               FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn shapes                                    FU          69%          82%
                               FCI:   no.   of   shop-bought toys                                        FU          61%          76%
                               FCI:   no.   of   different types of play activities in last 3 days       FU          87%          93%
                               FCI:   no.   of   times told a story to child in last 3 days              FU          66%          81%
 Time investment at
                               FCI:   no.   of   times read to child in last 3 days                      FU          73%          85%
 FU (ItT )
                               FCI:   no.   of   times played with toys in the last 3 days               FU          55%          72%
                               FCI:   no.   of   times named things to child in last 3 days              FU          56%          73%
                               Mothers’ years of education                                               FU          54%          50%
                               Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                               BA          54%          51%
 Mother’s cognitive            Mother’s vocabulary                                                       FU2         65%          62%
 skills at BA (P C )           FCI: no. of books for adults in the home                                  BA          39%          36%
                               FCI: no. of magazines and newspapers in the home                          BA          20%          19%
                               CESD:    did you feel depressed? (-)                                      BA          70%          73%
                               CESD:    are you bothered by what usually don’t? (-)                      BA          42%          45%
                               CESD:    did you have trouble keep mind on doing? (-)                     BA          49%          52%
 Mother’s                      CESD:    did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)               BA          45%          49%
 socio-emotional skills        CESD:    did you feel fearful? (-)                                        BA          47%          51%
 at BA (P S )                  CESD:    was your sleep restless? (-)                                     BA          34%          38%
                               CESD:    did you feel happy?                                              BA          46%          50%
                               CESD:    how often did you feel lonely last week? (-)                     BA          51%          55%
                               CESD:    did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                         BA          48%          52%
Note: This table shows the measures allowed to load on each latent factor, as well as the fraction of the variance in each measure that
is explained by the variance in signal, for the control and treatment groups separately. “BA” refers to Baseline, “FU” refers to the first-
follow-up survey and “FU2” refers to the second follow-up survey collected 2 years after the intervention ended. The symbol (-) indicates
that the scoring on these measures was reversed so that a higher score on the corresponding latent factor means a higher level of skill.
say is too advanced for children at 1-2 years old and hence was only administered at
follow-up when children were between 2.5 to 3.5 years old. Similarly, with respect to
socio-emotional skills, the ECBQ is designed to measure temperament among children
aged 3-7 and therefore was only administered at follow-up.17 However, in both rounds,
we use the same measure to normalize the child’s baseline cognitive and socio-emotional
skills.
    In our model we use mother’s skills to control for parental background. During
the data collection process, we had to focus only on the mother’s skills (who is almost
always the principal caregiver and often a single mother) because of resource constraints
and in order to keep interview times at a reasonable level. In so doing, it is possible that
we miss the influence of the father; however, we expect to be capturing at least some
of that by conditioning on the baseline skills of the child. We use baseline measures to
extract two factors measuring the mother’s cognitive and socio-emotional skills, with
the exception of the vocabulary test, which was administered at follow up and the
Raven’s score which was administered at a later round of data collection (2 years after
the end of the intervention). In both cases we checked and the intervention had no
impact on the scores.
    The parameters of the measurement system for treatment and control are estimated
together with the latent factor distributions as described above. To do so, we use the
estimation method described in Attanasio et al. (2017), which approximates the joint
distribution of the latent factors by a mixture of normals (as in Cunha et al. (2010)) and
the measurement error distribution by a normal distribution. We report estimates of
the factor loadings and distribution of measurement errors in Appendix C. To assess the
extent of information relative to measurement error contained in each of the measures,
we compute the signal-to-noise ratio measuring the fraction of the variance of each

   17
    The ICQ is in principle designed for children up to 2 years old. We administered the same
questions of the ICQ at baseline and follow-up after consultation with the developer of the test.

                                               18
measure driven by signal. For example, for the j-th measure of child’s skills of type k,
this ratio is defined as:


                               k             (αjk )2 V ar(ln θk )
                            sln
                             j
                                θ
                                  =
                                      (αjk )2 V ar(ln θk ) + V ar(kj )

where we have assumed that the j-th measure of latent factor θk can be written,
simplifying notation, as:
                                      mθj = µkj + αjk ln θk + kj

    The last two columns of Table 1 report the signal-to-noise ratio for each of the
measures used in the analysis for the control and treated groups separately. These
numbers can be different because the joint distribution of latent factors is allowed to
be different between the two groups. Clearly, there is much variation in the amount
of information contained in each measure of the same factor. For example, 78% of
the variance in the Bayley: Cognitive item is due to signal, whereas only 51% of
the variance in the Mac Arthur: Complex Phrases item is due to signal. Overall,
most measures are far from having 100% of their variance accounted for by signal,
which illustrates the usefulness of the latent factor approach in modeling human capital
accumulation and parental investments: without such an approach, one would risk to
obtain severely attenuated coefficients, masking the importance of investments and
background variables on child development.


4    Short-term impacts on child outcomes and parental invest-

     ments

In this section, we document the impacts of the intervention on child’s cognitive and
socio-emotional development as well as parental investments, observed at first follow-
up, just after the 18 month-long intervention ended. Impacts on the latter provide the

                                                  19
basic input to perform the mediation analysis discussed below to uncover the mecha-
nisms behind the observed impacts on children outcomes. We focus on the impact of
the psychosocial stimulation component of our intervention because there were no sig-
nificant impact of micronutrient supplementation on any child developmental outcomes
(Attanasio et al., 2014).18


4.1     Impacts on child development

Each panel of Table 2 reports the estimated impacts of receiving the home visits on one
of four sets of outcomes: (i) cognitive development; (ii) socio-emotional development;
(iii) parental investment in play materials; (iv) parental investment in play activities.
Impacts on the Bayley outcomes outcomes and two of the FCI measures were previ-
ously reported in Attanasio et al. (2014) and are repeated here for completeness.19 In
addition to the impact on each measure, we also report the impact on the mean of the
corresponding log latent factor. The results in the first panel imply an increase of 0.25
of a standard deviation (SD) in cognitive development and an increase of 0.175 SD
in receptive language, assessed using the Bayley.20 The cognitive factor summarizing
all these effects shows a substantial and significant increase of 11% (0.11 log points)
amongst the treated group relative to the control group. The second panel of the ta-
ble also shows that the intervention led to an overall improvement in socio-emotional
development (p-value<0.05).
      In Figure 1, we plot the estimated densities of some of the factors for the control and
treated groups and perform a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test of the hypothesis that
   18
      If we explicitly control for the fact that half of the stimulation group also received micronutrient
supplementation, the impact on cognition and receptive language remains virtually the same, with a
very small increase in the point estimates we report below (see Appendix Table D.1).
   19
      Here we include among the control group those who obtained micronutrient supplementation,
since that intervention had no effect on any developmental measure.
   20
      These treatment effects are slightly different from those reported in Attanasio et al. (2014) because
in this paper we estimate the impact of psychosocial stimulation by pooling the two groups that
received it and the two groups that did not, while Attanasio et al. (2014) estimates the impact of each
of the four arms of the intervention separately.

                                                    20
                                                                                                                                     21

                                                   Figure 1: Kernel densities of latent factors

               (a) Children’s cognitive skills, baseline                 (b) Children’s socio-emotional skills, baseline
                         Treated                                                              Treated
                         Control                                                              Control
             0.5




                         p−value diff: 1                                                      p−value diff: 0.603




                                                                                   0.5
             0.4




                                                                                   0.4
             0.3
   Density




                                                                         Density

                                                                                   0.3
             0.2




                                                                                   0.2
             0.1




                                                                                   0.1
             0.0




                                                                                   0.0
                    −3        −2              −1    0    1     2    3                    −3        −2           −1   0   1   2   3



             (c) Children’s cognitive skills, follow-up                  (d) Children’s socio-emotional skills, follow-up
                         Treated                                                   0.6        Treated
             0.5




                         Control                                                              Control
                         p−value diff: 0.01                                                   p−value diff: 0.061
                                                                                   0.5
             0.4




                                                                                   0.4
             0.3
   Density




                                                                         Density

                                                                                   0.3
             0.2




                                                                                   0.2
             0.1




                                                                                   0.1
             0.0




                                                                                   0.0




                    −3        −2              −1    0    1     2    3                    −3        −2           −1   0   1   2   3



                   (e) Material investments - follow-up                                  (f) Time investments - follow-up
                         Treated                                                              Treated
             0.4




                         Control                                                              Control
                         p−value diff: 0.001                                                  p−value diff: 0.004
                                                                                   0.8
             0.3




                                                                                   0.6
   Density




                                                                         Density
             0.2




                                                                                   0.4
             0.1




                                                                                   0.2
             0.0




                                                                                   0.0




                    −3        −2              −1    0    1     2    3                    −3        −2           −1   0   1   2   3




Note: These kernel densities are constructed using 10,000 draws from the estimated joint distribution
of latent factors for the control group and for the treated group. For each factor, we perform a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test using the bootstrap and accounting for the entire estimation procedure.
p-values reported in each panel.
                              Table 2: Treatment impacts on raw measures and factors

                                                                                                    Treatment effect
                                                                                       Point             Standard              Sample
                                                                                     estimate              error                size
 A - Child’s cognitive skills at follow-up
 Bayley: cognitive                                                                     0.250               (0.063)               1,264
 Bayley: receptive language                                                            0.175               (0.063)               1,264
 Bayley: expressive language                                                           0.032               (0.062)               1,263
 Bayley: fine motor                                                                    0.072               (0.060)               1,262
 MacArthur: words the child can say                                                    0.092               (0.064)               1,322
 MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                                          0.058               (0.054)               1,322
 Cognitive factor                                                                      0.115               (0.051)
 B - Child’s socio-emotional skills at follow-up
 ICQ: difficult (-)                                                                   -0.041               (0.054)               1,326
 ICQ: unsociable (-)                                                                  -0.075               (0.045)               1,326
 ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                                                 -0.032               (0.054)               1,326
 ECBQ: inhibitory control                                                             -0.003               (0.058)               1,323
 ECBQ: attentional focusing                                                            0.070               (0.049)               1,323
 Socio-emotional factor                                                                0.087               (0.044)
 C - Material investment at follow-up
 FCI: no.    of different types of play materials                                      0.215               (0.064)               1,326
 FCI: no.    of coloring and drawing books                                            -0.133               (0.056)               1,326
 FCI: no.    of toys to learn movement                                                -0.048               (0.065)               1,326
 FCI: no.    of toys to learn shapes                                                   0.416               (0.088)               1,326
 FCI: no.    of shop-bought toys                                                       0.024               (0.061)               1,326
 Material    investment factor                                                         0.227               (0.069)
 D - Time investment at follow-up
 FCI: no. of different types of play activities in last 3 days                         0.277               (0.050)               1,326
 FCI: no. of times told a story to child in last 3 days                                0.138               (0.060)               1,326
 FCI: no. of times read to child in last 3 days                                        0.362               (0.062)               1,326
 FCI: no. of times played with toys in last 3 days                                     0.175               (0.056)               1,326
 FCI: no. of times named things to child in last 3 days                                0.137               (0.048)               1,326
 Time investment factor                                                                0.302               (0.068)

Note: All scores have been internally standardized non-parametrically for age and are expressed in standard deviation units (see Appendix
B for details about the measures and the standardization procedure). The effects relating to the latent factors are in log points. Coefficients
and standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in parentheses) from a regression of the dependent variable measured at follow-up
on an indicator for whether the child received any psychosocial stimulation and controlling for child’s sex; tester effects and baseline level
of the outcome.



      the corresponding CDFs are equal to each other (the p-values of the tests are reported




                                                                     22
in the figure and have been derived using the bootstrap).21 The first two panels show
the distribution, in treatment and control villages, of cognitive and socio-emotional
skills at baseline. The two densities overlap each other and the K-S test cannot reject
that they are equal to each other, thus confirming that our sample is balanced. The
following two panels depict the distribution of cognitive and socio-emotional factors
at follow-up. In the case of the cognitive factor, we see that the shift in the mean
reported in Table 2 reflects a shift in the entire distribution. For the socio-emotional
factor, however, the shift occurs mainly for children below the median.


4.2      Suggestive evidence on the mechanisms behind the impacts

In the last two panels of Figure 1, we notice a strong shift to the right of the distribu-
tions of both the material and time investment factors. For either type of investments,
the K-S strongly rejects the equality of the corresponding densities between control
and treated groups. The bottom two panels of Table 2 focus on the mean impacts of
the stimulation intervention on parental investments and indicate substantial impacts
on several individual items of the Family Care Indicator (FCI), as well as on the two
latent factors measuring investments. Panel D of Table 2 shows that all types of time
activities increase, but among play materials the increase is not uniform (Panel C).
Specifically, there is an increase in most toys but a reduction in coloring books, which
may reflect crowding out specially because the home visitors intentionally left picture
books behind. The overall material investment factor registers a highly significant
increase however.
      As mentioned above, the measure of materials relates specifically to items provided
by the parents. Although the home visitors were supposed to take away all intervention
toys (with the exception of picture books) upon the completion of the last home visit,
some were left behind at the end of the intervention as is evident from the summary
  21
       The estimation method used for this purpose is based on Attanasio et al. (2017)

                                                  23
statistics reported in Appendix Table D.3.22 However, since we are able to separately
measure parental contributions from intervention materials, this does not pose any
problem for our analysis, and whenever we refer to material investments we exclude
intervention play materials and only keep items provided by the parents. The impact
of the intervention materials, if any, will be captured by the treatment dummy; we
return to this point when interpreting our results.
    As we show above, the measures of parental inputs relating to materials and quality
time both increased. As argued by DelBoca, Flinn, and Wiswall (2014) it may be
important distinguish these inputs because they can have different impacts on child
development. On the other hand the inputs are clearly related and the two factors are
correlated (0.64). Thus one could imagine a more parsimonious approach where they
are combined into one investment factor. However, another good reason for keeping
them separate relates to the way they are measured. Materials are actually observed
and enumerated by the surveyors; quality time items are measured by maternal self-
reports, which may make them noisier measures of parental investment. This may also
make them more likely to be subject to intervention bias due to the fact that mothers in
the treatment group may exaggerate the extent to which they engage in developmental
activities with the children. Without this implying that there is no information in the
measures of time investments, these may be less reliable measures of parental behavior
than material investments, which are directly observed and also likely to reflect actual
effort by the parents. We will return to this important issue when interpreting the
results.




  22
     The median number of days between the end of the intervention and data collection was 10.
Almost all interviews were completed within 40 days. Very few households were interviewed a few
days before the end of the intervention. Omitting these households from the analysis leaves the results
completely unchanged.

                                                  24
5    The accumulation of human capital in the early years and

     the role of the intervention

To better understand the determinants of early childhood development and to explore
the way that the intervention affected outcomes we now specify a model of parental
investments and child skill formation, where skills take two dimensions, namely cogni-
tive and socio-emotional skills. We use such a model to inform the mediation analysis
aimed at explaining the channels through which the intervention generated the im-
pacts documented in Section 4. An important element of the model is that parents
can choose to invest in play materials and quality time.
    We refer to the baseline period as t, when children were between 12 to 24 months
old, and to the post-intervention period as t + 1, when children were between 30 to 42
months old. Child skills at t+1 are assumed to be a function of the vector of child skills
at t, maternal skills at t, parental investments in the intervening period and random
shocks. However, rather than modeling investment choices resulting from the dynamic
optimization of a household problem as in DelBoca, Flinn, and Wiswall (2014), we
estimate a pair of reduced form investment equations, which can be interpreted as
an approximation to those derived (numerically) in a full structural model. By not
imposing all the restrictions from a specific structural model we do not have to take
a stance on whether parents know the process of child development reflected in the
structure of the production function.
    The model we use allows us to characterize the process of early child development
and provides a framework to understand the mechanisms that generated the interven-
tion’s impacts. One mechanism through which the intervention may have operated is
by changing the production function itself. On the one hand, the stimulation provided
during the home visits may be a new input in the development of the child, and this



                                           25
would be captured by a shift in Total Factor Productivity (TFP) parameter or other
parameters of the production function. On the other hand, parents, now guided by
the intervention, may use time and resources in a more effective way. This interpreta-
tion implies that, despite the richness of our data, some aspects of investment quality
may not be captured by our measures and thus get embodied in the estimates of the
production function parameters.23
    A second mechanism through which the intervention could generate impacts on
child development could be an increase in parental investments. Indeed, the interven-
tion aims to strengthen child-mother interactions and encourage mothers to engage
more with the child by incorporating age-appropriate play activities in the daily rou-
tine, introducing new toys constructed with home-made materials and spending time
reading, telling stories or singing. However, it is also possible that investments could
decline as parents shift their attention and resources elsewhere (for example, to other
children) because they perceive the intervention itself as some form of investment either
in itself (effectively an in-kind transfer). Such crowding-out of private resources is a
standard concern in programs that target children.
    Finally, the intervention could also have affected maternal cognitive or, more plau-
sibly, socio-emotional skills. Many of the mothers (37%) were depressed at baseline
according to the CESD scale, and it is plausible that the treatment mitigated this. Al-
though we checked for such impacts, we did not detect any differences in our measures
of maternal skills (either cognitive or socio-emotional skills) between the control and
treatment groups after the intervention; thus this potential change is not a mechanism
that contributed to the outcome. In our estimated model we only include baseline
   23
     We made every effort to collect both time and resource use carefully targeted to the child with
an emphasis on items that can drive development. For example, one of our measures is the number
of times spent reading with the child in the last 3 days. Yet, it is still a possibility that as a result
of the intervention, parents may be more able to select age-appropriate or stimulating stories to read
with their child. Our measure of the frequency with which parents read with their child would not
pick up this change in the quality of interaction, which would instead be picked up by a shift in the
productivity of time investments.

                                                   26
maternal skills.24


5.1     The production function for human capital

We consider a production function of human capital that maps initial conditions,
parental investment of different types and other factors on two different dimensions
of child development. In particular, we assume that the stock of skills of child i in pe-
riod t + 1 is determined by the vector of child’s baseline cognitive and socio-emotional
skills θit embodying the initial conditions at the time of observation (possibly including
any paternal influence), the mother’s cognitive and socio-emotional skills denoted by
PitC and PitS respectively, and the investments Iit+1 made by the parents between t and
                                                   k
t + 1. We also allow for the effect of a variable ηit+1 that reflects unobserved shocks. As
with skills, parental investments Iit+1 can be a multi-dimensional vector. We denote
                         M                             T
material investments by Iit+1 and time investments by Iit+1 .
      Following our own earlier experimentation, we assume the production function for
each of the two skills is Cobb-Douglas, so we can write the technology of formation for
skill k as follows:25

    k
ln(θidt+1 ) =Akd + γ1d
                    k
                       ln(θitC ) + γ2d
                                    k
                                       ln(θitS ) + γ3d
                                                    k
                                                       ln(PitC )+ γ4d
                                                                   k
                                                                      ln(PitS )
                                                                                                   (5)
                    k      M              k      T               k             k
               +   γ5d ln(Iidt+1 )   +   γ6d ln(Iidt+1 )   +    γ7d nit   +   ηit+1   k ∈ {C, S}


where C and S stand for cognitive and socio-emotional skills respectively. The term
nit is the number of children in the household and allows for the possibility that the
presence of siblings affects child development because of spillover effects and more
broadly because of the learning and socialization that can be achieved by interacting



   24
       The effect of the intervention on the principal component factor of the CES-D scale items at
follow-up is 0.13 of a standard deviation (with a p-value of .12), which, given the way the factor is
defined, is indicative of an improvement but too insignificant to rely upon.
    25
       Cunha et al. (2010) use a CES, while Cunha and Heckman (2008) use a log linear specification.

                                                           27
with other older children.26 It is possible, on the other hand, that the presence of
siblings dilute attention and resources. As we discuss below, such an effect could be
captured by the investment functions. Akd is a factor-neutral productivity parameter
or TFP and depends on the treatment status of the child (d) to capture the potential
direct effect of the home-visitor stimulation during her weekly visit. Finally, all the
parameters are specific to a particular skill.


5.2      Parental investments

We model investments as a function of the child and the mother’s baseline skills and
the number of children in the household.27 The number of children in the household
may dilute both resources and time devoted to the subject child. We also include a
vector of variables Zit , which determine investments but do not enter the production
function. We discuss them below. The investment equations we estimate are

      τ
  ln(Iidt+1 ) =λτ0d + λτ1d ln(θitC ) + λτ2d ln(θitN ) + λτ3d ln(PiC ) + λτ4d ln(PiS )
                                                                                                      (6)
                  +   λτ5d   ln(nit ) +   λτ6d Zit   +   uτit+1 ,                       τ = {M, T }


As implied by the subscript d all coefficients could change with the treatment, a hy-
pothesis we directly test. The effect of background variables on parental investment,
given child initial conditions, is an important potential source of socio-economic gra-
dients in child development. Moreover, the extent to which investments increase with
child initial abilities is a reflection of parental beliefs about the heterogeneity of returns
to such investments as well as parental taste for redistribution among children.




  26
       Since our subject children are 12-24 months old at baseline these are almost always older children.
  27
       The measure includes the subject child so the minimum is 1.

                                                               28
5.3     Estimation and mediation analysis

Parental investments are an input in the production function. However, they may be
                                   k      τ
endogenous, i.e. it may be that E(ηit+1 |Iit+1 ) 6= 0. In particular, parental investments
might respond to unobserved, time-varying shocks in order to compensate or reinforce
their effects on child development. Consider, for example, the case of a child who
is suddenly affected by a negative shock, such as an illness, which is unobserved to
the econometrician but perceived by the parents as delaying the child’s development.
As a result of this shock, parents might decide to invest in their child’s development
more than they would have otherwise. This parental response would create a nega-
                                                                        k
tive correlation between parental investments and the unobserved error ηit+1 , biasing
downwards the impact of investments. Alternative assumptions about preferences and
technologies (or technologies as perceived by the parents) can create different patterns
of correlations between shocks and investment and, therefore, introduce different types
of biases.
      Standard mediation analysis, as in Heckman et al. (2013), takes all inputs as ex-
ogenous. It then considers various possible channels through which the intervention
could affect outcomes and tries to establish which of them can explain the observed
impacts on the outcomes. In our case, this approach would correspond to estimating
the production functions by OLS, allowing the intervention to affect outputs (cognition
and socio-emotional skills) directly, as well as indirectly through its impact on invest-
ments. One could then decompose the overall effect of the intervention into a direct
effect, which could be interpreted as an improvement in productivity, and an indirect
effect mediated by the increase in investment. Such an approach, however, can lead to
misleading conclusions if investments are endogenous: if, for instance, ignoring endo-
geneity leads to under-estimate the impact of investment on outputs, then the channels
through which the intervention can affect outcomes will be potentially misinterpreted.


                                           29
To deal with the endogeneity of investment we use instrumental variables. We discuss
our choice of instruments in the next subsection.
   To estimate the model we proceed in three steps. First, as mentioned earlier, we
estimate the covariance structure and the factor loadings of the latent factors based on
the covariance structure of the observed measures. This step requires no distributional
assumptions on the latent factors or the measurement error, but only relies on the
restrictions embedded in the measurement system and discussed earlier. For estimation
however, we assume that the latent factors are distributed as a mixture of two normal
distributions and that measurement error is normally distributed. In the second step,
we use the estimates of the measurement system to predict Bartlett factor scores for
each individual in the data. In the final and third step, we use these predicted scores as
observable data to estimate the parental investment and production function equations.
   The third step requires correcting for the measurement error introduced from the
fact that we use predicted values of the latent factors instead of the actual ones. To
do so, we adapt the correction method described in Heckman et al. (2013) in the
context of instrumental variables. Using the predicted factor scores and instruments,
we estimate the investment equations and the reduced form of the production functions,
where we obtained the latter by substituting material and time investments in the
production function with their relevant first stage equations. We correct the investment
and reduced form coefficients using the method described in Heckman et al. (2013) and
finally recover the structural coefficients of the production function using a minimum
distance estimator (Rothenberg, 1971).
   We compute 95% confidence intervals and critical values for test statistics using the
cluster bootstrap, where the entire estimation procedure is replicated 1000 times. We
cluster at the municipality level which was the randomization unit in our experiment.




                                           30
5.4     Choice of instruments

When investments are treated as endogenous, identification requires instruments that
are relevant and can be excluded from the production function, under reasonable as-
sumptions. A potential instrument is the intervention itself, which was randomized.
However, the fact that we wish to test whether the intervention affected the production
function directly as one of the possible channels through which it operated precludes us
from using it as an identifying variable that is excluded from the production function.
Moreover, because we have two endogenous variables (material and time investments),
we need at least two instruments so the randomization alone would not be enough to
identify the model anyway.
      Consistent with a standard model of parental investment, we expect material invest-
ments to be related to the prices of relevant goods. Specifically, we use as instruments
the average log price of toys and the average log price of food items in the municipality
of residence. We assume that the variability of prices across communities is unrelated
to factors affecting the development of cognition and socio-emotional skills of children.
      To provide corroborative evidence of the validity of these exclusion restrictions,
in Table 3 we present regressions of the log price of food and the log price of toys
on various baseline characteristics, which, reasonably, should not be affected by these
prices. The coefficients are jointly insignificant as shown by the p-values at the bottom
of the Table. Moreover, the associated coefficients are very small and economically
unimportant. Marriage is individually significant and while all other variables are
included in the model marriage is not. In other versions of the model we also include
the marriage indicator in the production function and none of the conclusions we draw
are affected. Indeed, such a variable is completely insignificant in the production
functions, further strengthening our conclusions.
      Finding instruments for quality time is more challenging. This input may reflect


                                            31
                       Table 3: Balance test for the instrumental variables

                                                    Log Toy Price        Log Food Price        Conflict†
               Mother’s Cognition                       0.020                  0.007             -0.005
                                                       (0.009)               (0.007)            (0.003)
               Mother’s non-cognitive skill             -0.006                -0.014             0.005
                                                       (0.008)               (0.006)            (0.005)
               Married                                  0.013                  0.030              0.017
                                                       (0.016)               (0.012)            (0.008)
               Wealth Index                             -0.003                 0.002              0.002
                                                       (0.007)               (0.006)            (0.004)
               Terrorism?                               0.014                 -0.012              0.005
                                                       (0.014)               (0.013)            (0.009)
               Constant                                 8.036                  8.053              0.039
                                                       (0.036)               (0.027)            (0.015)
               Observations                               1,010               1,023              1,023
               R-squared                                  0.011               0.021              0.017
               F-statistic                                1.631               2.147              1.438
               F-pvalue                                   0.160               0.0671             0.218
              Note: All right hand side variables measured at baseline. ? Terrorist attacks: measured
              between conception of child and baseline. † “Conflict” is the number of conflicts against
              civil population/1000 population when the mother herself was a child. Asymptotic stan-
              dard errors in parentheses allowing for clustering at the municipality level (randomization
              unit).



more the way parents spend time with their children and the type of activities they
engage in than the amount of time spent. This intuition is confirmed by results in
Table 4, which show that the intervention had no impact on maternal labor supply:
the impact of the treatment on both employment and weekly hours is small and in-
significant, although it had large effects on time investments. This evidence suggests
that the margin of adjustment is not between work and quality time with children, but
rather between quality time versus other household production activities or leisure,
which are excluded from our measures of time investments. Consequently, measures of
the opportunity cost of time, such as village-level female or male wages, are unlikely
to have much explanatory power.28 Below we also show that quality time investment
is also unrelated to the relative prices we use as instruments for material investment.



  28
       In earlier versions we demonstrate that indeed they do not.

                                                           32
             Table 4: Impact of the intervention on maternal labor supply

                                                            Employment              Hours of work
         Treatment dummy                                      -0.0373                    0.208
                                                             (0.0852)                   (1.793)
         Demographic controls
           Mother’s age                                         0.193                      3.839
                                                             (0.0439)                    (0.802)
           Mother’s age squared                                -0.003                    -0.0542
                                                             (0.0007)                   (0.0130)
           Years of education                                   0.056                      0.921
                                                             (0.0121)                    (0.214)
           No. of children = 2                                 -0.213                     -4.429
                                                             (0.0983)                    (1.866)
           No. of children = 3                                 -0.397                     -5.905
                                                              (0.124)                    (2.382)
           No. of children = 4                                 -0.230                     -2.057
                                                              (0.166)                    (3.158)
           No. of children = 5                                 -0.664                     -13.71
                                                              (0.236)                    (3.612)
           No. of children > 6                                 -0.346                     -0.169
                                                              (0.244)                    (5.107)
         Constant                                              -3.457                     -48.39
                                                              (0.659)                    (11.91)
         Observations                                          1,210                     1,200

       Note: Interviewer fixed effects included. Default number of children is one, which is the subject
       child. Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses allowing for clustering at the municipality level
       (randomization unit).



   To instrument time investments, we instead focus on variables that have the po-
tential to affect the willingness and ability of mothers to engage with their children.
Specifically, we exploit the fact that Colombia has a long and well documented his-
tory of civil conflict that has affected large parts of the country and, in particular,
rural areas. It is well documented that exposure to violence can cause emotional de-
tachment, which can impede or make subsequent interaction with one’s own children
harder (Betancourt, 2015; Creech and Misca, 2017, for related evidence). This leads
us to consider maternal exposure to past conflict as a potential instrument for current
quality time investment, where we exploit variation in the intensity of conflict across




                                                       33
municipalities.29
     As with our price instruments, our identifying assumption is that the variation
in conflict across municipalities is orthogonal to unobservable factors affecting the
development of the cohort of children we are studying. Although this assumption is
not testable, in Table 3 we show that the incidence of conflict is not associated with
mothers’ baseline characteristics or with household wealth: all coefficients are very
small and insignificant with a joint p-value of 0.22. Among these variables we also
include the incidence of terrorist activities around the time the child was born: while
the conflict itself was mainly over in the sampled communities by the time of our
experiment, there were sporadic terrorist attacks during the period of the intervention.
We included this variable to check that our measure of maternal childhood exposure
to conflict is not related to current violence, which could have a direct impact on
the child. The results in Table 3 strongly suggest that they are not. Thus, as is
evident from these results, the past incidence of conflict is not associated with baseline
characteristics relevant for child development. However, as we show below, mothers’
childhood exposure to conflict is a strong determinant of the quality time that they
spend with their child.


6        Results

We now report our empirical results. We start with estimates of the investment function
before moving on to estimates of the production functions. The latter allow us to
investigate what generates the impacts of the intervention on child development, a key
question that impinges on the design of such programs. In what follows we report
confidence intervals for all parameters. These have been computed using the block
bootstrap accounting for the entire estimation procedure, and the cluster structure
    29
     Specifically, our instrument is defined as the number of conflicts against the civil population
divided by population (in thousands) in a given municipality when the mother was a child.

                                                34
of our data. Whenever we present test statistics we compute the p-values using the
bootstrap.


6.1     Estimates of the investment functions

The estimates of the investment equations are reported in Table 5. The first two
columns of the table report estimates of the material and time investment equations,
where we use toy price, food price and maternal childhood exposure to conflict as
exclusion restrictions. The third column reports estimates of the material investment
equation, where we only include prices as exclusion restrictions. This first stage will be
used to estimate a production function for cognitive skills that does not include time
investments as an input (and that will turn out to be our preferred specification).
      The first striking result is the impact of treatment on investments: it increases
materials by 20% and time by 33%, and both effects are highly significant. The results
reported in Table 5 exclude interactions of the treatment parameter with the remaining
variables, which were found to be insignificant.30 These estimates of the impact of the
intervention on investments are driven by the experimental design and do not require
any of the assumptions necessary for the identification of the production functions.
      The fact that the intervention increased the quality time and resources that parents
provide to children is important because it shows that parents are willing to reinforce
the intervention. While we already showed some evidence of crowding out for individual
items, overall the opposite seems to be happening. From a policy perspective this is a
major conclusion that should encourage further interventions in such contexts. As we
shall see below, this increase in parental investment is the key source of success of the
intervention.
  30
     The estimates where all parameters of the investment functions are allowed to vary with treatment
are shown in Web Appendix Table E.1. We test the joint significance of the interaction terms and find
that we cannot reject that all the interactions are equal to 0 for both material and time investments:
the p-value for the material investment equation is 0.369 and the p-value for the time investment
equation is 0.099.

                                                 35
                                                                                                         36



             Table 5: Estimates of the material and time investment equations

                                                               Instruments:                  Instruments:
                                                            Prices and Conflict               Prices only

                                                         Material            Time              Material
                                                        investment        investment          investment


 Intercept                                                 -0.016            0.001               -0.016
                                                        [-0.114,0.078]    [-0.089,0.089]       [-0.11,0.078]
 Treatment dummy                                           0.204             0.333                0.203
                                                        [0.038,0.365]      [0.155,0.48]        [0.037,0.362]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                           0.130             0.067                0.133
                                                        [0.016,0.246]      [-0.044,0.18]        [0.017,0.25]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                     -0.032            0.021               -0.033
                                                        [-0.133,0.087]    [-0.083,0.145]       [-0.131,0.088]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                          0.754             0.367                0.755
                                                        [0.582,0.939]     [0.162,0.498]        [0.583,0.943]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                    0.071             0.024                0.071
                                                        [-0.008,0.139]     [-0.06,0.108]       [-0.008,0.139]
 Log number of children (t)                                -0.129            -0.134              -0.128
                                                        [-0.18,-0.077]    [-0.186,-0.072]      [-0.18,-0.078]
 Log toy price                                             -0.095            -0.020              -0.094
                                                        [-0.168,-0.027]   [-0.085,0.037]      [-0.163,-0.026]
 Log food price                                            0.096             0.042                0.097
                                                        [0.006,0.178]     [-0.026,0.121]       [0.006,0.178]
 Maternal childhood exposure to conflict                   -0.011            -0.096
                                                         [-0.08,0.063]    [-0.139,-0.032]

 Rank test(a)                                                  0.011
 Cragg-Donald test                                             0.019
 Test of joint significance - F-statistic (p-values):
    Toy price, food price, conflict                10.48 (0.028) 13.42 (0.008)
    Toy price, food price, conflict, treatment 22.41 (0.001) 26.42 (0.001)
    Toy price, food price                          10.48 (0.013) 1.53 (0.455)                10.57(0.010)
    Toy price, food price, treatment               22.41 (0.001) 20.55 (0.000)               22.55(0.000)
    Conflict, treatment                             5.95 (0.047) 21.79 (0.000)
Note: Dependent variables are the log of material and time investments. Maternal childhood exposure to
conflict is defined as the number of conflicts against civil population/1000 when the mother was a child.
t refers to baseline/pre-treatment measurement. (a) This is a test of the null hypothesis that the smallest
eigenvalue of the 2×2 matrix β 0 β is zero, where β is the 3×2 matrix of coefficients on food price, toy price
and conflict in the material and time investment equations. We present this alongside the Cragg-Donald
test because in this context it is not clear which is the more powerful. 95% Confidence intervals in square
brackets. These as well as the p-values for the rank tests and all other tests are based on 1,000 bootstrap
replications of the entire estimation process taking into account of clustering at the municipality level.
   Turning now to the other regressors, we find that parents invest more resources in
children with a higher baseline level of cognition (elasticity of 0.13) but the child’s base-
line socio-emotional skills have no impact on either type of investment. The elasticity
of both material and time investments with respect to maternal cognition is very high
and particularly so for the former; however mother’s socio-emotional skills only affect
material investments significantly and there the impact is very small. The number of
other children in the household at baseline reduce significantly both time and material
investments: an extra child reduces both investments by about 13%, which is consis-
tent with a quantity/quality tradeoff among children. Moreover, the results are in line
with a model where parents choose investments taking into account complementarity
with child cognitive skills.


Importance of instruments. The next set of variables reported in Table 5 explain
investments and act as excluded instruments when we estimate the production func-
tions and treat investments as endogenous. These are the prices of toys and food and
the level of conflict in the municipality when the mother was a child. The rank test
we implement has a p-value of 0.011.31 As an alternative, we also present the Cragg-
Donald form of this test, which has a p-value of 0.019. These establish the strength of
the instruments, allowing for the fact that there are two endogenous variables. As we
will elaborate in Section 6.4, our Monte Carlo simulations show that these instruments
are strong enough to avoid weak instrument bias.
   The prices we consider are expected to affect material investment through the
household budget constraint. Indeed, the p-value of a test of joint significance of
these instruments is 0.013 in the material investment equation. As we would expect,
toy price has a negative and significant impact on material investments. Food price,
on the other hand, has a significant positive effect on material investment, implying

  31
       See Robin and Smith (2000) and Blundell et al. (1998).

                                                  37
that play materials and food are substitutes.
      Understanding the determinants of quality time is harder, as argued above. Prices
have no explanatory power: their joint p-value in the quality time investment equation
is 0.46. In results not reported here, we also found that wages did not predict time
investments either, supporting our argument that the opportunity cost of quality time
is not the time spent in the labor market and that spending quality time with children
does not necessarily require monetary resources, but rather perhaps knowledge of child
development and a certain willingness to engage with the child. Maternal childhood
exposure to conflict, on the other hand, has a strong and significant negative impact on
quality time activities (p-value 0), although it has no impact on material investments.
The latter result reinforces the idea that this variable is not merely picking up some
omitted background factor.
      Jointly, these instruments are strong enough to allow us to control for the endogene-
ity of investments in the production function. In some specifications, we also exclude
treatment status from the production functions, thus implicitly using the treatment as
an instrument. In this case, the instruments only become stronger.
      Finally, in the last column of Table 5 we present a specification for material invest-
ment that excludes the conflict variable; the coefficients are almost identical to those
in column (1), and the prices are jointly even more significant. We use this investment
equation to estimate a model where only material investments enter the production
function for cognitive skills.


6.2     The production function for cognitive skills

In Table 6, we report estimates of a Cobb-Douglas production function for cognitive
skills. The first column presents results where investments are assumed to be condi-
tionally exogenous; in the remaining columns investments are taken as endogenous.
      The production function demonstrates a high level of persistence for cognition;

                                              38
                       Table 6: Estimates of the production function for cognitive skills

                                                     (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                     OLS                                         IV
 Instruments:                                                     Prices, conflict     Price, conflict,       Prices         Prices and
                                                                                         treatment                           treatment

 Intercept                                          -0.016               -0.02               0.008            -0.006           -0.009
                                                 [-0.094,0.053]       [-0.111,0.085]      [-0.088,0.104]    [-0.092,0.072]   [-0.083,0.057]
 Treatment                                          0.084                0.076                                -0.022
                                                 [-0.025,0.192]        [-0.12,0.391]                        [-0.176,0.161]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                     0.67                0.663               0.634             0.632            0.631
                                                  [0.589,0.77]         [0.544,0.797]       [0.521,0.748]    [0.527,0.747]    [0.533,0.739]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)              -0.004               0.004               0.019             0.014            0.02
                                                 [-0.091,0.087]        [-0.09,0.142]      [-0.095,0.142]    [-0.088,0.129]   [-0.081,0.129]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                   0.217                0.018               -0.179           -0.099           -0.094
                                                  [0.089,0.35]        [-0.435,0.477]      [-0.548,0.198]    [-0.503,0.291]    [-0.45,0.21]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)             0.106                0.089               0.064             0.067            0.074
                                                 [0.031,0.173]        [-0.031,0.162]      [-0.034,0.149]    [-0.021,0.157]   [-0.025,0.154]
 Log of number of children (t)                      0.041                0.075               0.084             0.09             0.086
                                                  [-0.01,0.092]        [-0.068,0.15]       [0.011,0.163]    [0.004,0.176]    [0.023,0.163]
 Log of material investment (t+1)                    0.08                0.463               0.799             0.531            0.516
                                                 [0.016,0.157]         [0.033,1.182]        [0.197,1.4]     [0.038,1.015]    [0.195,0.949]
 Log of time investment (t+1)                        0.04                -0.131              -0.323
                                                 [-0.051,0.129]        [-1.178,0.3]       [-1.022,0.227]



 Gap in output between treated and control:
 (a) Measured in the data                                                                0.115
 (b) Predicted by the model estimates    0.114                           0.127              0.055              0.086            0.105

Note: Dependent variable is the log cognition of the child at follow up. At the top of each of the IV columns we state the exclusion
restrictions used. t and t + 1 denote that a variable was measured at baseline and endline, respectively. 95% Confidence intervals in
brackets based on 1,000 bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process taking into account clustering at the municipality level.


        however, socio-emotional skills do not affect cognition at this early age, and this re-
        sult remains unchanged whether we treat investments as endogenous or not. Mothers’
        cognition and socio-emotional skills have a strong positive effect on cognitive devel-
        opment when we use OLS, but in the remaining columns, when we use IV for the
        investments, these effects disappear, implying that mothers’ skills operate through the
        initial conditions of the child and through the investment decisions only. Finally, the
        number of other children in the family improve child cognitive development. This is
        particularly interesting because the investment equations show that additional children


                                                                  39
reduce both material and quality time investments. However the presence of other (for
the most part older) children has a direct impact on child development, with an extra
child improving cognition by 4%-9% depending on the specification.
    We now turn to the estimates of the direct treatment effect and the coefficients
on parental investments, as measured by our ‘material investment’ and our ‘quality
time investment’ factors. When we treat investments as exogenous and use OLS, we
find that the impact of material investments on cognitive development is significantly
different from zero, but that of time is insignificant. The direct treatment effect is large
but very imprecisely estimated, to the extent that it is insignificant. The estimate of
the impact of material investments increases dramatically when we treat investment
as endogenous. Going from column 1 to column 2, this coefficient increases from 0.08
to 0.46; and although it is now estimated less precisely it remains significant at the
5% level. The change in the size of the coefficient points to parents compensating for
negative shocks affecting their children.
    The coefficient on time investment, instead, stays insignificant and its point estimate
actually turns negative. The estimate of the direct effect of the intervention stays
insignificant, although, as we discussed above it is strongly significant in the investment
equations. For this reason, in column 3, we force the direct treatment effect to be
zero. Despite the now unequivocal strength of the instruments (since we are also using
the treatment allocation as an exclusion restriction in column 3), the results do not
change: material investments enter with a large and significant coefficient (0.56) and
time investments remain completely insignificant.32



  32
      In an earlier version of the paper we also used an indicator for whether the mother is married at
baseline as an instrument. Following referees’ comments we no longer use it. It is worth mentioning
though that while being married had a significant effect in the investment equations it was not at
all significant when also included in the production functions. One interpretation is that married
couples invest more in their children and this is the channel through which outcomes are affected in
our context.

                                                  40
Using material investments alone Given the measurement issues for quality time,
which is based on self-reports and discussed further below,33 and in light of the results
presented thus far, in the next two columns we exclude time investments from the
production function and we switch to using only prices as instruments so the relevant
first stage investment equation is in the third column of Table 5. In one specification we
include the treatment dummy reflecting the direct effect of the intervention (column
4) and in the other we exclude it (column 5). The results are essentially the same,
though with improved precision, and present a clear message: material investments
have a strong and positive impact, while the direct effect of treatment is small and
completely insignificant.


Interpreting the impact of the intervention Based on these estimates, we now
consider how the intervention affects outcomes through the lens of the production
function. The possible channels include changes in the production function - a direct
effect - and changes in parental investment inputs. Changes in the production function
could happen for a number of reasons. First, the weekly session of the home visitor with
the child, as well as any materials left behind, can be thought of as a new input; second
the intervention could lead to a better use of measured inputs by parents or equivalently
an improvement in the unmeasured quality of these inputs. These are possible channels
through which the intervention could affect outcomes over and above inducing more
investments through its emphasis on parenting and the direct involvement of the mother
in the home visit.
   From the coefficients reported in column 1 of Table 6, which treats investment as
exogenous, together with the increase in investment documented in Table 5, we see that
increased investment accounts for about 25% of the impact of the intervention. The
point estimate of the coefficient on treatment, instead, indicates that the intervention

  33
       See also section 4.2.

                                           41
directly increased cognition considerably, by about 8.4%, although it is not precisely
estimated. Therefore, according to this specification, parental investments play some
role in mediating the intervention but there is a large direct effect, at least in terms of
the point estimate.
   A key problem with these results, though, is that they assume investments are
invariant to unobserved shocks to child development that occur between baseline and
the end of the intervention 18 months later. The IV results presented in columns
2 to 5 of Table 6 address this issue and present a different story: the increase in
material investments now explains a large fraction of the observed impact. Thus, a
good description of cognitive development among children aged 3-4 is that it is driven
by initial cognition (measured at aged 1-2), stimulation provided by older siblings,
and material investments provided by parents, and the main channel through which
the intervention affects cognitive development is by shifting these investments. The
model in column 5 with material investments alone achieves a good fit of the data
and captures over 91% of the overall impact of the intervention. Finally, we find no
evidence that any other coefficient of the production function changed. In Table E.2
we allow all coefficients to vary by treatment status. The overall p-value is 0.32, while
for the non-intercept coefficients it is 0.29.
   These results highlight the importance of material investments but leave no role
for quality time investments. This is perhaps surprising because one would expect
quality time to be an important input as well. However, this result could at least
partly reflect the measurement issue we discussed earlier (see Section 4.2) and that
needs to be addressed in future research: material investments are measured through
interviewer observations, while time investments are self-reported and hence carry the
risk to be over-reported, particularly in the intervention communities where the impor-
tance of quality time has been continuously emphasized throughout the duration of the
intervention. Material investments provided by the parents require real effort through

                                             42
making or buying toys, and they are likely to correlate strongly with actual activities
carried out with the child. For example, providing a toy, whether it is home made or
bought, will likely include spending time with the child in this activity. The actual
observation of play materials may therefore better reveal the developmental activities
carried out by parents. On the other hand the materials left behind by the intervention
and captured by the intervention/treatment dummy may not reflect actual engagement
by the parent. This again emphasizes that the program works to the extent that it
shifts actual parental behavior.34


6.3     The production function for socio-emotional skills

In Table 7, we present estimates of several specifications of the production function
for socio-emotional skills. As with cognitive skills, we observe that the accumulation
process of socio-emotional skills exhibits substantial amount of persistence (regardless
of the specification considered). The point estimates, however, are lower than in the
case of cognition: about 0.50, compared to about 0.70 for cognitive skills. The inter-
vention also has no direct effect in any specification. The lagged value of cognitive
development is marginally significant in the various specifications, indicating a role for
cognitive development in generating socio-emotional skills.
      Parental background variables, such as mothers’ cognitive and socio-emotional
skills, do not seem to matter for the development of children’s socio-emotional skills.
Instead, the number of siblings has a positive and significant impact on these skills,
consistent with what we found for cognitive development. This result is robust across
specifications.
      As with cognitive skills, we experiment with a number of specifications. In none of

   34
     It may be interesting to consider whether similar impacts could be achieved by subsidizing prices
of toys. However, the treatment effect on investment is clearly very large compared to the price effects.
In a sense this reflects the fact that the intervention induce parents to change their behavior towards
their children in quite a radical way that cannot be reasonably achieved by shifting prices.

                                                   43
                   Table 7: Estimates of the production function for socio-emotional skills

                                                 (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)
                                                 OLS                                                  IV
 Instruments:                                                  Prices, conflict    Prices, conflict    Prices, conflict,    Prices, conflict,
                                                                                                          treatment            treatment
 Intercept                                      -0.008              -0.007              0.000                -0.026              -0.022
                                              [-0.08,0.063]       [-0.09,0.065]      [-0.083,0.066]        [-0.095,0.058]     [-0.092,0.051]
 Treatment                                      -0.012              -0.083              -0.102
                                              [-0.124,0.093]      [-0.318,0.158]     [-0.308,0.123]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                 0.105               0.086              0.087                 0.104              0.098
                                              [0.018,0.192]       [-0.018,0.211]     [-0.014,0.188]         [0.005,0.22]       [0.004,0.191]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)            0.51               0.494                0.5                 0.512              0.513
                                              [0.403,0.659]        [0.38,0.669]       [0.388,0.662]        [0.388,0.665]       [0.404,0.656]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)               -0.073              -0.091              -0.143               -0.035              -0.083
                                              [-0.217,0.049]      [-0.438,0.305]     [-0.361,0.085]        [-0.293,0.329]      [-0.23,0.075]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)          0.036               0.041               0.06                 0.046              0.044
                                              [-0.058,0.119]      [-0.055,0.144]     [-0.054,0.135]        [-0.047,0.134]     [-0.041,0.126]
 Log of number of children (t)                   0.098               0.128              0.131                 0.103              0.101
                                              [0.047,0.153]       [0.015,0.235]       [0.03,0.223]          [0.026,0.17]       [0.036,0.164]
 Log of material investment (t+1)                0.142              -0.079                                   -0.117
                                               [0.06,0.256]       [-0.645,0.424]                           [-0.698,0.341]
 Log of time investment (t+1)                    0.119               0.558              0.542                 0.436              0.324
                                              [-0.006,0.213]      [-0.175,1.285]      [-0.054,1.15]        [-0.096,1.022]      [0.023,0.687]

 Gap in output between treated and control:
 (a) Measured in the data                                                                 0.087
 (b) Predicted by the model estimates    0.057                       0.087              0.078                 0.121              0.108
Note: Dependent variable is the log socio-emotional skills of the child at follow up. At the top of each of the IV columns we state the
exclusion restrictions used. t and t + 1 denote that a variable was measured at baseline and endline, respectively. 95% Confidence intervals
in brackets based on 1,000 bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process - clustering at the municipality level.



         the specifications does the direct treatment effect play any role: the coefficient is always
         negative and very imprecise. When we use OLS we find that both material and quality
         time investments enhance socio-emotional development. When we turn to IV (columns
         2 to 5), none of the investment coefficients remain significant, with the exception of the
         results in column 5. There, we exclude material investments, which always enter with a
         negative coefficient when instrumented, and the treatment dummy, which never plays
         a role. In this case the results suggest that our measure of quality time can explain
         the improvement in socio-emotional skills resulting from the intervention.
              Based on the OLS and using a specification that excludes the direct impact of the
         intervention (which is negative and insignificant) all the reported coefficients in column


                                                                      44
1 remain unchanged. That specification explains 79% of the impact (it predicts a 0.069
log point improvement). The alternative specification in column 5 over predicts the
impact. We also tested whether the production function differed beyond an intercept
shift between treatment and control: the differences were completely insignificant, even
for the more precise OLS specification with a p-value of 0.38. Whether we take the
OLS results or the IV results presented in column 5, their implications are clear and
similar: the intervention acted by improving parental engagement with their children
but there is no evidence that it also had a direct impact on their development.35


6.4     Are the instruments weak? Monte Carlo evidence

Before discussing further the implications of the estimates we first report results demon-
strating that the instruments we use are strong enough to avoid biases due to a weak
instrument problem. Weak instruments can lead to estimates that are severely biased
towards OLS.36 Although the F-statistics and the rank tests reported in Table 5 sug-
gest that the instruments are sufficiently strong, these criteria have not been derived
and validated for our nonstandard framework, which includes a first stage with factor
analysis, two endogenous variables on the right hand side and a cluster structure with
intracluster spatial correlation. Instead of relying on unvalidated diagnostics, we in-
vestigate directly whether we have a weak instrument problem by performing a Monte
Carlo simulation.
      Using our parameter estimates as true values37 we simulate investments and cog-
  35
       The experiment was stratified across three regions: Central, Oriental and Cafetera. The proba-
bility of allocation to treatment was equal in each stratum and hence we do not need to control for
stratum fixed effects in the experimental analysis. However, they may be relevant in the estimation
of the investment equations and the production functions. Including the stratum fixed effects, as ex-
pected, weakens a bit the instruments, whose variation is geographic, although prices and conflict are
still significant. However, the overall conclusions do not change. We present these additional results
in Appendix Tables E.12 and E.13.
    36
       see Bound et al. (1997), Staiger and Stock (1997), Andrews and Stock (2005) amongst others.
    37
       We interpret the coefficient of time investments in the cognitive production function as 0. In
other non-reported simulations, we also allowed for a positive coefficient on time investment and none
of the conclusions were affected.

                                                 45
nition. The simulations use the actual data on the exogenous variables38 , which are
kept fixed in repeated samples. We draw errors based on a covariance matrix that
replicates the stochastic structure in the data, including the cluster structure. We use
two alternative covariance matrices (Cov A and Cov B), the latter being particularly
conservative (Cov B).39 By setting the coefficients of the first stage in the data gener-
ating process to be the same as the ones we estimate in the investment equations and
using the appropriate covariance structure for the errors we replicate data which leads
to a first stage effectively equal in strength as the actual one in the data. All details
are provided in Appendix section E.3.

                                    Table 8: Monte Carlo Simulations


                                                             Covariance A                    Covariance B
                               True Values            Material and time investment functions on simulated data
                            Material Time               Material        Time           Material        Time
 Toy price                   -0.095    -0.02             -0.089         -0.019           -0.082        -0.017
                                                       [-0.143,-0.036]   [-0.077,0.037]      [-0.154,-0.013]   [-0.101,0.073]
 Food price                   0.096        0.042           0.089             0.04                0.081             0.037
                                                        [0.024,0.154]    [-0.027,0.103]         [0,0.163]      [-0.061,0.142]
 Conflict                     -0.011       -0.096          -0.01            -0.093               -0.007           -0.085
                                                        [-0.064,0.048]   [-0.152,-0.037]      [-0.076,0.07]    [-0.172,0.001]
 Rank test                                                       0.047                          0.029
 Cragg-Donald test                                               0.059                          0.023
                               True Values                Cognitive production function on simulated data
                                                         Investment treated as:         Investment treated as:
                                                        Exogenous Endogenous          Exogenous Endogenous
 Material investment               0.463                  0.111         0.418            0.131         0.432
                                                        [0.045,0.176]    [-0.084,1.059]       [0.066,0.197]    [-0.132,1.103]
 Time investment                       0                   0.162            -0.003               0.185             0.017
                                                         [0.097,0.23]    [-0.655,0.516]       [0.118,0.253]    [-0.794,0.642]

Note: The Monte Carlo simulations employ 1000 replications. Average estimates across replications with bottom and top
2.5th percentile in square brackets. We produce a simulated observation for each household in the data using the actual
values for the observed exogenous variables, including the instruments. So the Simulated data has exactly the same structure
as the actual data. The data generating process includes the transformation from latent factors to measurements using
the estimated measurement system. Each replication implements the entire estimation procedure as described in the full
model, including the factor scoring. Investments are endogenous in the simulated data: the error structure assumed in the
simulation allows for a covariance between the investments and cognition residuals and for spatial dependence. The errors
are normal.



    We compare the assumed true values to the average estimates obtained in 1000
   38
        Prices, Conflict, Treatment status, Parental background and Child baseline characteristics.
   39
        Both covariance matrices are reported in Appendix Table E.9.

                                                          46
simulated data sets. The difference is the bias when our estimator is applied to data
of our structure and size. The results for some key parameters are shown in Table 8.
The top panel compares the average estimates of the coefficients on the instruments
for the first stage to the assumed true values used in generating the data. As expected
they are estimated with no substantial bias, the average being very close to the true
values.
      The lower panel of Table 8 shows the coefficients on the two investments in the cog-
nitive production function. Under the column “exogenous investments” we erroneously
ignore the endogeneity of investments in which case we obtain a strong downward bias
for the coefficient on material investments (0.111 and 0.131 under covariance A and
B respectively instead of 0.463) and a strong upward bias for the coefficient on time
investments as we would expect for the assumed structure of the covariance matrix of
the errors. However, when we allow for endogeneity the bias almost completely dis-
appears. For example, under the more conservative Covariance B we get 0.432 when
the true value is 0.463 for material investments; for time investments we obtain 0.017
where the true value is zero. These results are strong evidence that our estimates do
not suffer from weak instrument bias.40


6.5      Complementarities between inputs of the production function

We now go back to considering the implications of our estimates. The Cobb-Douglas
specification implied by the data means that the inputs are complementary (Cunha
et al., 2006; Heckman and Mosso, 2014). The complementarity is imposed by the
functional form. However, in earlier versions of the paper, when we estimated the
substitution elasticity, we always found it very close to 1. Given the metric we use for
the latent factors, the return to investment is higher for children with better initial
conditions. In Figure 2(a) we show the effect of a one standard deviation increase in
  40
       The full set of Monte Carlo results are presented in Appendix Table E.11.

                                                  47
material investment on cognitive skills and in Figure 2(b) the effect of a one standard
deviation increase in both material and time investments on socio-emotional skills. The
y-axes are in standard deviation units of the outcome.


                                                   Figure 2: Complementarity between investments and baseline skills
                                  (a) Production function for cognitive skills                     (b) Production function for socio-emotional skills




                                                                                                                                     3.5
                                             3.5
 Marginal product of material investment




                                                                                                    Marginal product of investment

                                                                                                                                     3.0
                                             3.0




                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                             2.5




                                                                                                                                     2.0
                                             2.0




                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                             1.5




                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                             1.0




                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                             0.5




                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                             0.0




                                                    1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                                                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10


                                                        Decile of baseline cognitive skill                                                 Decile of baseline socio−emotional skill


Notes: Figure 2.a (2.b) is based on the estimates of the production function for cognitive skills (socio-
emotional skills) reported in Column 5 (1) of Tables 6 and 7. The figures above are constructed by
evaluating the increase in cognitive (socio-emotional skills) in standard deviation units resulting from
                                                                               C               S
an increase in one standard deviation of investments at different deciles of θi,t for (a) and θi,t for (b)
and holding all remaining inputs of the production function at their mean values across the sample.


                                           The complementarity of investments with initial conditions of the child may ap-
pear contradictory to the set of studies indicating that early interventions benefit low-
achieving children the most (Bitler et al., 2014; Elango et al., 2016). However, one
needs to allow for the differences in the populations concerned. Our intervention tar-
gets the 20% poorest children in Colombia. While these children do not live in extreme
poverty, they may still be poorer and of lower ability at baseline than disadvantaged
children targeted by programs such as Head Start in the US. Our results imply that, in
this subset of the population, those with a better start benefited more. However, one


                                                                                              48
can imagine that with a population that extends more broadly in the socio-economic
distribution, diminishing returns could set in unless perhaps we design an intervention
better attuned to higher ability children.


6.6     Implications for longer term outcomes

The results have implications for what to expect in the longer term. Under the as-
sumption that the patterns of self-productivity and complementarities documented
here remain the same at least in the medium-term, the fact that the return to in-
vestments are complementary to the prior level of achievement implies that, if parents
keep investing at the higher levels induced by the intervention, the skills of the treated
children should continue to improve, subject of course to the impact of investments at
later ages. And since ability and investments are complementary, future investments
would further increase the skills of the intervention group. However, the estimates also
reveal fadeout between the baseline and the follow up: the coefficient on past cogni-
tive (socio-emotional) skills is about 0.7 (0.5) in the production function for cognitive
(socio-emotional) skill for a time lapse of about 18months. If such mean reversion
continues beyond the ages that we consider and if parents revert to the level of ac-
tivity in the control group, we can expect the impact of the intervention to become
much smaller in the long-run. In fact, as shown in Andrew et al. (2018), parents in
our intervention reduced their level of engagement to that of the control group when
interviewed again two years after the end of the intervention. And consistent with the
results here the impact of the intervention also faded.
      Partial fadeout was also observed following the Jamaica intervention (Walker et al.,
2005), although perhaps because the original effect was as large as 80% of a standard
deviation, half the original impact remained. This underscores two key lessons. First,
we should not underestimate the challenges involved in scaling up successful small scale
efficacy trials, such as the Jamaica study, and in achieving comparable initial impacts.

                                             49
Second, we need to better understand what motivates parents to continue investing
in children in the longer run and whether sustained intervention is needed to preserve
and reinforce initial gains in such environments.


7    Conclusion

Children from poor backgrounds accumulate developmental deficits from a very early
age. Causes include not only the risky environments in which they live but also the lack
of stimulation, which prevents the brain from developing its full potential. Such adverse
early experiences are at the heart of the intergenerational transmission of poverty.
    In this paper, we present results from an 18-month long early childhood intervention
carried out in Colombia that promoted suitable parenting and stimulation to children
between one and two years old at baseline. The intervention involved weekly home visits
delivered by local women who had no prior specific knowledge of child development, but
were trained as part of the intervention to deliver a structured stimulation curriculum
that progressed in difficulty. The evaluation by randomized controlled trial showed
improvements in a number of developmental dimensions, including cognition, language
and socio-emotional development, though impacts on the latter are smaller.
    We use data from the experiment to estimate a model of parental investments in
children and production functions for children’s cognition and socio-emotional skills.
The aim is to improve our understanding of the development of child skills from a
very early age and to provide an interpretation of how the intervention affected child
development. The model estimates trace some of the origins of social inequalities to
the beginning of life: children with higher initial skills obtain more investments from
their parents, and, given the child’s skills, mothers with higher levels of cognition invest
more in their children.
    The estimates of the production functions also provide evidence of several important


                                            50
features of skill development among children below the age of 4. First, we find strong
evidence of self-productivity of skills. That is, the current stock of cognitive (socio-
emotional) skills strongly affects the development of future cognitive (socio-emotional)
skills, but also imply mean reversion. Second, we find evidence of cross-productivity:
the current stock of cognitive skills fosters the development of future socio-emotional
skills, but the reverse does not seem to be the case. This result contrasts with that
reported by Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010), who find socio-emotional skills
to be important for the accumulation of future cognitive skills though at a different
age. While the presence of siblings in the household reduces parental investments, it
improves the cognitive and socio-emotional development of our subject child (who is
the youngest child in the family in most cases), most likely through interactions and
imitation, over and beyond the effect of parental investments.
   Most importantly for the question addressed in this paper, as well as more broadly,
our results show that investments help develop both cognitive and socio-emotional
skills. The program increased investments substantially and our key conclusion is that
it is this increase that led to the estimated impacts of the intervention on children’s
skills. Specifically, the intervention increased the cognitive development of the children
by 0.115 log points and socio-emotional development by 0.087 log points. Our best
estimates of the production functions imply that the increase in parental investments
induced by the program account for just over 91% of the intervention impact on cog-
nition and at least 66% of its impact on socio-emotional skills. There was no direct
impact of the intervention. It is thus the parenting component – where the home visitor
directly involves the mother in developing the stimulation activities and encourages to
continuously engage with the child based on the stimulating activities – that underlies
its success.
   Our study answers some important questions but raises many more, calling for
further experimentation and analysis. We need to understand how to better target

                                           51
and treat the most disadvantaged of society. Moreover, the analysis raises the question
of how sustainable the effects of the intervention are and how salient improvements
at this age are for longer term outcomes. This requires long-term follow ups of the
children participating in the intervention and calls for further research with systematic
measurements and interventions at various stages of life. Finally, an important lesson
from our results is that involving parents in interventions is key to promoting child
development in the short-term. Going forward, it is crucial that we better understand
how to ensure continued parental investments after the intervention has ended.




                                           52
References
Agostinelli, F. and Wiswall, M. (2016). Identification of dynamic latent factor mod-
  els: The implications of re-normalization in a model of child development. NBER
  Working Paper No. 22441.

Almlund, M., Duckworth, A., Heckman, J. J., and Kautz, T. (2011). Personality,
  psychology and economics. In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann, eds.,
  Handbook of the Economics of Education. Elsevier Science.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011). Human capital development before age five. In
  O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b. Elsevier
  Science, Amsterdam.

Anderson, T. and Rubin, H. (1956). Statistical inference in factor analysis. In Proceed-
 ings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
 volume 5, 111–150. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Andrew, A., Attanasio, O., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham-McGregor, S., Meghir, C., and
 Rubio-Codina, M. (2018). Impacts 2 years after a scalable early childhood devel-
 opment intervention to increase psychosocial stimulation in the home: A follow-up
 of a cluster randomised controlled trial in colombia. PLoS Med 15(4): e1002556.
 Https://doi. org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002556.

Andrews, D. W. K. and Stock, J. H. (2005). Inference with weak instruments.

Attanasio, O., Fernandez, C., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham-McGregor, S., Meghir, C., and
  Rubio-Codina, M. (2014). Using the infrastucture of a Conditional Cash Transfer
  programme to deliver a scalable integrated early child development programme in
  Colombia: A cluster randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal 349:g5785.

Attanasio, O., Fitzsimons, E., Gomez, A., Gutiez, M.-I., Meghir, C., and Mesnard, A.
  (2010). Children’s schooling and work in the presence of a conditional cash transfer
  program in rural colombia. Economic Development and Cultural Change 181–210.

Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., and Nix, E. (2017). Investments in children and the devel-
  opment of cognition and health in india. NBER Working Paper No. 21740.

Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., and Santiago, A. (2012). Education choices in Mexico: Using
  a structural model and a randomized experiment to evaluate Progresa. Review of
  Economic Studies 79(1):37–66.

Bates, J., Freeland, C., and Lounsbury, M. (1979). Measurement of infant difficultness.
  Child Development 50:794–803.

Bayley, N. (2006). Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development. Harcourt Assess-
  ment, San Antonio, TX, 3rd edition.


                                          53
Betancourt, T. S. (2015). Intergenerational effects of war. JAMA Psychiatry 72(3):199–
  200.
Bitler, M., Hoynes, H., and Domina, T. (2014). Experimental evidence on distributional
  impacts of head start. NBER Working Paper 20434.
Black, M. M., Walker, S. P., Fernald, L. C. H., Andersen, C. T., DiGirolamo, A. M.,
  Lu, C., McCoy, D. C., Fink, G., Shawar, Y. R., Shiffman, P. J., Devercelli, A. E.,
  Wodon, Q. T., Vargas-Bar., and Grantham-McGregor, S. (2016). Early childhood
  development coming of age: science through the life course. Lancet. 6736 1–14.
Blundell, R., Duncan, A., and Meghir, C. (1998). Estimating labor supply responses
  using tax reforms. Econometrica 66(4):827–761.
Bound, J., Jaeger, D. A., and Baker, R. (1997). Problems with instrumental vari-
  ables estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous
  explanatory variable is weak. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90:443–
  450.
Caldwell, B. and Bradley, R. (2001). HOME Inventory and Administration Manual.
  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AK, third edition edition.
Campbell, F., Conti, G., Heckman, J. J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Pungello, E., and Pan,
  Y. (2014). Early childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science
  343:1478 – 1485. DOI: 10.1126/science.1248429.
Campbell, F. A. and Ramey, C. T. (1994). Effects of early intervention on intellectual
  and academic achievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income families.
  Child Development 65:684 – 698. Doi:10.2307/1131410 Medline.
Carneiro, P., Hansen, K., and Heckman, J. (2003). Estimating distribution of counter-
  factuals with an application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the effect
  of uncertainty on schooling choice. International Economic Review 44(2):361–422.
Cattell, R. (1966). The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral
  Research 1:629–637.
Creech, S. K. and Misca, G. (2017). Parenting with ptsd: A review of research on
  the influence of ptsd on parent-child functioning in military and veteran families.
  Frontiers in Psychology 8. Doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01101.
Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the tech-
 nology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources
 43(4):738–782.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J., Lochner, L., and Masterov, D. (2006). Interpreting the evi-
 dence on life cycle skill formation. In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann,
 eds., Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1. Elsevier Science, Amster-
 dam.

                                          54
Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Schennach, S. (2010). Estimating the technology of
 cognitive and non-cognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78(3):883–931.

DelBoca, D., Flinn, C., and Wiswall, M. (2014). Household choices and child develop-
  ment. Review of Economic Studies 81:137–185.

Duflo, E., Hanna, R., and Ryan, S. P. (2012). Incentives work: Getting teachers to
 come to school. American Economic Review 102(4):1241–78.

Dunn, L., Padilla, E., Lugo, D., and Dunn, L. (1986). Manual del Examinador para el
 Test de Vocabulario en Imenes Peabody (Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test), Adaptaci
 Hispanoamericana (Hispanic-American Adaption). Pearson Assessments, Minneapo-
 lis, MS.

Elango, S., Garcı́a, J., Heckman, J., and Hojman, A. (2016). Early childhood education.
  volume Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, volume
  2. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Fernald, L., Kariger, P., Engle, P., and Raikes, A. (2009). Examining child development
  in low-income countries: A toolkit for the assessment of children in the first five years
  of life. The World Bank, Washington DC.

Frongillo, E., Sywulka, S., and Kariger, P. (2003). UNICEF psychosocial care indicators
  project. Final report to UNICEF. Mimeo, Cornell University.

Gelber, A. and Isen, A. (2010). Children’s schooling and parents’ behavior: Evidence
 from the head start impact study. Journal of Public Economics 101:25 ? 38.

Gertler, P., Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeerch, C., Walker, S., Chang,
 S., and Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood
 stimulation intervention in Jamaica. Science 344:998–1001.

Gorsuch, R. (1983). Factor Analysis. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.

Gorsuch, R. (2003). Factor analysis. In Handbook of psychology: Research methods in
 psychology, volume 2, 143–164. John Wiely & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.

Grantham-McGregor, S., Cheung, Y., Cueto, S., Glewwe, P., Richter, L., and Strupp,
  B. (2007). Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in developing
  countries. The Lancet 369(9555):60–70.

Grantham-McGregor, S., Powell, C., Walker, S., and Himes, J. (1991). Nutritional sup-
  plementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development of stunted children:
  the Jamaican study. Lancet 338(758):1–5.

Hamadani, J., Tofail, F., Hilaly, A., Huda, S., Engel, P., and Grantham-McGregor, S.
  (2010). Use of Family Care Indicators and their relationship with child development
  in bangladesh. Journal of Health Population and Nutrition 28(1):23–33.

                                            55
Heckman, J., Moon, S., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P., and Yavitz, A. (2010). Analyzing social
  experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the HighScope
  Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Quantitative Economics 1:1–46.

Heckman, J. and Mosso, S. (2014). The economics of human development and social
  mobility. Annual Reviews of Economics 6:689–733.

Heckman, J., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013). Understanding the mechanisms
  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 103:2052–2086.

Helmers, C. and Patnam, M. (2011). The formation and evolution of childhood skill
  acquisition: Evidence from India. Journal of Development Economics 95(2):252–266.

Horn, J. (1965). A rationale and a test for the number of factors in factor analysis.
  Psychometrika 30:179–185.

Hu, Y. and Schennach, S. (2008). Instrumental variable treatment of nonclassical
 measurement error models. Econometrica .

Jackson-Maldonado, D. (2011). Spanish cdi-iii development and preliminary results.
  Presentation at the International Congress for the Study of Child Language, Mon-
  treal.

Jackson-Maldonado, D. and Conboy, B. (2011). Preliminary norms and validity for the
  Spanish CDI-III. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) Annual
  Conference. San Diego, CA.

Jackson-Maldonado, D., Marchman, V., and Fernald, L. (2012). Short form versions of
  the Spanish MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories. In Applied
  Psycholinguistics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D., Marchman, V., Newton, T., Fenson, L., and Conboy,
  B. (2003). MacArthur Inventarios del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas:
  User’s guide and technical manual. Brookes, Baltimore, MD.

Kaiser, H. (1960). The application of electronic computers to factor analysis. Educa-
 tional and Psychological Measurement 20:141–151.

Knudsen, E. (2004). Sensitive periods in the development of the brain and behavior.
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 16(1):1412–1425.

Knudsen, E., Heckman, J., Cameron, J., and Shonkoff, J. (2006). Economic, neuro-
 biological and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Science 103(27):10155–10162.

Lancet (2016). Early child development in developing countries 2016 .


                                          56
Lu, C., Black, M. M., and Richter, L. M. (2016). Risk of poor development in young
  children in low-income and middle-income countries: an estimation and analysis at
  the global, regional, and country level. Lancet Global Health 4 e916?e922.

Nielsen, E. R. (2015).     Achievement gap estimates and deviations from car-
  dinal com- parability.      Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-
  040. Washington:      Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
  http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.040.

Putnam, S. P., Gartstein, M., and Rothbart, M. K. (2006). Measurement of fine-grained
  aspects of toddler temperament: The Early Childhood Behavior questionnaire. In-
  fant Behavior and Development 29(3):386–401.

Putnam, S. P., Jacobs, J., Garstein, M., and Rothbart, M. (2010). Development and
  assessment of short and very short forms of the Early Childhood Behavior Question-
  naire. International Conference on Infant Studies. Baltimore, MD.

Radloff, L. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the
  general population. Applied Psychological Measurement 1(3):385–401.

Raven, J. (1981). Manual for Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales.
  In Research Supplement No.1: The 1979 British Standardisation of the Standard
  Progressive Matrices and Mill Hill Vocabulary Scales, Together With Comparative
  Data From Earlier Studies in the UK, US, Canada, Germany and Ireland. Harcourt
  Assessment, San Antonio, TX.

Robin, J. and Smith, R. (2000). Tests of rank. Econometric Theory 16:151–175.

Romano, J. P. and Wolf, M. (2005). Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data
  snooping. Econometrica 73:1237 – 1282.

Rothenberg, T. J. (1971). Identification in parametric models. Econometrica 39(3):577–
  591.

Rubio-Codina, M., Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., Varela, N., and Grantham-McGregor, S.
 (2015). The socioeconomic gradient of child development: Cross-sectional evidence
 from children 6-42 months in bogota. Journal of Human Resources 50(2):464–483.

Schennach, S. (2004). Estimation of nonlinear models with measurement error. Econo-
  metrica 72:33–75.

Schennach, S. (2007). Instrumental variable estimation of nonlinear errors-in-variables
  models. Econometrica 75:201–239.

Staiger, D. and Stock, J. H. (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak in-
  struments. Econometrica 65:557–586.



                                          57
Todd, P. and Wolpin, K. (2006). Using experimental data to validate a dynamic
  behavioral model of child schooling and fertility: Assessing the impact of a school
  subsidy program in Mexico. American Economic Review 96(5):1384–1417.

Velicer, W. (1976). Determining the number of components from the matrix of partial
  correlations. Psychometrika 41:32l–327.

Walker, S., Chang, S., C.Powell, E.Simonoff, and Grantham-McGregor, S. (2006).
 Effects of psychosocial stimulation and dietary supplementation in early childhood
 on psychosocial functioning in late adolescence: follow-up of randomized controlled
 trial. British Medical Journal 333(7566):472.

Walker, S. P., Chang, S. M., Powell, C. A., and Grantham-McGregor, S. M. (2005).
 Effects of early childhood psychosocial stimulation and nutritional supplementation
 on cognition and education in growth-stunted Jamaican children: prospective cohort
 study. The Lancet 366:1804 – 1807.

Walker, S. P., Wachs, T. D., Grantham-McGregor, S. M., Black, M., Nelson, C., and
 Huffman, S. (2011). Inequality in early childhood: risk and protective factors for
 early child development. Lancet 378(1325-38).




                                         58
     Estimating the Production Function for Human Capital:
     Results from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Colombia


                 Orazio Attanasio, Sarah Cattan, Emla Fitzsimons,
                     Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-Codina∗


                                                May 12, 2019


                                           WEB APPENDIX




      ∗
        Attanasio: University College London and Institute for Fiscal Studies (o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk). Cattan: Insti-
tute for Fiscal Studies (sarah c@ifs.org.uk). Fitzsimons: UCL Institute of Education and Institute for Fiscal Studies
(e.fitzsimons@ucl.ac.uk). Meghir: Yale University, NBER, IZA and Institute for Fiscal Studies (c.meghir@yale.edu).
Rubio-Codina: Inter-American Development Bank and Institute for Fiscal Studies (martarubio@iadb.org).

Acknowledgements: We are grateful to three anonymous referees and the editor for detailed comments. We also
thank participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum and Montreal CIREQ Applied
Microeconomics on Fertility and Child Development and seminars at Stanford University, University of Chicago, Ox-
ford University, Cornell University, Bristol University and the Institute for Fiscal Studies for their comments. We are
grateful to the Economic and Social Research Council (Grant ES/G015953/1), the Inter-American Development Bank,
the International Growth Centre, and the World Bank for funding the intervention and data collection. Some of this re-
search was financed by the European Research Council’s Advanced Grant 249612 and by the Grand Challenges Canada
Prime Award 0072-03 (sub-award reference number 560450). Sarah Cattan gratefully acknowledges financial assistance
from the British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship pf140104, as well as from the European Research Council’s Grant
Agreement No. 240910. We thank the NIH for funding under grant R01 HD072120 as well as the Cowles foundation
and the ISPS at Yale for financial assistance. All errors are the responsibility of the authors.
A     The Intervention

This appendix provides a detailed description of the intervention, its implementation
and roll-out. The material in this section draws heavily on Attanasio et al. (2014).


A.1     Description of the Intervention

The integrated early child development intervention was designed so that it could be
delivered by local people, readily identifiable through administrative infrastructures
of social welfare systems (the conditional cash transfer program Familias en Accion
(FeA) in our case). The intervention included psychosocial stimulation on its own,
micronutrient supplementation on its own, and both combined. Each of these arms
had 24 clusters (municipalities).


A.1.1    Psychosocial Stimulation

The psychosocial stimulation component was inspired by and based on the Jamaican
home visiting model Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991), the overarching aim of which is
to facilitate developmentally appropriate learning activities between mothers (primary
caregivers) and their children through demonstration of play activities centred around
daily routines. Play activities draw on resources in the home, low cost home-made
toys and the intervention toy kit. The toy kit included picture books, naming plates,
conversation scenes, puzzles, lotteries, and blocks. Play activities followed steps aimed
towards children’s gradual mastery of a learning objective: (1) child observes play ac-
tivity (modeling), (2) mother and child do the activity together, (3) child attempts the
play activity on his/her own, (4) mother prompts naming and verbalisation of objects
and actions linked to the play activity, (5) the developmental level of play activity is
adjusted by increasing or decreasing the challenge based on the child’s performance
(scaffolding). Throughout the play activities, mothers are encouraged to provide chil-

                                           1
dren with contingent positive reinforcement for progress toward the learning goals
(praise) and to follow the child’s interest.
   Materials for the stimulation component were adapted from the Jamaican interven-
tion guide to the local cultural context and to the average educational level of home
visitors and program beneficiaries. Such adaptations included (1) inclusion of local
songs and rhymes, (2) modification of the home-made toys instruction manual to use
local recyclable materials, (3) incorporation into the intervention toy kit of culturally
relevant pictures, scenes and objects, (4) re-organization of the psychosocial stimula-
tion guide in weekly instruction cards for specific age groups, and (5) ordering of play
materials, via an index, by developmental stage to facilitate the scaffolding of activities.
   Home visits lasted approximately one hour. Home visits took place with the child’s
biological mother or primary caregiver. Other adults in the household, where present,
were also encouraged to participate in the home visit. In advance of the visit, the home
visitor selected the weekly instruction card from the psychosocial stimulation guide
according to the appropriate developmental level of the target child, and prepared the
toys and materials for the visit. The home visit had three parts. At the beginning,
the home visitor did an informal assessment of the child’s progress in the sequence
of play activities, by asking about the play activities the mother and child practiced
during the previous week and identifying where challenges arose (or on the contrary,
where activities were overly simplistic). In the second and main part of the visit,
new play activities were shown and practised. At the end, the mother was prompted
to summarize the play activities and agree a plan on how to practice them over the
following week.


A.1.2    Micronutrient Supplementation

The micronutrient supplementation component consisted of micronutrient supplemen-
tation in the form of sprinkles (encapsulated micronutrients). Each single-dose sachet

                                               2
contains 12.5 mg iron, 5 mg zinc, vitamin A 300 mg RE, 160mg g folic acid and 30 mg
vitamin C and each displayed a pictorial representation of use. In addition to the fort-
nightly provision of sprinkles, participating families received a booklet with detailed
instructions for use and storage and daily record forms to track use. Families were
provided with enough sachets for all children below six years of age to prevent sharing
with siblings.


A.2    Implementation

We obtained institutional cooperation from the National Director of FeA, the coordina-
tor of the Strategic Planning and Monitoring Unit of FeA, and FeA administrative staff
at the municipality level. From the latter, we obtained rosters of female community
representatives (Madres Lideres) and selected three female community representatives
in each of the 96 target municipalities.
   In municipalities assigned to receive stimulation, 63% of selected female community
leaders took on the role of home visitor. The remainder declined due to other work
commitments or not meeting the minimum reading comprehension criteria (established
using a short reading comprehension test designed by the study data collection team).
Replacements were found through referral; women who were referred were screened
for reading comprehension skills, motivation and availability. If they met established
criteria, they were offered the opportunity to become home visitors.
   The intervention staff included a local field coordinator, six mentors, and a team
of home visitors. The field coordinator oversaw the roll out of the intervention and
monitored the mentors from the central office (in Bogota) and also on site. Six men-
tors, with an undergraduate degree in psychology/social work or comparable fieldwork
experience, were recruited to train and supervise home visitors throughout the study.
They had six weeks’ pre-service training focused on the home visiting curriculum and
protocols, training and supervision skills, creating home-made toys, and supervised

                                           3
practice. Four short (one- to four-day) refresher and feedback sessions took place in
Bogota during the course of the intervention. These also provided the mentors the
opportunity to exchange experiences, challenges and solutions. In addition, the men-
tors were in regular email/phone communication with the field coordinator, and email
communication with a member of the research team, as needed.
   Each mentor trained and supervised 24 home visitors, covering eight municipali-
ties. The home visitors’ pre-service training on the stimulation component lasted two
weeks, with an additional week of in-service training after the team of mentors had
completed the first round of itinerant supervision (one to two months after the inter-
vention roll-out). The home visitor training sessions included: (1) basic concepts of
child development and early learning; (2) the aims of the stimulation intervention and
the role of the home visitor in this; (3) an introduction to play activities, the steps
to demonstrate and scaffold each activity and guidelines to assess the progress of the
child towards the learning goals; (4) guidelines to help manage difficult children; (5) a
toy making workshop; (6) guidelines for record keeping. The training of home visitors
emphasized the importance of a good working relationship with the beneficiary mother,
positive reinforcement, and listening skills.
   In addition, home visitors participated in a 5-hour training session on the micronu-
trient component of the intervention before rollout. The training sessions included a
description of the micronutrient supplement, storage requirements, instructions for use,
potential side effects, toxicity risks, and safety protocols in case of side effects.


A.3    Rollout and Monitoring

The intervention was rolled out over four months from February through May 2010, and
phased out 18 months later, from September through December 2011. Training and
supervision was rolled out by geographical location, evenly across treatment groups,
following baseline data collection. Once the intervention was up and running, mentors

                                             4
visited intervention communities once every 7 to 10 weeks to monitor implementation,
provide support, and reinforce home visitors’ motivation. At this time, mentors also
distributed one-page bulletins to home visitors, with reminders of best practices in
home visiting. In addition, mentors sent short text (SMS) messages to home visitors
every month to reinforce key aspects the stimulation protocol. Home visitors were
encouraged to call mentors for advice where necessary (calling cards were provided by
the study team).
   To monitor the psychosocial stimulation component, home visitors filled in a form at
the end of each visit with basic information on the visit (e.g. date, activities performed,
who present), as well as a short assessment of children’s performance and engagement
with the activities. Home visitors were paid $100,000 Colombian pesos (COP) (19.4%
of legal monthly minimum wage for 2010) per month.
   To monitor the micronutrient component, the home visitor collected the empty sa-
chets and intake charts (monitoring forms) from the household every two weeks. During
these visits, mentors checked that tracking charts were filled in correctly, reminded the
mother about the protocols of use, how to react if side effects arose and addressed
any other queries and concerns. The home visitor was paid $25,000 Colombian pesos
(COP) per month for these activities.


A.4    Balance

Table A.1 shows the characteristics of children who remained in the study at follow-
up, their mothers, and their households in the group who received any stimulation
(alone or in combination with the nutritional supplementation) and in the group who
received none (including those who received the nutritional supplementation alone).
No differences were apparent between the groups, with the exception of the fact that
”no stimulation group” had a higher proportion of first borns than the group who
received some stimulation.

                                            5
                                                                                                                          6

Table A.1: Baseline characteristics of participant children, their mothers and their households by treatment
status


                                                       Control           Treatment                   Difference
                                                  Mean     Std. Dev   Mean     Std. Dev     Mean      pval    RW pval
 Children:
 Boy                                               0.510   (0.500)     0.481   (0.500)       0.029   0.268        0.992
 Age (months)                                      18.02               18.04                -0.019   0.933        0.992
 Premature                                         0.098               0.074                 0.024   0.287        0.992
 Mean birth weight (g)                            3236.1   (526.4)    3246.0   (499.8)      -9.924   0.762        0.992
 Stunted                                           0.141               0.134                 0.007   0.729        0.992
 First born                                        0.420               0.367                 0.053   0.078        0.888
 Bayley: cognitive                                -0.005   (1.003)    -0.034   (1.049)       0.029   0.788        0.908
 Bayley: receptive language                       -0.009   (0.999)    -0.006   (0.934)      -0.003   0.976        0.992
 Bayley: expressive language                      -0.020   (0.992)    0.004    (1.018)      -0.024   0.812        0.992
 Bayley: fine motor                               -0.006   (1.003)    -0.066   (1.094)       0.060   0.639        0.992
 Mac Arthur: words the child can say              -0.018   (0.933)    0.003    (0.974)      -0.021   0.730        0.992
 ICQ: difficult (-)                               -0.002   (1.001)     0.062   (1.000)      -0.064   0.359        0.992
 ICQ: unsociable (-)                               0.001   (0.997)    -0.035   (1.002)       0.037   0.534        0.992
 ICQ: unadaptable (-)                              0.001   (0.998)    -0.035   (1.036)       0.037   0.685        0.992
 ICQ: unstoppable (-)                              0.006   (0.996)     0.092   (1.026)      -0.087   0.335        0.992

 Mother:
 Education (years)                                 7.575   (3.534)     7.351   (3.423)       0.224   0.343        0.992
 Married                                           0.690              0.673                  0.017   0.512        0.992
 CESD: Bothered by things? (-)                     0.004   (0.988)    0.092    (0.943)      -0.089   0.020        0.490
 CESD: Trouble keeping mind on doing? (-)         -0.008   (0.999)    -0.070   (1.076)       0.062   0.018        0.438
 CESD: Feel depressed? (-)                         0.005   (0.993)     0.108   (0.976)      -0.103   0.001        0.056
 CESD: Everything was an effort? (-)              0.001    (1.001)    0.120    (0.908)      -0.119   0.002        0.092
 CESD: Feel fearful? (-)                           0.005   (0.997)    -0.077   (1.058)       0.082   0.097        0.936
 CESD: Was sleep restless? (-)                    -0.003   (1.004)    0.070    (0.974)      -0.073   0.012        0.343
 CESD: Feel happy?                                -0.005   (1.005)     0.030   (0.996)      -0.035   0.015        0.382
 CESD: Feel lonely? (-)                            0.004   (0.999)     0.037   (0.974)      -0.033   0.006        0.223
 CESD: Feel you couldn’t get going? (-)            0.005   (0.999)     0.134   (1.037)      -0.130   0.038        0.673

 Household:
 No of rooms/household size                        0.594   (0.281)    0.591    (0.310)       0.003   0.875        0.992
 Wealth index                                     -0.010   (0.993)    0.016    (1.006)      -0.027   0.708        0.992
 Home ownership                                    0.370              0.364                 0.006    0.829        0.992
 FCI: Types of play materials                     3.708    (1.688)    3.644    (1.697)      0.064    0.600        0.992
 FCI: Types of play activities over past 3 days    3.256   (1.609)    3.223    (1.513)       0.033   0.777        0.992
 FCI: No of adult books                            1.071   (1.044)    1.047    (1.059)       0.023   0.775        0.992
 FCI: No of magazines and newspapers               0.984   (1.140)    0.960    (1.160)       0.025   0.772        0.992
 Log village-level toy prices                      8.072   (0.189)    8.000    (0.221)      0.074    0.081        0.884
 Log village-level food prices                     8.075   (0.147)    8.101    (0.135)      -0.026   0.372        0.992
 Maternal childhood exposure to conflict            .056   (0.081)    0.070    (0.094)      -0.013   0.469        0.992
   Note: “pval” refer to single hypothesis testing p-values and “RW pval” refer to stepdown p-values accounting for
   multiple hypotheses testing as in Romano and Wolf (2005).
B     Measures of skills and investments

In this section, we provide detailed information on each of the instruments we used to
measure children’s cognitive and socio-emotional skills, mother’s cognitive and socio-
emotional skills, and parental investments. In subsection B.4, we describe the non-
parametric procedure we followed to standardize the measures for age.


B.1     Measures on the target child

B.1.1    Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 3rd edition [Bay-
         ley]

We administered the cognitive, receptive language, expressive language, fine motor
and gross motor scales of the 3rd edition of the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler
Development (Bayley-III) developed by Bayley (2006) both at baseline and follow-up,
following standard procedures. The scales assess children from birth up to 42 months
by direct observation of performance on a series of items and are considered by many
the “gold standard” for the assessment of children of these ages Fernald et al. (2009).
Bayley-III subscales were translated into Spanish, back translated to English to ensure
accuracy, and piloted by testers. Children were assessed in local community centers
with their mothers present. Testers held degrees in psychology and had a six-week
training, including practice sessions with children of the target age groups. Inter-rater
reliability (intra-class correlation) was above 0.9 on each subscale. Furthermore, 5% of
the measurements were supervised by the trainer (reliabilities above 0.9) and corrective
feedback was given when appropriate.




                                           7
B.1.2   MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories I, II and
        III [MacArthur]

We assessed language comprehension and production using the Spanish short-form
versions of the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories I, II and III
(SFI, SFII, SFIII). This is a parent report inventory and was collected in the house
as part of the household survey. At baseline, we administered Spanish short forms of
Inventories I and II to children of 12-18 and 19-24 months of age, respectively, which
have been validated in Mexico (Jackson-Maldonado et al. (2012), Jackson-Maldonado
et al. (2003)). At follow-up, we administered the Spanish short form of Inventory
III to children 30-42 months. This form was under validation at the time of data
collection (Jackson-Maldonado and Conboy (2011), Jackson-Maldonado (2011)). We
collaborated with the developer of the test in Spanish in the identification of suitable
words in Colombian Spanish, prior and during piloting activities. We administered the
vocabulary checklist (words the child “understands” and words the child can say) for
all Short Forms (SFs) and sentence structure sections (for SFIII only), and counted
the number of words the child could say (as reported by the mother/caregiver) and
number of more complex sentence structures the child uses.


B.1.3   Infant Characteristics Questionnaire [ICQ]

The Infant Characteristics Questionnaire Bates et al. (1979) assesses the construct of
“difficult” temperament by maternal (caregiver) report. As such it measures parents’
perceptions of the infant, not necessarily the infant’s behavior as it might be objec-
tively recorded. Both at baseline and follow-up, we used those items (17 in total) in
questionnaires for 13-months and 24-months old children that related to the following
constructs: difficult, unadaptable, unstoppable, and unsociable, as part of the house-
hold questionnaire. We made minor adjustments to the Spanish translations of the


                                           8
forms in order to maximize comprehension and and cultural adequacy. For simplicity,
we converted the 7-point rating items into 5-point ratings. We discussed these modifi-
cations with the author over email correspondence and piloted them before use in the
field.


B.1.4     Early Children’s Behavior Questionnaire [ECBQ]

At follow up, we complemented the assessment of temperament with measures of atten-
tion and inhibitory control by maternal report using the attentional focusing (sustained
duration of orienting on an object of attention; resisting distraction), attentional shift-
ing (the ability to transfer attentional focus from one activity/task to another) and
inhibitory control (the capacity to stop, moderate, or refrain from a behavior under
instruction) sub-scales in the short versions of the Spanish translation of the Early
Children’s Behavior Questionnaire (Putnam et al. (2006), Putnam et al. (2010)). The
ECBQ is designed to measure temperament in children aged 3-7 years. As before, for
simplicity, we converted the 7-point rating scale into a 5-point rating scale. Minor lan-
guage modifications to wording and sentence structure, with the aim to better reflect
Colombian Spanish, were extensively piloted in the field.


B.2      Measures on the mother

B.2.1     Maternal vocabulary

We assessed maternal receptive vocabulary in the first follow-up survey. For this,
we used a selection of 50 words from the Spanish version of the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT), the Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes de Peabody (TVIP)
Dunn et al. (1986). The reason why we used a selection of the words is because the
Spanish version of the test is developed for ages 2.5-18 years. Hence, we could not
use the test as designed (using established start and stopping rules) on our sample


                                            9
of mothers. Instead, we selected those words exhibiting a reasonable level of varying
difficulty, after extensive piloting, and administered them all in the order in which they
appear in the test. For each word, the subject points at the one picture (out of four)
that best relates to the word (noun, action, abstract concept, adjective) that the tester
calls out. The test was administered in the home by the interviewer at the end of the
household interview


B.2.2    Standard Progressive Matrices [RPM]

We used Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices system Raven (1981) to measure moth-
ers’ reasoning ability or what is often referred to as general intelligence in the second
follow-up. This is a non-verbal test typically made of multiple choice items listed in
order of difficulty, requiring ever greater capacity to encode and analyze the informa-
tion, and which are organized in sets. In each test item, the subject is asked to identify
the missing element that completes a pattern. Test items are presented in black ink
on a white background. Out of the 5 sets of 12 matrices, we administered the middle
3 – hence, those with an intermediate level of difficulty. This decision was made after
careful piloting.
   We collected RPM at second follow up only under the presumption that mater-
nal reasoning ability should not be affected by the intervention, and because of the
monetary and time restrictions we faced in previous rounds.


B.2.3    Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression scale (CES-D)

We assessed maternal depressive symptoms by direct interview with the mother using
the 10-item Spanish version of the CES-D, the CESD-10, developed by Radloff (1977).
We used the same measure both at baseline and follow up.




                                           10
B.3     Measures of parental investments

The quality of the home environment (or level of stimulation in the home) was measured
using items in the Family Care Indicators [FCI] developed by UNICEF Frongillo et al.
(2003). The FCI has been validated against the Home Observations for Measurement
of the Home Environment (HOME) Caldwell and Bradley (2001), against which it was
validated in Bangladesh Hamadani et al. (2010).
   Both at baseline and follow up, we collected by direct observation during the house-
hold survey the following information: the number of books for adults, the number of
newspapers and magazines, and the number of varieties of play materials in the home
that the child often played with. We collected by maternal (caregiver) report the num-
ber of play activities the child engaged in with an adult over the three days before the
interview. Play materials include toys that make/play music; toys/objects meant for
stacking, constructing or building; things for drawing, writing, colouring, and painting;
toys for moving around; toys to play pretend games; picture and drawing books for
children; and toys for learning shapes and colours. Play activities include reading or
looking at picture books; telling stories to child; singing songs with child; playing with
child with her toys; spending time with child scribbling, drawing, or colouring; and
spending time with child naming things or counting; and taking child out for a leisure
walk.


B.4     Age standardization of the measures

Total raw scores are increasing in age. Since we are interested in within sample com-
parisons, we internally standardize scores to remove the effect of age (child’s age for the
childs’ measures and mother’s age for the mothers’ measures). We compute internal
z-scores using the empirical age-conditional means and standard deviations estimated
using non-parametric regression methods. In particular, for each measure to stan-


                                            11
dardize, we compute the age-conditional mean using the fitted values of the following
regression, estimated by kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing methods:


                                  Yi = f (Xi ) + i                                  (7)


where Yi is the raw score of individual i in a given scale and Xi is the age of the
individual (in months for the child, in years for the mother). Next, we regress the
square of the residuals in equation (7) on age of the child as shown in the following
kernel-weighted local polynomial regression:


                              (Yi − fˆi )2 = g(Xi ) + υi                             (8)


   Our estimate of the age-conditional standard deviation is the square root of the
fitted values in equation (8). Finally, we compute the internally age-adjusted z-score,
ZYi , by subtracting from the raw score the within sample age-conditional mean es-
timated in (7) and dividing by the within sample age-conditional standard deviation
obtained from (8). More specifically:

                                          (Yi − fˆi )
                                  ZYi =     √                                        (9)
                                              ĝi

   This procedure, less sensitive to outliers and small sample sizes within age category,
resulted in smoothly distributed internally standardized scores, with mean zero across
the age range.


B.5   Instruments

Toy prices and food prices were collected as part of the community questionnaire ad-
ministered by surveyors to a community leader. These therefore only vary at the village
level but not at the individual level within villages. Toy prices were only collected in

                                            12
the second follow-up survey, i.e. 2 years after the end of the intervention, while food
prices were collected in every round of data collection. For the analysis presented in
this paper, we use food prices collected in the first follow-up, i.e. just after the interven-
tion ended. The questionnaire asks price information about around 40 different items
related to children, including books, toys, clothing and health products. We construct
the measure of toy prices we use as an instrument in the paper as an average of the
log price of all different types of books and toys listed in the questionnaire. For food
prices, the questionnaire asks the price about 40 different types of food at the market
and at the supermarket. To construct our measure of food prices that we use as an
instrument in the paper, we first average the market and supermarket prices of each
item and then average these averages across all 40 items. If items are only sold at the
market or at the supermarket, we only use the available price.
   Our measure of maternal childhood exposure to conflict is constructed using data
from the ”Panel Municipal del CEDE” created by the Centre of Studies on Economic
Development at the University de Los Andes, Colombia. The dataset includes year
and municipality level information on general characteristics of the municipality (pop-
ulation, altitude, geographical location...), conflict and violence, public investment,
and the education and agricultural sectors. The earliest year of data available on
municipality-level exposure to conflict and violence is 1993. Our instrument is the
number of attacks against the civil population in 1993 in the family’s municipality by
1000 individuals living in the municipality that year. Mothers in our sample were on
average 10 years old in 1993.




                                             13
C     Measurement system

This appendix provides further details about the measurement system relating observed
measures of child’s skills, parental investments and maternal skills to the latent factors
measuring these constructs. We start by providing details of the exploratory factor
analysis (EFA) we performed to inform the specification of the measurement system
described in Table 1 of the paper. We then present estimates of the measurement
system, including estimates of the factor loadings, of the variance of measurement
error and of the distribution of latent factors.


C.1   Exploratory factor analysis

Following the psychometric literature Gorsuch (1983, 2003), we aim to build a mea-
surement system with dedicated measures (measures that only proxy one latent factor)
as it makes interpretation of the latent factors easiest and most transparent. EFA con-
sists of two main steps. First, we select the number of latent factors that should be
extracted from all the measures we have on each of the aspect we want to measure
(e.g. child’s development at baseline, child’s development at follow-up, etc.). Second,
we allocate measures to factors, estimate factor loadings and discard measurements
that load on multiple factors in order to achieve a dedicated measurement system.


C.2   Selecting the number of latent factors

The first step aims to determine how many latent factors should be extracted from
each set of measures we have available to measure the child’s development at baseline,
the child’s development at follow-up, parental investment at follow-up, the mother’s
skills, and the household’s wealth at baseline. A variety of methods are available to
select the number of factors, and here we implement four of the most popular methods
developed in the literature. Below, we succinctly describe each one of them, before

                                            14
commenting on the number of factors they suggest to extract.


C.2.1    Description of methods

Kaiser’s eigenvalue rule The Kaiser’s criterion consists in retaining only factors
with eigenvalues greater than 1 Kaiser (1960). The intuition behind this rule is that
unless a factor extracts at least as much variance as the equivalent of one original
variable, it should be dropped.


Cattell’s scree plot The scree test was proposed by Cattell (1966) and is based on
the analyst’s inspection of a plot of the eigenvalues associated with the data. Cattell’s
rule is such that the number of factors should be equal to the number of eigenvalues
before which the smooth decrease of eigenvalues appears to level off to the right of the
plot.


Velicer’s minimum average partial (MAP) correlation rule Velicer (1976)’s
minimum average partial (MAP) involves a complete factor analysis followed by the
examination of a series of matrices of partial correlations. In the first step, the first
factor is partialed out of the correlations between the variables of interest, and the av-
erage squared coefficient in the off-diagonals of the resulting partial correlation matrix
is computed. In the second step, the first two factors are partialed out of the origi-
nal correlation matrix and the average squared partial correlation is again computed.
These computations are conducted for k − 1, where k is the number of measurements.
The number of components is determined by the step number in the analyses that
resulted in the lowest average squared partial correlation. Intuitively, components are
retained as long as the variance in the correlation matrix represents systematic variance.
Components are no longer retained when there is proportionately more unsystematic
variance than systematic variance.


                                           15
Horn’s parallel analysis Horn’s parallel analysis, described in Horn (1965), involves
extracting eigenvalues from random data sets that parallel the actual data set with
regard to the number of observations and variables. For example, if the original data
set consists of n observations for each one of m variables, then a series of random data
matrices of size n × m are generated, and eigenvalues are computed for the correlation
matrices for the original data and for each of the random data sets. The eigenvalues
derived from the actual data are then compared to the eigenvalues derived from the
random data. Factors are retained as long as the i-th eigenvalue from the actual data
is greater than the i-th eigenvalue from the random data.


C.2.2   Results

Appendix Table C.1 reports how many factors each method suggests we should extract
from all the measures we have available to measure child’s development at follow-up
and at baseline, parental investments, mother’s skills and household’s wealth. Most
methods indicate that two factors should be extracted from the measures of child’s
development at follow-up. Between 1 and 3 factors should be extracted from the
measures of child’s development at baseline. Most methods also suggest that two
factors should be extracted from the measures of parental investments and from the
measures of maternal skills. Finally, only one factor seem to underlie the measures of
household wealth, according to all methods.
   The results from this first step of the EFA suggests that the data we work with
may be rich enough to support the model we set out in Section 5, which assumes
two dimensions for the child’s skills, two dimensions for the mother’s skills, and two
dimensions for parental investments. We now need to estimate factor loadings to
allocate groups of measures to different factors and identify measures that do not proxy
one factor in order to finalize the configuration of measurement system and interpret
each factor with precision. This is what we do in the second step of the EFA, which

                                          16
   Table C.1: Exploratory factor analysis to determine the number of latent factors

                                           Number of factors according to the following methods
                                            Kaiser’s                                           Horn’s
                                                             Cattell’s      Velicer’s
                                           eigenvalue                                         parallel
                                                            scree plot      MAP rule
                                              rule                                            analysis
 Dimensions to measure:
 Child’s skills at follow-up                    2                2               2               3
 Child’s skills at baseline                     1                2               1               3
 Parental investments at follow-up              2                2               2               3
 Maternal skills at baseline                    2                2               2               4


we describe now.


C.3     Specifying the dedicated measurement system

Once we have a strong indication how many factors should be retained from the data,
we search for dedicated measures for each factor by implementing an exploratory factor
analysis with quartimin rotation. We first estimate the factor loadings in a measure-
ment system for each of the elements we want to measure. We then rotate the factor
loadings so as to identify measures that heavily load on one factor and are therefore
good candidates for the dedicated measurement system.1
    The aim of the quartimin rotation is to re-weight the factor loadings obtained from
the EFA in a way that leads to a structure of factor loadings such that measures only
heavily load on one factor. This helps in identifying good candidate measures for our
system of dedicated measures. In contrast, if a measure does not load heavily on a
factor or if it is not clearly related to only one factor, it cannot serve as a dedicated
measure. In this case, we exclude it from our measurement system.
    Table A2 reports rotated factor loadings for each measure. Note that we have
   1
     Several methods are available to rotate the factors. We focus on the results of a quartimin rotation
because it is an oblique rotation and hence allows factors to be correlated. We also performed the
same exercise using geomin rotation, since it is another type of oblique rotation, and reached similar
conclusions with respect to the final measurement system.

                                                    17
assumed two factors for the measures of child development at baseline and at follow-up,
two factors for the measures of mother’s skills, two factors for the measures of parental
investments and one factor for the measures of household wealth. Below we comment
on these results and how they informed the final configuration of our measurement
system.


Measures of child’s development at t and t + 1 The factor loadings on the
measures of child’s skills at follow-up (t + 1) clearly suggest two groupings of measures.
The Bayley measures and the MacArthur measures heavily load on a first factor, which
we call cognitive skill. Some of the ICQ measures and some of the ECBQ measures
heavily loads on a second factor, which we call socio-emotional skill. Note that the
measures ICQ: Unadaptable and ECBQ: Attentional shifting load slightly more heavily
on the first factor than on the second, but overall have two very small loadings of each
of these factors (below 0.3) and do not clearly load on one of the two factors. As a
result, we discard these two measures from the final measurement system. Based on
these groupings, we interpret the first factor as measuring the child’s cognitive skills
at follow-up and the second factor as measuring the child’s socio-emotional skill at
follow-up.
   Turning to the measures on the child’s skills at baseline (t), we again obtain a
pattern of factor loadings that clearly support two groupings of measures. On the
one hand, all the Bayley measures (cognitive, receptive language, expression language
and fine motor) heavily load on a first factor, which we interpret as measuring the
child’s cognitive skill at baseline. The MacArthur-Bates measures of number of words
understood has two very small loadings and does not clearly load on one of the two
factors. As a result, we discard this measure as an unfit candidate for our dedicated
measurement system. The MacArthur-Bates measures of number of spoken shows a
s clearer pattern, with a heavier loading on factor 1 than factor 2. Although this


                                           18
pattern is not as clear as the Bayley measures, we do retain MacArthur-Bates measure
of the number of words spoken by the child in our final measurement system, so as
to have a measure of the child’s vocabulary measuring cognitive skill both at baseline
and at follow-up. Finally, the ICQ measures of the child’s temperament at baseline
clearly load on the second factor. In the final measurement system, we retain these four
measures to proxy the factor that we call socio-emotional skill of the child at baseline.


Measures of parental investments The measures of parental investments from
the follow-up survey indicate two clear groupings. On the one hand, the variables mea-
suring the variety of play materials and the number of different types of play material,
for the most part, load on a first factor. On the other hand, the variable measuring the
variety of play activities and most of the variables measuring the frequency of each of
these activities in the three days preceding the interview load on a second factor. One
variable (‘Number of home-made toys”) does not clearly load on one the factors, and
for this reason, we exclude it from our system of dedicated measures.


Measure of maternal skills The measures of maternal skills that we have at our
disposal in the survey indicate two clear groupings of measure. On the one hand, the
mother’s years of education, vocabulary and IQ score, along with two items from the
FCI (the number of books in the house and the number of magazines and newspapers)
seem to be highly correlated to each other, as they clearly load on a first factor (Factor
2 in the table). On the other hand, most items of the CES-D scale heavily load on a
second factor. The only exception is the third measure asking the mother “Did you feel
hopeful about the future?”, and we exclude this measure from our final measurement
system since it is not clearly dedicated to one of the two factors measuring maternal
skills.




                                           19
                                                                                  20




Table C.2: Estimated rotated loadings on child’s measures of development at baseline

        Bayley: Cognitive                              0.662*        0.049
        Bayley: Receptive language                     0.803*        -0.015
        Bayley: Expressive language                    0.767*        0.013
        Bayley: Fine motor                             0.683*       -0.066*
        MacArthur: No. words the child can say         0.370*       0.143*
        MacArthur: No. words the child can understand 0.047         0.097*
        ICQ: Unsociable                               0.118*         0.382*
        ICQ: Difficult                                -0.003*        0.669*
        ICQ: Unadaptable                              0.091*         0.429*
        ICQ: Unstoppable                              -0.118*        0.424*




Table C.3: Estimated rotated loadings on child’s measures of development at follow-up

        Bayley: Cognitive                               0.786*       -0.028
        Bayley: Receptive language                      0.762*        0.007
        Bayley: Expressive language                     0.777*       -0.016
        Bayley: Fine motor                              0.629*        0.006
        MacArthur: Words the child can say              0.580*       0.125*
        MacArthur: Complex sentences the child can say 0.480*        0.137*
        ICQ: Unsociable                                 0.166*       0.250*
        ICQ: Difficult                                   0.027       0.691*
        ICQ: Unadaptable                                0.193*       0.144*
        ICQ: Unstoppable                               -0.086*       0.722*
        ECBQ: Inhibitory control                        -0.001       0.748*
        ECBQ: Attentional focusing                      0.062*       0.329*
        ECBQ: Attentional shifting                      0.203*       0.078*
                                                                                  21




Table C.4: Estimated rotated loadings on measures of investment at follow-up

     FCI:   Number of different types of play material     1.007*   -0.006*
     FCI:   Number of picture books                        0.334*    0.048
     FCI:   Number of colouring books                      0.433*    -0.016
     FCI:   Number of home-made toys                       0.102*    0.093*
     FCI:   Number of bought toys                          0.492*    0.042
     FCI:   Number of toys to learn movement               0.490*   0.081*
     FCI:   number of toys to learn shapes                 0.613*    0.025
     FCI:   Number of different types of play activities      0      0.985*
     FCI:   Times told stories in last 3 days              -0.008    0.519*
     FCI:   Times read in last 3 days                       0.002    0.520*
     FCI:   Times played with toys in last 3 days           0.049    0.528*
     FCI:   Times labelled things in last 3 days           -0.006    0.545*




Table C.5: Estimated rotated loadings on baseline measures of maternal skills

Mothers’ years of education                                    0.685*    -0.018
Mother’s vocabulary                                            0.775*    -0.001
Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                    0.735*    0.034
FCI: No. of adult books at home                                0.410*    -0.003
FCI: No. magazines and newspapers at home                      0.249*    0.016
CESD: Are you bothered by what usual don’t? (-)                -0.049    0.411*
CESD: Did you have trouble keeping mind on doing? (-)          -0.027    0.504*
CESD: Did you feel hopeful about your future? S               0.151*      0.047
CESD: Did you feel depressed? (-)                              0.000     0.674*
CESD: Did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)       0.037     0.500*
CESD: Did you feel fearful? (-)                                -0.018    0.560*
CESD: Was your sleep restless? (-)                            -0.206*    0.458*
CESD: Did you feel happy?                                       0.05     0.454*
CESD: How often did you feel lonely in last 7 days? (-)         0.015    0.510*
CESD: Did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                   0.02    0.530*
C.4   Estimates of the measurement system

The following tables report the estimates of the measurement system. Appendix Table
C.6 reports the estimates of the factor loadings in each measurement equation. Ap-
pendix Table C.7 reports the estimates of the variance of and correlation between the
latent factors for the treated and control households separately
   Appendix Table C.8 reports the estimates of the means of the latent factor distribu-
tions for the treated households relative to the means of the latent factor distributions
for the control households (which is normalized to 0). Appendix Table C.10 reports the
correlation between the latent factors in each group. Appendix Table C.9 reports the
weights assigned to each normal distribution in the joint distribution of latent factors.




                                           22
                                                                                                                                    23



                                             Table C.6: Estimates of factor loadings

                                                                                              Latent factor
                                                                       C
Measures                                                              θt+1     θtC     S
                                                                                      θt+1     θtS     M
                                                                                                      It+1     T
                                                                                                              It+1    PtC      PtS
Bayley: cognitive                                                       1      0       0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: receptive language                                            0.935    0       0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: expressive language                                           0.992    0       0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: fine motor                                                    0.779    0       0       0       0       0       0        0
MacArthur: words the child can say                                    0.784    0       0       0       0       0       0        0
MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                          0.685    0       0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: cognitive                                                      0        1      0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: receptive language                                             0      0.980    0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: expressive language                                            0      1.035    0       0       0       0       0        0
Bayley: fine motor                                                     0      0.909    0       0       0       0       0        0
MacArthur: words the child can say                                     0      0.679    0       0       0       0       0        0
ICQ: difficult (-)                                                     0       0        1      0       0       0       0        0
ICQ: unsociable (-)                                                    0       0      0.535    0       0       0       0        0
ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                                   0       0      0.837    0       0       0       0        0
ECBQ: inhibitory control                                               0       0      0.982    0       0       0       0        0
ECBQ: attentional focusing                                             0       0      0.477    0       0       0       0        0
ICQ:   difficult (-)                                                   0       0       0        1      0       0       0        0
ICQ:   unsociable (-)                                                  0       0       0      0.541    0       0       0        0
ICQ:   unadaptable (-)                                                 0       0       0      0.638    0       0       0        0
ICQ:   unstoppable (-)                                                 0       0       0      0.486    0       0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   different types of play materials                    0       0       0       0        1      0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   coloring and drawing books                           0       0       0       0      0.231    0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn movement                               0       0       0       0      0.593    0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn shapes                                 0       0       0       0      0.824    0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   shop-bought toys                                     0       0       0       0      0.583    0       0        0
FCI:   no.   of   different types of play activities in last 3 days    0       0       0       0       0        1      0        0
FCI:   no.   of   times told a story to child in last 3 days           0       0       0       0       0      0.778    0        0
FCI:   no.   of   times read to child in last 3 days                   0       0       0       0       0      0.965    0        0
FCI:   no.   of   times played with toys in the last 3 days            0       0       0       0       0      0.663    0        0
FCI:   no.   of   times named things to child in last 3 days           0       0       0       0       0      0.658    0        0
Mothers’ years of education                                            0       0       0       0       0       0        1       0
Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                            0       0       0       0       0       0      1.021     0
Mother’s vocabulary                                                    0       0       0       0       0       0      1.162     0
FCI: no. of books for adults in the home                               0       0       0       0       0       0      0.862     0
FCI: no. of magazines and newspapers in the home                       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.591     0
CESD:    did you feel depressed? (-)                                   0       0       0       0       0       0       0        1
CESD:    are you bothered by what usually don’t? (-)                   0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.686
CESD:    did you have trouble keep mind on doing? (-)                  0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.773
CESD:    did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)            0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.727
CESD:    did you feel fearful? (-)                                     0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.749
CESD:    was your sleep restless? (-)                                  0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.622
CESD:    did you feel happy?                                           0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.725
CESD:    how often did you feel lonely last week? (-)                  0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.786
CESD:    did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                      0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.798
                                                                                                                    24


Table C.7: Estimated variance of the measurement error in each measure included in the measurement
system

                                                                                              Variance of the
           Factor   Measurements
                                                                                             measurement error
                                                                                          Estimate   Stand. Error
                    Bayley: cognitive                                                      0.430       (0.029)
                    Bayley: receptive language                                             0.443       (0.026)
                    Bayley: expressive language                                            0.428       (0.032)
            C
           θt+1     Bayley: fine motor                                                     0.633       (0.034)
                    MacArthur: words the child can say                                     0.538       (0.026)
                    MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                           0.658       (0.040)
                    Bayley: cognitive                                                      0.520       (0.029)
                    Bayley: receptive language                                             0.444       (0.030)
           θtC      Bayley: expressive language                                            0.450       (0.035)
                    Bayley: fine motor                                                     0.677       (0.043)
                    MacArthur: words the child can say                                     0.702       (0.070)
                    ICQ: difficult (-)                                                     0.458       (0.043)
                    ICQ: unsociable (-)                                                    0.757       (0.041)
            S
           θt+1     ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                                   0.635       (0.040)
                    ECBQ: inhibitory control                                               0.481       (0.042)
                    ECBQ: attentional focusing                                             0.811       (0.049)
                    ICQ:   difficult (-)                                                   0.511       (0.055)
                    ICQ:   unsociable (-)                                                  0.818       (0.046)
           θtC      ICQ:   unadaptable (-)                                                 0.814       (0.042)
                    ICQ:   unstoppable (-)                                                 0.889       (0.048)
                    FCI:   no.   of   different types of play materials                    0.161       (0.048)
                    FCI:   no.   of   coloring and drawing books                           0.715       (0.100)
           ItM      FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn movement                               0.604       (0.037)
                    FCI:   no.   of   toys to learn shapes                                 0.825       (0.082)
                    FCI:   no.   of   shop-bought toys                                     0.586       (0.049)
                    FCI:   no.   of   different types of play activities in last 3 days    0.351       (0.081)
                    FCI:   no.   of   times told a story to child in last 3 days           0.713       (0.061)
           ItT      FCI:   no.   of   times read to child in last 3 days                   0.798       (0.074)
                    FCI:   no.   of   times played with toys in the last 3 days            0.845       (0.079)
                    FCI:   no.   of   times named things to child in last 3 days           0.794       (0.109)
                    Mothers’ years of education                                            0.584       (0.037)
                    Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                            0.599       (0.030)
           PC       Mother’s vocabulary                                                    0.496       (0.037)
                    FCI: no. of books for adults in the home                               0.773       (0.040)
                    FCI: no. of magazines and newspapers in the home                       0.912       (0.036)
                    CESD:    did you feel depressed? (-)                                   0.464       (0.031)
                    CESD:    are you bothered by what usually don’t? (-)                   0.711       (0.040)
                    CESD:    did you have trouble keep mind on doing? (-)                  0.680       (0.040)
                    CESD:    did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)            0.682       (0.035)
           PS       CESD:    did you feel fearful? (-)                                     0.685       (0.039)
                    CESD:    was your sleep restless? (-)                                  0.798       (0.038)
                    CESD:    did you feel happy?                                           0.672       (0.040)
                    CESD:    how often did you feel lonely last week? (-)                  0.642       (0.036)
                    CESD:    did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                      0.728       (0.048)
    Table C.8: Estimated means of the (log) latent factors in the treated group

                                                      Estimate   Stand. error

         Child’s cognitive skill at follow-up           0.115       (0.051)
         Child’s cognitive skill at baseline           -0.022       (0.067)
         Child’s socio-emotional skill at follow-up     0.087       (0.044)
         Child’s socio-emotional skill at baseline      0.034       (0.058)
         Parental material investments                  0.227       (0.069)
         Parental time investments                      0.302       (0.068)
         Maternal cognitive skills                     -0.016       (0.042)
         Maternal socio-emotional skills               0.105        (0.046)


Table C.9: Estimates of the mixture weights of the joint distribution of the latent
factors

                             Mixture weight 1            Mixture weight 2

                          Estimate   Stand. error     Estimate   Stand. error
          Control group    0.442       (0.026)         0.558       (0.026)
          Treated group    0.357       (0.024)         0.643       (0.024)




                                          25
                                                                              26




            Table C.10: Estimated latent factor correlation

                              Control group

thetaC
     t+1      1      0.667   0.363   0.296    0.396   0.280   0.496   0.148
thetaSt+1    0.667    1      0.257   0.261    0.267   0.225   0.345   0.044
thetaC
     t       0.363   0.257    1      0.622    0.372   0.275   0.290   0.183
thetaSt      0.296   0.261   0.622    1       0.290   0.235   0.406   0.242
 M
It+1         0.396   0.267   0.372   0.290     1      0.624   0.603   0.123
 T
It+1         0.280   0.225   0.275   0.235    0.624    1      0.394   0.053
PtC          0.496   0.345   0.290   0.406    0.603   0.394    1      0.070
PtS          0.148   0.044   0.183   0.242    0.123   0.053   0.070    1



                              Treated group

thetaC
     t+1      1      0.681   0.320   0.213    0.292   0.172   0.257   0.087
thetaSt+1    0.681    1      0.245   0.203    0.213   0.134   0.180   0.034
thetaCt      0.320   0.245    1      0.445    0.282   0.284   0.234   0.183
thetaSt      0.213   0.203   0.445    1       0.086   0.045   0.274   0.342
 M
It+1         0.292   0.213   0.282   0.086     1      0.451   0.457   0.021
 T
It+1         0.172   0.134   0.284   0.045    0.451    1      0.276   0.054
PtC          0.257   0.180   0.234   0.274    0.457   0.276    1      0.098
PtS          0.087   0.034   0.183   0.342    0.021   0.054   0.098    1
D     Supplemental evidence on the intervention impacts

Table D.1 reports the treatment effects of the stimulation and micronutrient supplemen-
tation components of the intervention, and of their interactions on all the raw measures
we use in the measurement system to proxy the latent factors for children’s cognitive
skill at follow-up, children’s socio-emotional skills at follow-up, material investments
and time investments at follow-up. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level. To obtain these effects we regressed the outcome on an indicator that takes the
value of 1 if any stimulation (alone or in combination), an indicator that takes the
value of 1 if any supplementation (alone or in combination), and an indicator that
takes the value of 1 if both stimulation and supplementation. We controlled for tester
effects (two for each region), sex of the child, and baseline level of the outcomes, except
for items that were not measured at baseline. Specifically, for MacArthur: Complex
phrases the child can say, we controlled for the MacArthur item measure the number
of words the child can say at baseline. For ECBQ items, we controlled for the ICQ
item measuring how difficult the child is at baseline (ICQ: difficult). We controlled for
baseline FCI: Number of different types of play materials for all items in Panel C and
for baseline FCI: Number of different types of play activities for all items in Panel D.
    Table D.2 compares the treatment effects of receiving any stimulation on the raw
measures of material and time investments at follow-up between the full sample and
the sample where we exclude the households where the data collection was less than
four days after the last home visit.
    Table D.3 shows descriptive statistics of the play materials delivered by the inter-
vention and recorded at follow-up in the homes of the treatment group.




                                            27
                Table D.1: Treatment impacts of the psychosocial stimulation and nutritional components of the intervention

                                                                                             Any stimulation                    Any nutrition                 Nutrition and stimulation
                                                                                          Point est         St err          Point est        St err           Point est             St err
      A - Child’s cognitive skills at follow-up
      Bayley: cognitive                                                                   0.310***        (0.0843)            -0.0331       (0.0726)             -0.121             (0.123)
      Bayley: expressive language                                                          0.236**        (0.0909)            -0.0475       (0.0952)             -0.122             (0.125)
      Bayley: receptive language                                                            0.0805        (0.0783)            -0.0878       (0.0924)            -0.0990             (0.126)
      Bayley: fine motor                                                                    0.135         (0.0889)             -0.139       (0.0840)             -0.127             (0.119)
      MacArthur: words the child can say                                                     0.143        (0.0865)             -0.118       (0.0775)             -0.106             (0.131)
      MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                                         0.00473        (0.0785)             0.0675       (0.0728)              0.109             (0.106)
      B - Child’s socio-emotional skills at follow-up
      ICQ: unsociable                                                                      0.00143        (0.0827)             0.0103       (0.0844)             0.0797             (0.110)
      ICQ: difficult                                                                       0.119*         (0.0672)           -0.00156       (0.0604)            -0.0896            (0.0898)
      ICQ: unstoppable                                                                     0.0448         (0.0771)            -0.0107       (0.0737)            -0.0256             (0.116)
      ECBQ: inhibitory control                                                             0.0289         (0.0782)           0.00716        (0.0789)            -0.0647             (0.116)




28
      ECBQ: attentional focusing                                                           0.0907         (0.0664)            -0.126*       (0.0725)            -0.0466            (0.0982)
      C - Material investment at follow-up
      FCI: no. of different types of play materials                                       0.282***        (0.0801)             -0.116       (0.0958)             -0.138             (0.128)
      FCI: no. of coloring and drawing books                                               -0.124         (0.0759)             0.0136       (0.0901)            -0.0172             (0.113)
      FCI: no. of toys to move                                                             0.0589         (0.0834)             -0.160        (0.108)             -0.219             (0.136)
      FCI: no. of toys to learn shapes                                                    0.443***        (0.0985)            -0.0694        (0.100)            -0.0572             (0.174)
      FCI: no. of shop-bought toys                                                         0.0455         (0.0817)             -0.121       (0.0991)            -0.0460             (0.130)
      D - Time         investment at follow-up
      FCI: no. of      different types of play activities in last 3 days                  0.287***        (0.0745)            -0.0664       (0.0678)            -0.0210             (0.105)
      FCI: no. of      times read to child in last 3 days                                 0.353***        (0.0921)             0.0410       (0.0790)             0.0201             (0.120)
      FCI: no. of      times told a story to child in last 3 days                          0.208**        (0.0845)            -0.0839       (0.0711)             -0.143             (0.119)
      FCI: no. of      times played with toys in last 3 days                                 0.115        (0.0778)            -0.0337       (0.0700)              0.119             (0.119)
      FCI: no. of      times named things to child in last 3 days                           0.0783        (0.0607)            -0.0219       (0.0694)              0.118            (0.0992)
     Note: Coefficients and standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in parentheses) from a regression of the dependent variable measured at follow-up on an indicator
     that takes the value of 1 if any stimulation (alone or in combination), an indicator that takes the value of 1 if any supplementation (alone or in combination), and an indicator
     that takes the value of 1 if both stimulation and supplementation. We also control for the child’s sex; tester dummies; and baseline level of the outcome. ***, ** and * indicate
     significance at 1, 5, and 10%. All scores have been internally standardized non-parametrically for age and are therefore expressed in standard deviations (see Appendix B for
     details about the measures and the standardization procedure). Sample size ranges from 1,262 to 1,326 depending on the outcome.
                                                                                                  29




Table D.2: Impacts of the intervention on investments in the full and restricted samples



                                                                       Full sample      Restricted sample

 A- Material investment at follow-up

 FCI: no. of different types of play materials                           0.215***            0.216***
                                                                         (0.0637)            (0.0656)
 FCI: no. of books to pain and draw                                      -0.133**            -0.136**
                                                                         -(0.056)            (0.0656)
 FCI: no. of toys bought                                                  0.0240               0.0477
                                                                         (0.0611)            (0.0621)
 FCI: no. of toys to learn movement                                       -0.0476             -0.0505
                                                                         (0.0646)            (0.0674)
 FCI: no. of toys to learn shape                                         0.416***            0.421***
                                                                         (0.0877)            (0.0924)

 B - Time investment at follow-up

 FCI: no. of different types of play activities in last 3 days           0.277***            0.273***
                                                                         (0.0503)            (0.0516)
 FCI: no. of times told a story to child in last 3 days                   0.138**             0.113*
                                                                         (0.0601)            (0.0602)
 FCI: no. of times read to child in last 3 days                          0.362***            0.350***
                                                                         (0.0625)            (0.0651)
 FCI: no. of times played with toys in the last 3 days                   0.175***            0.193***
                                                                         (0.0597)            (0.0632)
 FCI: no. of times named things to child in last 3 days                  0.137***            0.134***
                                                                         (0.0483)            (0.0498)

 Number of observations                                                    1,326               1,244
Note: Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses clustered at the municipality. Restricted sample ex-
cludes all those households where the data collection was less than four days after the last home visit.
                                                                                   30




Table D.3: Materials from the intervention in treatment households at first follow-up

                                                          Mean   St. Dev.

                  Toys given by the home visitor          4.26    (6.38)
                  Toys made with the home visitor         0.84    (2.64)
                  Intervention books                      5.20    (3.39)
                 Note: Sample size is 667 observations.
E     Specification and robustness checks

In this section of the appendix, we report results associated with specification and
robustness checks we discuss in the main text.
    Table E.1 reports the estimates of the investment functions where the investment
function is fully interacted with the treatment indicator.
    Table E.2 report the estimates of the Cobb-Douglas production functions for cog-
nitive skills and socio-emotional skills where all the share parameters (as well as the
total productivity factor A) are interacted with the treatment dummy. The production
function for cognitive skills is estimated by IV where we use toy price and food price as
exclusion restrictions. The production function for socio-emotional skills is estimated
by OLS.
    Table E.3 reports the estimates of the production functions in the case where the
control group is made of children who neither received the stimulation nor the nutri-
tional supplementation component of the intervention and the treated group is only
made of children who received the stimulation, but not the nutritional supplementation
component.
    Table E.4 reports the estimates of the production functions where the joint distribu-
tion of latent factors has been estimated using measures from which we removed tester
fixed effects before age standardizing them. Specifically, we first regressed the raw
measures on tester dummies and then age standardized the residuals of this regression
using the age standardization procedure described in Appendix B.4.


E.1    Invariance of the measurement system between the treated and con-
       trol groups

Tables E.5 and E.6 report estimates of the factor loadings in the measurement system
where we allow the loadings associated with measures of child’s skills and parental

                                           31
investments at follow up to differ between control and treatment groups. We test for
the equality of loadings associated with measures of the child’s cognitive and socio-
emotional skills, as well as measures of parental investments at follow-up. We find that
the p-value is 0.064, thus we cannot reject that they are the same between treated and
control at the 5% significance level.
   Table E.7 report the estimates of our favorite specifications for the production
function for cognitive and socio-emotional skills where the latent factors are estimated
using this measurement system.




                                          32
                                                                                                                33



Table E.1: Material and time investment equations where all parameters are interacted
with treatment

                                                         Material investment          Time investment
     Constant                                                     -0.017                      0.002
                                                               [-0.112,0.086]             [-0.092,0.094]
        x Treatment                                                0.204                      0.330
                                                                [0.032,0.378]              [0.131,0.494]
     Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                              -0.064                      0.005
                                                                [-0.374,0.29]             [-0.304,0.317]
        x Treatment                                                0.130                      0.039
                                                               [-0.078,0.329]             [-0.177,0.249]
     Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                         0.028                      0.134
                                                               [-0.287,0.402]             [-0.203,0.528]
        x Treatment                                               -0.050                     -0.087
                                                               [-0.286,0.142]             [-0.343,0.117]
     Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                              1.088                      0.581
                                                                [0.642,1.522]              [0.151,0.961]
        x Treatment                                               -0.185                     -0.126
                                                               [-0.436,0.094]             [-0.343,0.098]
     Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                        0.171                     -0.072
                                                                [-0.099,0.43]             [-0.333,0.183]
        x Treatment                                               -0.061                      0.068
                                                               [-0.223,0.105]             [-0.111,0.242]
     Log number of children (t+1)                                 -0.122                     -0.251
                                                               [-0.276,0.029]             [-0.416,-0.089]
        x Treatment                                                0.001                      0.079
                                                               [-0.098,0.112]             [-0.021,0.182]
     Log toy price                                                -0.132                     -0.151
                                                               [-0.369,0.093]             [-0.347,0.012]
        x Treatment                                                0.022                      0.083
                                                               [-0.128,0.171]             [-0.034,0.221]
     Log food price                                               -0.106                     -0.087
                                                               [-0.405,0.147]             [-0.291,0.132]
        x Treatment                                                0.133                      0.088
                                                               [-0.049,0.322]             [-0.074,0.241]
     Conflict                                                      0.072                      0.002
                                                                [-0.219,0.25]             [-0.142,0.252]
        x Treatment                                               -0.056                     -0.062
                                                               [-0.172,0.145]             [-0.203,0.043]

     F-test of joint significance of interactions with treatment dummy:
     p-value                                            0.369                                 0.099
     Note: Dependent variables are the log of material and time investment factors measured at follow-up.
     t and t + 1 denote that a variable was measured at baseline and endline, respectively. 95% Confidence
     intervals in brackets based on 1,000 bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process taking into
     account clustering at the municipality level.
                                                                                                                       34



Table E.2: Production functions where all parameters are allowed to vary with treat-
ment

                                                                       Cognitive skill               Socio-emotional skill
                                                                            IV                                  OLS
                                                                   (prices, treatment)
 TFP                                                                         -0.013                            -0.009
                                                                          [-0.103,0.073]                     [-0.085,0.063]
    x Treatment                                                              0.148                             -0.002
                                                                          [-0.069,0.383]                     [-0.11,0.107]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                                             0.476                              0.077
                                                                          [0.193,0.816]                      [-0.172,0.356]
    x Treatment                                                              0.133                              0.02
                                                                          [-0.073,0.332]                     [-0.148,0.169]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                                       0.043                              0.828
                                                                          [-0.178,0.328]                     [0.529,1.159]
    x Treatment                                                              -0.038                            -0.201
                                                                          [-0.229,0.131]                    [-0.385,-0.027]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                                            0.366                             -0.288
                                                                          [-0.165,1.241]                     [-0.703,0.122]
    x Treatment                                                              -0.23                              0.127
                                                                          [-0.931,0.301]                     [-0.118,0.376]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                                      0.152                              0.017
                                                                           [-0.106,0.41]                     [-0.254,0.275]
    x Treatment                                                              -0.038                             0.015
                                                                          [-0.181,0.128]                     [-0.138,0.179]
 Log of number of children (t)                                               0.165                              0.13
                                                                          [-0.049,0.327]                     [-0.023,0.274]
    x Treatment                                                              -0.048                            -0.022
                                                                          [-0.185,0.111]                     [-0.122,0.08]
 Log of material investment (t+1)                                             0.33                              0.243
                                                                           [-0.79,0.95]                      [0.006,0.534]
    x Treatment                                                              0.052                             -0.062
                                                                          [-0.634,0.907]                      [-0.21,0.07]
 Log of time investment (t+1)                                                                                  -0.009
                                                                                                             [-0.404,0.295]
    x Treatment                                                                                                 0.067
                                                                                                             [-0.102,0.298]



 P-value of F-test of joint significance of interactions with treatment dummy
 Excluding the interaction with the intercept            0.288                0.378
 Including the interaction with the intercept            0.318                 0.47
Note: Dependent variable in column 1 (2) is the log of cognitive (socio-emotional) skill measured at follow-up. The specification
for cognitive skills corresponds to the specification reported in column 5 of Table 6, and the specification for socio-emotional
skills corresponds to that reported in column 1 of Table 7. t and t + 1 denote that a variable was measured at baseline and
endline, respectively. 95% Confidence intervals in brackets based on 1,000 bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process
taking into account clustering at the municipality level.
                                                                                                                         35




Table E.3: Estimates of the production functions on the sample excluding children who
received nutritional supplementation

                                                                   (1)                               (2)
                                                              Cognitive skill                Socio-emotional skill
                                                                    IV                                   OLS
                                                           (prices, treatment)
 TFP                                                                -0.006                              -0.007
                                                                  [-0.122,0.063]                      0.103,0.087]
 TFP × Treatment                                                                                        -0.017
                                                                                                     [-0.154,0.127]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                                     0.628                              0.142
                                                                  [0.485,0.802]                      [-0.025,0.286]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                               0.064                              0.606
                                                                  [-0.077,0.209]                      [0.475,0.795]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                                   -0.123                              -0.142
                                                                  [-0.64,0.197]                      [-0.383,0.088]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                              0.115                              -0.007
                                                                  [-0.021,0.258]                      [-0.14,0.131]
 Log number of children (t)                                          0.073                              0.106
                                                                  [-0.016,0.163]                      [0.028,0.182]
 Log material investment (t+1)                                       0.453                               0.14
                                                                   [0.154,0.97]                       [0.022,0.299]
 Log time investment (t+1)                                                                              0.139
                                                                                                     [-0.236,0.275]

 Note: Dependent variable in column 1 (2) is the log of cognitive (socio-emotional) skill measured at follow-up. The
 specification for cognitive skills corresponds to the specification reported in column 5 of Table 6, and the specification
 for socio-emotional skills corresponds to that reported in column 1 of Table 7. t and t + 1 denote that a variable
 was measured at baseline and endline, respectively. The sample excludes children who received the nutritional
 supplementation intervention. 95% Confidence intervals in brackets based on 1,000 bootstrap replications of the
 entire estimation process taking into account clustering at the municipality level.
                                                                                                                         36




Table E.4: Estimates of the production functions where tester effects have been re-
moved from the measures

                                                                   (1)                               (2)
                                                              Cognitive skill                Socio-emotional skill
                                                                    IV                                   OLS
                                                           (prices, treatment)
 TFP                                                                -0.019                              -0.011
                                                                  [-0.117,0.051]                     [-0.069,0.045]
 TFP × Treatment                                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                     [-0.084,0.096]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                                     0.663                              0.063
                                                                   [0.558,0.79]                      [-0.022,0.153]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                              -0.053                              0.478
                                                                  [-0.158,0.039]                      [0.392,0.617]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                                   -0.143                              0.014
                                                                  [-0.659,0.241]                     [-0.128,0.137]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                             -0.039                              0.057
                                                                  [-0.187,0.084]                     [-0.024,0.129]
 Log number of children (t)                                          0.093                              0.072
                                                                  [0.018,0.183]                       [0.023,0.121]
 Log material investment (t+1)                                       0.617                               0.11
                                                                  [0.153,1.236]                       [0.037,0.206]
 Log time investment (t+1)                                                                              0.054
                                                                                                     [-0.127,0.134]

 Note: Dependent variable in column 1 (2) is the log of cognitive (socio-emotional) skill measured at follow-up. The
 specification for cognitive skills corresponds to the specification reported in column 5 of Table 6, and the specification
 for socio-emotional skills corresponds to that reported in column 1 of Table 7. t and t + 1 denote that a variable was
 measured at baseline and endline, respectively. In this specification, the latent factors have been estimated using
 measures from which we first removed tested fixed effects. 95% Confidence intervals in brackets based on 1,000
 bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process taking into account clustering at the municipality level.
                                                                                                                        37




                         Table E.5: Estimates of factor loadings in the control group

                                                                                        Latent factor
                                                                 C
Measures                                                        θt+1     θtC     S
                                                                                θt+1     θtS     M
                                                                                                It+1     T
                                                                                                        It+1    PC       PS
Bayley: cognitive                                                 1       0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: receptive language                                      1.005     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: expressive language                                     1.014     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: fine motor                                              0.852     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: words the child can say                              0.827     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                    0.801     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: cognitive                                                 0       1       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: receptive language                                        0     1.023     0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: expressive language                                       0     1.046     0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: fine motor                                                0     0.889     0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: words the child can say                                0     0.689     0       0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: difficult (-)                                                0       0       1       0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unsociable (-)                                               0       0     0.532     0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                              0       0     0.807     0       0       0       0       0
ECBQ: inhibitory control                                          0       0     1.025     0       0       0       0       0
ECBQ: attentional focusing                                        0       0     0.450     0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: difficult (-)                                                0       0       0       1       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unsociable (-)                                               0       0       0     0.460     0       0       0       0
ICQ: unadaptable (-)                                              0       0       0     0.556     0       0       0       0
ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                              0       0       0     0.433     0       0       0       0
FCI: no. of different types of play materials                     0       0       0       0       1       0       0       0
FCI: no. of books to pain and draw                                0       0       0       0     0.717     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys bought                                           0       0       0       0     0.382     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys to learn movement                                0       0       0       0     0.561     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys to learn shape                                   0       0       0       0     0.740     0       0       0
FCI: no. of different types of play activities in last 3 days     0       0       0       0       0       1       0       0
FCI: no. of times told a story to child in last 3 days            0       0       0       0       0     1.183     0       0
FCI: no. of times read to child in last 3 days                    0       0       0       0       0     1.016     0       0
FCI: no. of times played with toys in the last 3 days             0       0       0       0       0     0.716     0       0
FCI: no. of times named things to child in last 3 days            0       0       0       0       0     0.823     0       0
Mothers’ years of education                                       0       0       0       0       0       0       1       0
Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                       0       0       0       0       0       0     1.032     0
Mother’s vocabulary                                               0       0       0       0       0       0     1.198     0
FCI: no. of books for adults in the home                          0       0       0       0       0       0     0.819     0
FCI: no. of magazines and newspapers in the home                  0       0       0       0       0       0     0.601     0
CESD: did you feel depressed? (-)                                 0       0       0       0       0       0       0       1
CESD: are you bothered by what usually don’t? (-)                 0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.682
CESD: did you have trouble keep mind on doing? (-)                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.775
CESD: did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)          0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.718
CESD: did you feel fearful? (-)                                   0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.737
CESD: was your sleep restless? (-)                                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.655
CESD: did you feel happy?                                         0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.687
CESD: how often did you feel lonely last week? (-)                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.764
CESD: did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                    0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.749
                                                                                                                        38




                        Table E.6: Estimates of factor loadings in the treated group

                                                                                        Latent factor
                                                                 C
Measures                                                        θt+1     θtC     S
                                                                                θt+1     θtS     M
                                                                                                It+1     T
                                                                                                        It+1    PC       PS
Bayley: cognitive                                                 1       0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: receptive language                                      0.885     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: expressive language                                     1.056     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: fine motor                                              0.778     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: words the child can say                              0.792     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: complex phrases the child can say                    0.620     0       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: cognitive                                                 0       1       0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: receptive language                                        0     1.023     0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: expressive language                                       0     1.046     0       0       0       0       0       0
Bayley: fine motor                                                0     0.889     0       0       0       0       0       0
MacArthur: words the child can say                                0     0.689     0       0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: difficult (-)                                                0       0       1       0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unsociable (-)                                               0       0     0.413     0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                              0       0     0.893     0       0       0       0       0
ECBQ: inhibitory control                                          0       0     0.936     0       0       0       0       0
ECBQ: attentional focusing                                        0       0     0.452     0       0       0       0       0
ICQ: difficult (-)                                                0       0       0       1       0       0       0       0
ICQ: unsociable (-)                                               0       0       0     0.460     0       0       0       0
ICQ: unadaptable (-)                                              0       0       0     0.556     0       0       0       0
ICQ: unstoppable (-)                                              0       0       0     0.433     0       0       0       0
FCI: no. of different types of play materials                     0       0       0       0       1       0       0       0
FCI: no. of books to pain and draw                                0       0       0       0     0.130     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys bought                                           0       0       0       0     0.765     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys to learn movement                                0       0       0       0     0.721     0       0       0
FCI: no. of toys to learn shape                                   0       0       0       0     0.718     0       0       0
FCI: no. of different types of play activities in last 3 days     0       0       0       0       0       1       0       0
FCI: no. of times told a story to child in last 3 days            0       0       0       0       0     0.670     0       0
FCI: no. of times read to child in last 3 days                    0       0       0       0       0     0.690     0       0
FCI: no. of times played with toys in the last 3 days             0       0       0       0       0     0.613     0       0
FCI: no. of times named things to child in last 3 days            0       0       0       0       0     0.625     0       0
Mothers’ years of education                                       0       0       0       0       0       0       1       0
Mother’s Raven’s score (IQ)                                       0       0       0       0       0       0     1.032     0
Mother’s vocabulary                                               0       0       0       0       0       0     1.198     0
FCI: no. of books for adults in the home                          0       0       0       0       0       0     0.819     0
FCI: no. of magazines and newspapers in the home                  0       0       0       0       0       0     0.601     0
CESD: did you feel depressed? (-)                                 0       0       0       0       0       0       0       1
CESD: are you bothered by what usually don’t? (-)                 0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.682
CESD: did you have trouble keep mind on doing? (-)                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.775
CESD: did you feel everything you did was an effort? (-)          0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.718
CESD: did you feel fearful? (-)                                   0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.737
CESD: was your sleep restless? (-)                                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.655
CESD: did you feel happy?                                         0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.687
CESD: how often did you feel lonely last week? (-)                0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.764
CESD: did you feel you couldn’t get going? (-)                    0       0       0       0       0       0       0     0.749
Table E.7: Production functions where the measurement system allows for different
factor loadings and intercepts between the control and treatment groups

                                                              (1)                             (2)
                                                         Cognitive skill              Socio-emotional skill
                                                              IV                                  OLS
                                                     (prices, treatment)
  Intercept                                                    -0.007                            0.005
                                                             [-0.075,0.054]                   [-0.065,0.068]
  Treatment                                                                                      -0.009
                                                                                              [-0.118,0.099]
  Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                               0.633                            0.119
                                                              [0.528,0.75]                     [0.028,0.209]
  Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                         0.012                            0.469
                                                             [-0.086,0.116]                    [0.372,0.611]
  Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                             -0.104                            -0.083
                                                             [-0.495,0.201]                   [-0.222,0.042]
  Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                         0.073                            0.041
                                                             [-0.024,0.151]                   [-0.054,0.125]
  Log number of chidlren (t)                                    0.086                            0.168
                                                             [0.017,0.181]                     [0.074,0.277]
  Log material investment (t+1)                                 0.517                             0.11
                                                              [0.16,1.03]                      [0.003,0.198]
  Log time investment (t+1)                                                                      0.104
                                                                                               [0.051,0.159]

  Note: Dependent variable in column 1 (2) is the log of cognitive (socio-emotional) skill measured at follow-up.
  The specification for cognitive skills corresponds to the specification reported in column 5 of Table 6, and the
  specification for socio-emotional skills corresponds to that reported in column 1 of Table 7. t and t + 1 denote
  that a variable was measured at baseline and endline, respectively. In this specification, the latent factors
  have been estimated using a measurement system that allows for different factor loadings and intercepts for
  all measures of child skills and investments at follow up. 95% Confidence intervals in brackets based on 1,000
  bootstrap replications of the entire estimation process taking into account clustering at the municipality level.




E.2    Reduced form production functions

In this section we present the reduced form production functions, where the material
and time investments have been substituted out.




                                                        39
                       Table E.8: Reduced form Production Functions

                                                                  Cognitive        Socioemotional
           Intercept                                               -0.019               -0.01
                                                                  [-0.097,0.062]     [-0.086,0.066]
           Treatment dummy                                           0.085              0.071
                                                                  [-0.026,0.193]     [-0.057,0.192]
           Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                           0.726              0.111
                                                                  [0.642,0.819]      [0.022,0.214]
           Log child’s socio-emotional skills (t)                   -0.002              0.527
                                                                  [-0.087,0.084]     [0.409,0.668]
           Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                          0.279              0.073
                                                                  [0.169,0.411]      [-0.049,0.201]
           Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                     0.11              0.047
                                                                  [0.039,0.181]      [-0.049,0.13]
           Log number of children (t)                                0.026              0.063
                                                                  [-0.024,0.075]     [0.015,0.112]
           Log toy price                                            -0.013             -0.022
                                                                  [-0.072,0.049]     [-0.075,0.032]
           Log food price                                            0.079             -0.015
                                                                  [0.017,0.136]      [-0.082,0.044]
           Maternal childhood exposure to conflict                   0.054             -0.067
                                                                    [0,0.102]        [-0.116,0.002]

           Note: 95% Bootstrap confidence intervals in brackets




E.3    Monte Carlo for evaluating the presence of Weak Instruments bias

Here we provide details on the Monte Carlo simulation used to assess whether with
our data and first stage we obtain bias due to weak instruments. To run the Monte
Carlo we choose parameters to equal the estimated parameter estimates. To replicate
the structure of our data we need to choose appropriately the covariance structure.
    Define by en an n-vector of ones (the number of individuals in a community) and
by In the n dimensional identity matrix.2 The covariance matrix between outcome
cognition and the two investments is denoted by Σd . The off diagonal blocks, reflecting
spatial covariance within the community, are denoted by Σof f . Then the covariance

   2
      In practice the number of individuals varies across communities, but we simplified the notation
by using n instead of ni . The Monte Carlo simulation uses the exact same structure of the data as in
reality and the actual values of the exogenous variables, including prices and cognition.

                                                     40
matrix for a community i with n individual observations can be written as


                        Σi = In ⊗ Σd + (en × e0n − In ) ⊗ Σof f


The errors for outcome cognition, time investments and material investments for all
individuals in a community (cluster) is a 3n × 1 vector u3n and is distributed as:


                                   u3n ∼ N (0, Σi )                                  (10)


            Table E.9: Covariances used for the Monte Carlo Simulation


                                         Covariance A
                    Within Person Σd             Spatial Covariance Σof f
                    Material Time Cognition      Material Time Cognition
        Material      0.623   0.202  -0.179         0.04      0         0
          Time        0.202   0.561  0.038            0     0.04        0
        Cognition    -0.179   0.038  0.506            0      0        0.04
                                         Covariance B
                    Within Person Σd             Spatial Covariance Σof f
                    Material Time Cognition      Material Time Cognition
        Material      0.823   0.351  -0.200        0.147   0.132     -0.006
          Time        0.351   0.815  0.052          0.132  0.207      0.011
        Cognition    -0.200   0.052  0.595         -0.006  0.011     0.046


   One difficulty was to decide on the value of the covariance matrix of the residuals
from which to draw the errors in the investment equations and the production function.
Given parameter values for the first stage (chosen to equal the ones we estimate in
the real data), the sample size and the cluster structure, this drives the precision
of estimation and of course the strength of the first stage. The most conservative
approach is to use the estimated residuals from our model to compute Σd and Σof f . The
reason this is conservative is because the errors will contain an additional component
corresponding to the estimation error of the factor scores, which will now be taken to


                                          41
be part of the error structure in the production function and the investment equations.
The results using this approach are given under Covariance B below. The first stage is
weaker than in the actual data with this covariance. In another approach we computed
a covariance matrix after removing community specific means from the residuals for
Σd . We then set the diagonal elements of Σof f to 0.04, having tried a number of values
so as to achieve a first stage closer in precision to our actual first stage. The result
was that the estimation precision of the price coefficients in the material investment
equation is a bit higher than in reality, but the precision of the conflict variable in
the time investment equation is closer to the actual one. In both cases the rank test
and the Cragg-Donald test are considerably weaker than in our actual data. The two
covariances we use are given in Table E.9.
   The simulated data is generated as follows: we draw errors for all individuals jointly
in each community based on equation (10). This respects the actual cluster structure.
Using the actual treatment status, prices and conflict values as well as the factor
scores estimated for the child’s and mother’s baseline cognition in the actual data,
we generate material and time investments for each household in our data. Given
the generated investments and the exogenous variables just described, we generate the
cognitive outcome for each child. For the production function we use as true value the
estimated coefficient on the material investment (0.463) in column 2 of Table 6 and
0 for the time investment, which is what we interpret the results to imply. In other
experiments (not reported here) we also used a positive coefficient for time investment
as well, and our conclusions on bias do not change. Once we generate the latent factors
for the child’s cognition and the two investments, we then generate the equivalent
of the original measurements, for the baseline factors (mother and child cognition),
the cognitive outcome of the child in the follow-up period and the two investments
themselves. To do this we use the measurement system in reverse (from latent factor
to measurement) based on the factor loadings and variance of the measurement errors

                                           42
(assumed normal) that we estimated in the real data. This provides a simulated data
set of a similar structure to the one we observe. We then estimate the model on this
data. We do not use knowledge of the fact the distribution is normal and we base
our estimates on a distribution free approach, which can be done because the model is
linear. We employ 1000 replications.3


Table E.10: Standard errors from estimated model and standard deviations from the
Monte Carlo Simulations


                          Estimated Model      Covariance A               Covariance B
                                            Investment Equations
                          Material    Time     Material Time              Material      Time
 Toy Price                 0.036      0.031      0.028   0.031             0.037        0.044
 Food Price                0.043      0.038      0.033   0.033             0.043        0.051
 Conflict                  0.037      0.028      0.028   0.030             0.038        0.043

                                                Production Function
 Material Investment             0.299                 0.270                    0.338
 Time Investment                 0.374                 0.316                    0.377




    In Table E.10 we show the standard errors from the estimated model and compare
them to the standard deviations of the Monte Carlo simulations. In the top panel we
show ones for the instruments in the material and time investments. These show that
the simulation with Covariance B gets the standard deviations for the price coefficients
very similar to the ones in the estimated model, but that the standard deviation of
the conflict variable is too high, implying that the first stage under Covariance B is
weaker than the one in the real data (as also implied by comparing the rank tests).
Under covariance A the price coefficients have a standard deviation a bit lower than
the standard errors in the estimated model but this time the coefficient on the conflict
   3
     The estimated production function is a bit more precise because we use Maximum likelihood
to estimate the distribution of the factors as in Attanasio et al. (2017). The Monte Carlo estimates
the distribution of factors non-parametrically and hence is more conservative. In practice, this makes
almost no difference to the estimates but slightly improves precision.

                                                 43
                                                                                                                     44

                                  Table E.11: Monte Carlo Simulations


                                                             Covariance A                  Covariance B
                               True Values           Material and Time investment functions on Simulated Data
                            Material Time               Material        Time          Material        Time
 Intercept                   -0.016    0.001             0.001          0.001           0.001         0.001
                                                        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.001)
                                                        [0.001,0.002]        [0,0.002]           [0,0.002]         [0,0.002]
 Treatment                    0.204         0.333           0.188             0.33                0.173             0.291
                                                           (0.063)           (0.064)             (0.087)           (0.096)
                                                        [0.059,0.313]     [0.202,0.454]        [0.003,0.336]    [0.106,0.479]
 Baseline Cognition            0.13         0.067           0.132             0.071               0.122             0.064
                                                           (0.041)           (0.042)             (0.045)           (0.048)
                                                        [0.056,0.214]     [-0.008,0.155]        [0.03,0.21]     [-0.031,0.153]
 Mother’s Cognition           0.754         0.367           0.749              0.39               0.692             0.349
                                                           (0.049)           (0.045)             (0.050)           (0.047)
                                                        [0.659,0.849]     [0.299,0.481]        [0.596,0.793]     [0.26,0.445]
 Price of Toys                -0.095        -0.02           -0.089            -0.019              -0.082            -0.017
                                                           (0.028)           (0.031)             (0.037)           (0.044)
                                                        [-0.143,-0.036]   [-0.077,0.037]      [-0.154,-0.013]   [-0.101,0.073]
 Price of Food                0.096         0.042           0.089              0.04               0.081             0.037
                                                           (0.033)           (0.033)             (0.043)           (0.051)
                                                        [0.024,0.154]     [-0.027,0.103]         [0,0.163]      [-0.061,0.142]
 Conflict                     -0.011        -0.096          -0.01             -0.093              -0.007            -0.085
                                                           (0.028)           (0.030)             (0.038)           (0.043)
                                                        [-0.064,0.048]    [-0.152,-0.037]      [-0.076,0.07]    [-0.172,0.001]


 Rank test                                                       0.047                          0.029
 Cragg-Donald test                                               0.059                          0.023
                                True Values               Cognitive Production function on Simulated Data
                                                         Investment treated as          Investment treated as
                                                        Exogenous Endogenous          Exogenous Endogenous
 Intercept                          -0.02                   0             0                0             0
                                                         (0.000)       (0.001)          (0.000)       (0.001)
                                                             [0,0]        [-0.001,0.001]           [0,0]        [-0.001,0.001]
 Treatment                          0.076                   0.085             0.067               0.075             0.054
                                                           (0.055)           (0.122)             (0.052)           (0.133)
                                                        [-0.018,0.194]    [-0.144,0.276]      [-0.031,0.175]    [-0.203,0.293]
 Baseline Cognition                 0.663                   0.635             0.611               0.607             0.586
                                                           (0.037)           (0.052)             (0.035)           (0.055)
                                                        [0.563,0.706]     [0.506,0.714]        [0.544,0.675]    [0.478,0.687]
 Mother’s Cognition                 0.018                   0.182             0.02                0.162             0.014
                                                           (0.043)           (0.212)             (0.042)           (0.231)
                                                        [0.104,0.264]     [-0.407,0.385]       [0.076,0.245]    [-0.445,0.467]
 Material investment                0.463                   0.111             0.418               0.131             0.432
                                                           (0.033)           (0.270)             (0.033)           (0.338)
                                                        [0.045,0.176]     [-0.084,1.059]       [0.066,0.197]    [-0.132,1.103]
 Time investment                       0                    0.162             -0.003              0.185             0.017
                                                           (0.033)           (0.316)             (0.034)           (0.377)
                                                         [0.097,0.23]     [-0.655,0.516]       [0.118,0.253]    [-0.794,0.642]

Note: The Monte Carlo simulations employs 1000 replications. Average estimates across replications with standard deviation
in parentheses and bottom and top 2.5th percentile in square brackets. We produce a simulated observation for each
household in the data using all their observed exogenous variables, including the instruments. So the simulated data has
exactly the same structure as the actual data. The data generating process includes the transformation from latent factors to
measurements to produce data similar to the one we observe. Each replication implements the entire estimation procedure
as described in the full model, including the factor scoring. Investments are endogenous in the simulated data: the error
structure assumed in the simulation allows for a covariance between the investments and cognition residuals and for spatial
dependence as in the data. The errors are normal.
instrument has a very similar standard deviation to the estimated standard error in the
time investment equation, where it is significant in reality. Importantly the standard
deviations of the investment coefficients in the Monte Carlo are similar to those in the
estimated model.
   In Table E.11 we show the corresponding Monte Carlo simulations for the three
equation system of material and time investments and cognitive skills. The coefficients
on the production function in the Monte Carlo average out very close to the true values
when we allow for endogeneity (as we should), while the model where we treat invest-
ments as exogenous show substantial bias. These results taken together imply that
there is no evidence that the instruments are weak. More discussion and interpretation
of the results is provided in the main text.


E.4    Allowing for stratum fixed effects

The randomization was stratified by geography. There were three strata and the prob-
ability of assignment to treatment was equal in each stratum. The strata are “Central
Region”, “Oriental Region” and “Zona Cafetera”. Consequently the experimental re-
sults do not require controlling for stratum fixed effects. However the estimation of
the production functions and the investment equation could be affected in principle
by their inclusion. In this subsection we report results that include the strata fixed
effects. The results are substantially the same as those reported in the main paper
and none of the conclusions change. Where there are some differences these are always
insignificant.




                                           45
                                                                                                               46




                 Table E.12: Investment equations with stratum fixed effects

                                                      Material investment            Time investment
 Intercept                                                     0.187                       0.095
                                                            [-0.006,0.382]             [-0.033,0.232]
 Treatment dummy                                               0.187                       0.283
                                                            [0.006,0.356]               [0.122,0.44]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                               0.082                       0.065
                                                            [-0.021,0.193]              [-0.045,0.18]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)                         -0.018                      0.031
                                                            [-0.124,0.116]             [-0.085,0.162]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                              0.848                       0.443
                                                            [0.675,1.032]               [0.221,0.607]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)                        0.081                       0.043
                                                            [0.006,0.153]              [-0.041,0.136]
 Log number of children (t)                                    -0.018                     -0.008
                                                            [-0.064,0.031]             [-0.057,0.037]
 Log toy price                                                 -0.058                      0.001
                                                            [-0.134,0.017]             [-0.065,0.067]
 Log food price                                                0.141                       0.094
                                                             [0.036,0.25]               [0.009,0.192]
 Maternal childhood exposure to conflict                       0.003                      -0.063
                                                            [-0.082,0.085]             [-0.121,-0.005]
 Central region                                                -0.217                      0.005
                                                            [-0.467,0.036]              [-0.19,0.193]
 Oriental region                                               -0.366                     -0.284
                                                             [-0.621,-0.1]              [-0.53,-0.048]


 Rank test                                                                   0.063
 Cragg-Donald test                                                           0.061
 Test for joint Significance - p-values
 Toy price, food price, conflict                               0.044                       0.026
 Toy price, food price, conflict, treat                        0.005                       0.000
 Toy price, food price                                         0.020                       0.167
 Toy price, food price, treat                                  0.001                       0.000
 Conflict, treat                                               0.143                       0.000
Note: Investment equations including stratum fixed effects. 95% Confidence Intervals in brackets. Zona Cafetera is the
reference region.
                                                                                                                           47




  Table E.13: Cognitive and socio-emotional production functions with stratum fixed effects

                                                               Cognition                         Socio-Emotional
                                                      OLS                 IV                  OLS             IV
                                                                    Prices, conflict                    Prices, conflict
 Intercept                                           -0.022             -0.053                0.116          0.161
                                                   [-0.128,0.082]     [-0.203,0.056]          [0,0.229]       [-0.019,0.303]
 Treatment                                            0.086              0.129                0.002              -0.124
                                                   [-0.014,0.191]     [-0.061,0.286]       [-0.106,0.106]     [-0.288,0.148]
 Log child’s cognitive skill (t)                       0.68              0.719                0.041              -0.011
                                                   [0.591,0.777]      [0.579,0.804]        [-0.069,0.149]      [-0.114,0.16]
 Log child’s socio-emotional skill (t)               -0.034             -0.021                0.541               0.51
                                                   [-0.125,0.049]     [-0.123,0.099]        [0.418,0.689]      [0.391,0.693]
 Log mother’s cognitive skill (t)                     0.191              0.073                -0.061             0.065
                                                   [0.059,0.338]      [-0.39,0.336]        [-0.211,0.076]     [-0.391,0.426]
 Log mother’s socio-emotional skill (t)               0.095              0.092                0.034              0.042
                                                   [0.026,0.167]      [-0.017,0.168]       [-0.057,0.121]     [-0.063,0.151]
 Log of number of children (t)                           0              -0.002                0.008              -0.006
                                                   [-0.044,0.046]     [-0.046,0.054]       [-0.035,0.054]     [-0.049,0.061]
 Log of material investment (t+1)                     0.068              0.335                0.133              -0.507
                                                   [-0.011,0.143]     [-0.007,0.984]        [0.042,0.231]      [-0.845,0.29]
 Log of time investment (t+1)                         0.064              -0.21                0.094              0.984
                                                   [-0.024,0.159]     [-0.927,0.324]       [-0.023,0.199]     [-0.057,1.409]
 Central region                                      -0.132             -0.054                -0.176             -0.335
                                                   [-0.273,0.006]     [-0.221,0.199]       [-0.326,-0.027]    [-0.531,-0.055]
 Oriental region                                      0.162              0.183                -0.182             -0.131
                                                   [0.026,0.309]      [0.009,0.392]        [-0.341,-0.038]    [-0.401,0.082]

Note: Production functions including stratum fixed effects. 95% confidence Intervals in brackets. Zona Cafetera is the
reference region.
