NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANALYZING THE LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
Maury Gittleman
Mark A. Klee
Morris M. Kleiner
Working Paper 20961
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20961
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

This paper benefited from discussions with Stephanie Ewert, Hwikwon Ham, Hubert Janicki, and
Jeremy Skog. We also thank seminar participants at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau,
and the Upjohn Institute for Employment Research for their helpful comments. This paper is released
to inform interested parties of research and to encourage discussion. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
any other agency of the U.S. Department of Labor, or the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Maury Gittleman, Mark A. Klee, and Morris M. Kleiner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Analyzing the Labor Market Outcomes of Occupational Licensing
Maury Gittleman, Mark A. Klee, and Morris M. Kleiner
NBER Working Paper No. 20961
February 2015
JEL No. J30,J38,J4,J44,J48,K23,L5,L51,L88
ABSTRACT
Recent assessments of occupational licensing have shown varying effects of the institution on labor
market outcomes. This study revisits the relationship between occupational licensing and labor market
outcomes by analyzing a new topical module to the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
Relative to previously available data, the topical module offers more detailed information on occupational
licensing from government, with larger sample sizes and access to richer sets of person-level characteristics.
We exploit this larger and more detailed data set to examine the labor market outcomes of occupational
licensing and how workers obtain these licenses from government. More specifically, we analyze
whether there is evidence of a licensing wage premium, and how this premium varies with aspects
of the regulatory regime such as the requirements to obtain a license or certification and the level of
government oversight. After controlling for observable heterogeneity, including occupational status,
we find that those with a license earn higher pay, are more likely to be employed, and have a higher
probability of retirement and pension plan offers.
Maury Gittleman
Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Avenue NE, Rm 4130
Washington, DC 20212
gittleman_m@bls.gov
Mark A. Klee
Social, Economic, and
Housing Statistics Division
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
mark.a.klee@census.gov

Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey School of Public Affairs
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu

1. Introduction
The study of the regulation of occupations has a long and distinguished tradition in
economics (Smith, 1937). Some economists have viewed such regulation through the prism of
rent-seeking behavior and have empirically examined the economic effect of occupational
licensing within that framework (Friedman and Kuznets, 1945; Friedman, 1962). In contrast,
others have suggested that regulation provides incentives for workers to enhance their human
capital through greater investments in their work life (Shapiro, 1986).
As an empirical issue, occupational licensing has become an increasingly important
factor in the regulation of services in the United States. The number of occupations that require
a license from government has grown since the 1970s, and the percentage licensed has been
increasing as well (Greene, 1969; Kleiner, 2006). The number of studies analyzing the labor
market institution of occupational regulation, however, has not been growing proportionately.
Perhaps one of the largest barriers standing in the way of analyzing occupational
licensing has been that there is no well-organized national data set available for examination. No
national or state data exist to assess the wage effects of occupational licensing. Although the
Bureau of Labor Statistics surveys workers on their union status, and also asks whether they are
displaced through the Current Population Survey, no information is currently available from this
survey about whether individuals are certified or licensed as a condition of employment.1
Although occupational associations, such as the American Bar Association and the American
Dental Association, collect wage and salary data, as well as the number of new entrants and pass
rates by state through the early 1980s, the state pass rate information is no longer tabulated or

1

Beginning January 2015, the CPS included three questions on certification and licensing, but the data being
collected will not be made available for public use until sometime in 2016.

1

released to the public. Moreover, state licensing boards either do not have reliable data to
provide this information to researchers or, if they do, they are often reluctant to provide it.
New data to address important licensing issues have, however, recently become available.
Specifically, we analyze the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). This panel is a large, nationally representative data set covering the period May 2008
through November 2013. This is the first time a large government survey specifically asked
questions about licensing and certification. Moreover, our examination of the role of licensing is
extended beyond wage determination to include the analysis and evaluation of employee benefits
and likelihood of finding employment.
Because estimates about the potential costs and benefits of licensing are difficult to
obtain, our ability to use these new data should advance knowledge about the labor market
effects of certification and licensing. For the most part, economists interested in studying
occupational licensing have needed to find ways to pull together their own data and approaches
(Kleiner and Krueger, 2010, 2013). An example of one approach is examining why states or
countries have different occupational licensing requirements. Why does Iowa license more than
twice as many workers as Indiana (Kleiner and Vorotnikov, 2015)? Is occupational licensing
endogenous to the industrial, occupational, demographic, or political composition of a state?
Empirical work in political economy suggests that political influence and funding of licensing
initiatives by the professions are the most important factors influencing whether an occupation
becomes regulated by the states (Graddy, 1991; Wheelan, 1999).
Another approach to examining licensing might be to seek to find ways to examine the
actual skill levels of certain occupations. Although regulated occupations routinely require
license holders to attend continuing education seminars, examinations on the contents are rarely

2

given to the persons that attend, and denial of permission to work in the occupations once an
individual passes the initial licensing exam is highly unusual. Finally, in thinking about the
policy implications of empirical research in this area, it is important to keep in mind the policy
option of certification. This potential substitute for licensing allows consumers or employers to
choose whether they are willing to pay a higher wage for someone with greater state or privatedocumented skills. It is plausible to think that certification would have lesser effects on labor
market outcomes within an occupation, because it would not restrict supply as tightly, and also
that it would have lesser effects on quality. Thus, certification offers an intermediate choice
between the extremes of no state or private role in qualifications at all and the absolute
requirement of having a license before working at certain occupations. Our study also examines
the influence of certification.
Prior to 2006, the data available on occupational licensing in the United States were
restricted to classifications as to whether various occupations were licensed at the state level,
often based on the America’s Career InfoNet data (Kleiner and Krueger, 2010, 2013). These
classifications could be linked to Census Bureau occupational employment data to derive
estimates of the proportion of workers in licensed jobs. Although informative, such data have
clear limitations. First, compliance with state licensing requirements could be less than
complete; some of those classified as working in licensed occupations may not in fact be
licensed. Moreover, many of the workers may be covered by occupational licensing statutes but
not have attained a license (Gittleman and Kleiner, forthcoming). Second, some occupations
have a trial period during which workers can perform a job before becoming licensed. For
example, accountants may work in an accounting firm prior to obtaining their license. Third, and
probably most important, the state data miss licensing that takes place at the local and federal

3

level. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) report that restricting analysis to state licensing would miss
10.5 percent of licensed workers, and that 49.8 percent of licensed workers have a credential that
was issued by the state and some other jurisdiction.
As employment in the United States shifted from manufacturing to service industries, the
members of the occupations established a formal set of standards that governed members of the
occupation. Wheelan (1999) argues that, for a professional association, obtaining licensing
legislation meant raising funds from members to lobby the state legislature, particularly the
chairs of appropriate legislative committees. In addition, the occupation association often
solicits volunteers from its membership to work on legislative campaigns. With both financial
contributions and volunteers, the occupational association has a significant ability to influence
legislation and its administration, especially when opposition to regulatory legislation is absent
or minimal.
Occupational regulation refers to mechanisms to impose minimum standards (often
educational standards) for entry and the ability to continue working in an occupation. These
regulations range from less restrictive (e.g., requirements to register their names, addresses, and
qualifications with a government agency), having an exclusive right to a title, known as
certification, to very restrictive (e.g., licensure, where it is illegal to practice an occupation for
pay without meeting government standards). We are able to examine these concepts with the
data we use from the SIPP.
We contrast the results from the SIPP with those obtained from the Princeton Data
Improvement Initiative (PDII) (Kleiner and Krueger, 2013). The PDII used the results of a
telephone survey of the workforce conducted by Westat that asked detailed questions on
occupational regulation as well as questions on the labor market status of individuals in 2008.

4

These questions probe the kind of government regulation required to perform a job, the process
of becoming licensed, and the level of education and tests necessary to become licensed. The
results of the Westat survey, as well as separate validation results from a related Gallup survey,
indicate that occupational licensing can be reasonably well measured in labor force surveys.
However, the small sample of slightly more than 2,200 individuals and the resulting lack of
representativeness for some groups may bias some of those results. We expect that using the
SIPP with its larger sample size and more detailed set of labor market questions would further
our analysis of the role of occupational licensing in the labor market. We next, however, provide
a background for our empirical results by examining the rationale for occupational regulation
within different institutional frameworks.
2. Theories of Occupational Licensing
Here we review the evolution of theories of occupational licensing, ranging from the
mechanistic ones to those that utilize human capital theory. We begin by outlining the simplest
theory of occupational licensing, which draws more heavily on administrative procedures than
on economics. We then incorporate insights from more complex theoretical models that
challenge some of the straightforward assumptions of the simple theory and which thereby
provide richer insights into the operation and effects of regulation.
A simple theory of occupational licensing envisions a costless supply of unbiased,
capable gatekeepers and enforcers. The gatekeepers screen entrants to the occupation, barring
those whose skills or character suggest a tendency toward low-quality output. The enforcers
monitor incumbents and discipline those whose performance is below standard with punishments
that may include revocation of the license needed to practice. Assuming that entry and
performance are controlled in these ways, the quality of service in the profession will almost
5

automatically be maintained at or above standards that are set by the gatekeeper to the
profession. Within this approach, only those who have the funds to invest in training and the
ability to do the work are able to enter the occupation.
Introducing economics to this otherwise mechanical model by noting that a key discipline
on incumbents — the threat of revoking one’s license — may not mean much if incumbents can
easily reenter the profession, such as by moving to a new firm, or by shifting to an alternative
occupation with little loss of income. Since grandfathering (i.e., allowing current workers to
bypass the new requirements) is the norm when occupations seek to become licensed, incumbent
workers are usually supportive of the regulation process. In the absence of grandfathering, lower
skilled workers in the occupation may have to seek alternative employment. For example, if sales
skills are the key to both providing licensed sales of heart monitors and the unlicensed selling of
shoes or cars, then individuals may shift between these lines of work with little loss of income.
Under these circumstances, meaningful discipline for license holders may require
deliberate steps to ensure that the loss of license entails significant financial loss. Such
additional steps could include imposition of fines, improved screening to prevent expelled
practitioners from reentering the occupation, or requiring all incumbents to put up capital that
would be forfeited upon loss of the license. To offset the possibility that incumbents could shift
to other occupations with little loss of income, entry requirements could be tightened to limit
supply and create monopoly rents within the licensed occupation. The threat of losing these
monopoly rents could, in principle, give incentives to incumbents to maintain quality standards.
This may also result in some increases in human capital investments in order to attain the
additional requirements. The rents could also motivate potential entrants to invest in high levels
of training in order to gain admittance. This suggests that licensing can raise quality within an

6

industry by restricting supply, thereby raising labor wages.
State-regulated occupations can use political institutions to restrict supply and raise the
wages of licensed practitioners. There is assumed to be a once-and-for-all income gain that
accrues to current members of the occupation who are grandfathered in and do not have to meet
the newly established standard (Perloff, 1980). Generally, workers who are grandfathered in are
not required to ever meet the standards of the new entrants. Individuals who attempt to enter the
occupation in the future will need to balance the economic rents of the field’s increased
monopoly power against the greater difficulty of meeting the entrance requirements.
Once an occupation is regulated, members of that occupation in a geographic or political
jurisdiction can implement tougher statutes or examination pass rates and may gain relative to
those who have easier requirements by further restricting the supply of labor and obtaining
economic rents for incumbents. Restrictions would include lowering the pass rate on licensing
exams, imposing higher general and specific requirements, and implementing tougher residency
requirements that limit new arrivals in the area from qualifying for a license. Moreover,
individuals who have finished schooling in the occupation may decide not to go to a particular
political jurisdiction where the pass rate is low because both the economic and shame costs may
be high.
One additional effect of licensing is that individuals who are not allowed to practice at all
in an occupation as a consequence of regulation may then enter an unlicensed occupation,
thereby shifting the supply curve outward and driving down wages in these unregulated
occupations. If licensing requirements contain elements of required general human capital, then
these workers may possibly raise the average skill level in their new occupation.
3. Data
7

To analyze a range of labor market effects of occupational regulation, we employ data
from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). This panel is a
large, nationally representative data set covering the period May 2008 through November 2013.
Every four months, respondents answer a core group of questions about the preceding four
months. These responses provide detailed monthly information about demographics,
employment situations, earnings, and a variety of other characteristics. Respondents also answer
a separate group of topical questions that vary from one interview, or wave, to the next. We
primarily utilize the Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates topical
module linked with Core data from the thirteenth wave of the 2008 panel, collected between
September and December 2012. In addition, we refer to previous topical modules to the SIPP in
order to estimate the impact of license and certification attainment on nonwage benefits.
Specifically, we exploit the Employer-Provided Health Benefits topical module in the sixth wave
and the Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module in the eleventh wave.
3.1. Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates Topical Module
The Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates topical module
offers data about the most recent license or certification that a respondent earned.2 To begin, all
respondents aged 16 and over answered the question “Do/Does you/he/she have a professional
certification or a state or industry license?”
Responses to this question are of primary interest for our analysis because they enable us
to investigate how labor market outcomes differ for those who obtain these credentials.
Individuals who had attained a professional certification or license then answered the question
“Who awarded this certification or license?”
2

See Ewert and Kominski (2014) for a description of this data set. The Federal Interagency Working Group on
Expanded Measures of Enrollment and Attainment developed and tested the survey questions that constitute this
topical module. See Bielick et al. (2013) for details regarding the development process.

8

Finally, these respondents replied whether the awarding body required three common
minimum standards in order to earn and maintain the credential: taking courses or training,
demonstrating skills while on the job or passing a test or exam, and taking periodic tests or
continuing education classes or earning CEUs (continuing education units).
Our data bear several important advantages for our analysis. First, the topical module
contains a direct measure of credential attainment. Other large, nationally representative data
sets including the decennial census and the Current Population Survey lack such measures.3
Studies that employ these data sets infer license attainment from occupational affiliation and,
sometimes, state. If regulations require a license to perform tasks within an occupation, then any
respondent in that occupation is imputed to have achieved a license. Consequently, previous
examinations of the labor market impacts of licensing in large, nationally representative data sets
limit themselves to relatively few institutional settings, thereby diminishing their external
validity.4 A second issue with this imputation strategy is evidence of substantial measurement
error in occupational affiliation, documented by Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) and others.
Measurement error in occupational affiliation could create measurement error in licensure status.

3

As noted in an earlier footnote, the CPS, as of January 2015, now includes three questions on certification and
licensing, but the data from these questions is not expected to be made available to the public until sometime in
2016.
4
Law and Marks (2009) use the decennial census to document how the introduction of licensing regulations during
the Progressive Era affected outcomes in eleven detailed occupations. Kleiner (2006) and Klee (2013) exploit
variation across states and over time in the stringency of licensing regulations to analyze wage effects for four
detailed occupations in the decennial census and Current Population Survey, respectively. Kleiner (2000) compares
average earnings across four licensed occupations and similar unlicensed occupations. Kleiner (2006) presents
average wage changes from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79) respondents who moved
into and out of licensed occupations. One notable exception is Gittleman and Kleiner (forthcoming). They
construct a comprehensive list of licensed occupations and categorize each state-by-occupation pair along two
dimensions: whether no, some, or all workers must have a license and how long this licensing policy has been in
effect. They estimate the licensing wage effect using the NLSY79. Although their regulatory data improve external
validity, a direct measure of license attainment would facilitate identifying the licensing wage premium in
occupations that were only partially licensed. In the absence of such a direct measure, the authors report a range of
wage effects under extreme assumptions about the fraction of workers in the occupation that has a license and the
starting date of the licensing regulation.

9

Kleiner and Krueger (2013) also emphasize the importance of direct measures of license
and certification attainment. In explaining the relative inattention given to these prevalent
policies, they claim “a major reason for the lack of empirical work has been the absence of
national data that clearly defines whether a worker is regulated and the extent of regulation.”
Our data help fill that void. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) find that attaining a license confers a
significant wage premium. This relationship persists when they attempt to mitigate selection
bias by using only within-occupation wage variation to identify this effect. However, their
sample size was relatively small, about 2,200 respondents, with a low response rate compared
with government labor force surveys. The SIPP’s large sample size, its second advantage,
allows for more externally valid and more precise estimates of the wage benefits of professional
licenses. Increased precision is especially advantageous when estimating models that include
occupation fixed effects.
A third advantage of the SIPP is that the core data include a breadth of information about
individuals and their labor market outcomes. This improves our ability to control for observable
heterogeneity that might be correlated with both attainment and labor market outcomes.5 The
variety of data also expands the ability to analyze how the attainment of licenses and
certifications relates to nonwage benefits. Many surveys lack information about these forms of
compensation, perhaps explaining why this relationship remains an understudied topic.6
The data also have some limitations for our analysis. First, the Professional
Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates topical module does not allow us to
5

Kleiner and Krueger (2010, 2013) report that, on average, workers who have attained a license are more educated,
more likely to belong to a union, and more likely to work for a public employer. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) also
note that workers who have attained a license are older on average and more likely to work in the services sector.
Ewert and Kominski (2014) conclude that licenses and certifications are more common among individuals who are
more educated, non-Hispanic white, aged 30 through 49, native born, and employed.
6
To our knowledge, Gittleman and Kleiner (forthcoming) is the only previous examination of the relationship
between licensing and nonwage benefits, though their analysis, because it used the NLSY79, is cohort-specific and
does not cover the entire prime working age range.

10

distinguish confidently between respondents who have earned licenses and respondents who
have earned certifications.7 Both credentials signal a worker’s quality to potential employers in
markets characterized by asymmetric information. The fundamental difference between a
license and a certification is that a licensed worker may not practice by law without a license,
whereas a certified worker may practice by law without a certification but may not use the title
held by those who have the certification.
Our main explanatory variable of interest indicates whether an individual had attained
either a license or a certification. We refer to this classification as “Definition 1.” We also use
characteristics of respondents’ credentials to construct a classification of licensed and certified
workers. In particular, we assume that a respondent had attained a license if a federal, state, or
local government issued that respondent’s credential. By contrast, we assume that a respondent
had attained a certification if a private agency issued that respondent’s credential.8 We refer to
this classification as “Definition 2.” This definition assumes that licensing regulations may
require practitioners to obtain only government-issued credentials, and that privately issued
credentials may not serve as a legal basis for restricting the right to practice. Although this
assumption is likely invalid for some occupations, it is generally consistent with the current
institutional context across the United States. One disadvantage of this criterion is that the
topical module only asked respondents about the characteristics of their newest credential.
7

By contrast, Kleiner and Krueger (2013) distinguish confidently between licensed and certified workers utilizing
the question “Would someone who does not have a license or certificate be legally allowed to do your job?” The
SIPP topical module does include the following question: “Is this certification or license required for your/his/her
current or most recent job?” Some respondents might have interpreted this question as asking whether the credential
was a legal requirement. Differences in legal requirements would allow us to distinguish licensed from certified
workers. Other respondents might have interpreted this question as asking whether the credential was an informal
requirement. Examples of such informal requirements occur when employers require the credential to consider a job
candidate qualified or when completing a task requires some proficiency that only credentialed workers possess. To
the extent that informal requirements and legal requirements do not align, this interpretation would not allow us to
distinguish licensed from certified workers. We lack sufficient information to determine the relative prevalence of
these two interpretations and, consequently, do not use this question to define licensing status.
8
Private organizations that issue credentials in our data include industries, businesses, companies, nonprofit
organizations, professional associations, and other private associations.

11

Therefore, our classification will suffer from measurement error to the extent that workers
obtained both a license and a certification.
A second limitation of our data is that the SIPP collects information on up to two jobs
and up to two businesses, but respondents did not indicate the job or business for which their
credential was relevant.9 We assume that the credential was relevant only for the job or business
on which a respondent earned the most income during a particular reference month, which we
refer to as the “main” job or business in that month. We drop all other jobs and businesses in
that month, regardless of a respondent’s licensure or certification status. Regression estimates
include job- or business-level information on hourly wages (derived from monthly earnings,
usual weekly hours worked and weeks worked), union status, occupation, broad industry
affiliation, establishment size, and employer type.10 These variables will suffer from
measurement error to the extent that respondents held credentials that were not relevant for main
jobs or businesses.
Demographics, job- or business-level information, and employment status come from
Core data in the same wave of the SIPP. We also use these Core data to derive an employersponsored health insurance outcome that we employ to examine the impact of licenses and
certifications on nonwage benefits. Specifically, respondents with employer-sponsored health
insurance chose whether their employer paid all, part, or none of that plan’s premium. We use
this question to create a variable that takes a value of 1 for respondents whose employers paid
the entire health insurance premium and 0 for all other respondents who had health insurance

9

By contrast, the survey described by Kleiner and Krueger (2013) specifically asked about licenses and
certifications that were relevant for respondents’ main job.
10
Monthly earnings include regular hourly pay and salary, tips, overtime, commissions, bonuses, and cash awards.
For business owners, monthly earnings also include profits.

12

through their employer.11 One problem with this variable is that respondents with multiple jobs
or businesses did not identify which employer sponsored their health insurance plan.
Consequently, this variable will suffer from measurement error to the extent that workers
provided information about health insurance obtained through jobs or businesses for which their
licenses and certifications were irrelevant.
Our sample contains respondents aged 18 through 64 who worked in the civilian labor
force. For all analyses, we restrict our sample to individuals who provided valid data for the
dependent variable.12 When we classify a worker’s licensure or certification status according to
Definition 1, we restrict the sample to respondents who provided valid data about credential
attainment. When we classify a worker’s licensure or certification status according to Definition
2, we also restrict the sample to respondents who provided valid data about the source of their
credential.13 Finally, in models that include occupation fixed effects, we restrict the sample to
respondents who provided valid data on their occupational affiliation.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for licensed and certified civilian workers. Of civilian
workers aged 18 through 64, 28.0 percent had attained a license or certification in the fall of
2012. Sample attrition likely biases this estimate upward. By Wave 13, a considerable portion
of initial respondents had exited the sample.14 Zabel (1998) provides evidence that sample
attrition was more likely among respondents of the 1990 SIPP panel who were unemployed or
11

Note that this variable is undefined for respondents with health insurance coverage through a spouse’s plan only.
Because we drop observations with imputed dependent variables, our results are not representative of the entire
U.S. population of civilian workers aged 18 through 64. The Census Bureau does not account for licensure or
certification status in the imputation process. Including observations with imputed dependent variables without
modeling nonresponse would bias estimates toward zero according to Hirsch and Schumacher (2004). Future work
should consider more carefully the impact of nonresponse on the estimated wage benefits and nonwage benefits
accruing to licensed and certified workers.
13
Typically, the Census Bureau imputes data for individuals who provided an invalid response to a question in SIPP.
However, these invalid responses remain in the Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates
topical module. Item nonresponse rates were relatively small at 2.5 percent for the direct measure of credential
attainment and 1.4 percent for the source of the credential.
14
Of the 105,663 respondents who participated in Wave 1 of the SIPP, only 66,034 participated in Wave 13 of the
SIPP. An additional 10,954 Wave 13 respondents entered the sample after Wave 1.
12

13

out of the labor force in the previous wave. Ewert and Kominski (2014) illustrate that
respondents who were unemployed or out of the labor force for each of the previous four months
were less likely to have attained a license or certification.15 Table 1 also presents summary
statistics when we classify licensure and certification status according to Definition 2. Under
this assumption, 19.8 percent of civilian workers aged 18 through 64 had attained a license, and
8.0 percent of this population had attained a certification. Table 2 describes who issued the
credential and how workers achieved the credential. Among licensed or certified workers, 64.1
percent received their credential from the state. In order to obtain their credential, 93.0 percent
of workers needed to complete courses or training.
Table 3 lists the most common occupations for licensed or certified individuals in our
data. Table 4 lists the analogous occupations when we classify licensure and certification status
according to Definition 2. The most commonly regulated occupations in our data are commonly
regulated in practice, which suggests that our data are reliable. Nevertheless, the relatively low
percentage of workers in some universally licensed occupations who report having a credential
suggests that the data remain imperfect. Consider the 138 individuals whose responses classify
them as physicians or surgeons on their main job or business. Absent measurement error in
occupational affiliation, regulations predict that all of these respondents had obtained a
professional license. Of the 138 physicians or surgeons, only 107 reported that they had attained
a license or certification.16 Of these 107 respondents, Definition 2 would classify only 86 as
licensed. This deviation from predicted attainment likely reflects measurement error in

15

Beginning with Wave 1 of the 2014 panel, the SIPP will offer a direct measure of credential attainment and
information about who issued these credentials. Consequently, it will be possible to estimate the percentage
licensed and certified based on a sample that minimizes attrition bias.
16
Kleiner and Krueger (2013) report that all fourteen physicians and surgeons in their data had attained a license.

14

attainment data in some cases.17 However, direct measures of attainment could help us identify
measurement error in occupational affiliation in other cases. This example suggests that it is
unclear whether direct measures of license attainment dominate indirect measures that are
implied by occupational affiliation when all practitioners must achieve a license. However,
direct measures of license and certification attainment likely dominate these indirect measures
when practitioners may exercise their occupation legally without a credential.
3.2. Topical Modules in Earlier Waves of 2008 SIPP
As noted, another advantage of our data is the capability to link the Professional
Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates topical module to other topical modules
that accompanied previous waves of the SIPP. This substantially expands the set of outcomes
that we can analyze. For instance, Core SIPP data contain very little information about access to
employer-sponsored retirement and pension plans.18 To improve upon this information, we
utilize data from the Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module, collected between
January and April 2012 in Wave 11 of the SIPP. The availability of previous topical modules
also enables us to expand our estimation sample for some analyses. Core SIPP data contain
information on employer-sponsored health insurance offers only for respondents who have no

17

One potential source of measurement error is proxy response. If a household member is absent at the interview,
the SIPP allows a household member who is present at the interview to answer on behalf of the absent household
member. This form of data collection is known as a proxy interview. Proxy respondents might have relatively poor
knowledge of other household members’ occupations or credential attainment status. To gauge the degree to which
proxy response explains the deviation from predicted attainment that we observe in the data, we compared the
incidence of proxy response across workers with and without a credential in various universally licensed
occupations. While 43.0 percent of physicians and surgeons with a license or certification resulted from a proxy
response, 32.3 percent of physicians and surgeons with no license or certification resulted from a proxy response.
This evidence seems inconsistent with the hypothesis that proxy responses play a disproportionate role in explaining
the deviation from predicted attainment. We also found a generally comparable incidence of proxy response among
cosmetologists, lawyers, and registered nurses with a credential and those without a credential.
18
In the Core SIPP, there is no direct information on retirement and pension plan offers. We can infer that
respondents who received income from retirement or pension plans must have been offered such a plan. However,
we cannot distinguish those who were not offered a retirement or pension plan from those who chose not to
participate. Moreover, Core SIPP data include no characteristics of the job or business that sponsored respondents’
plans. Consequently, we cannot infer whether a respondent’s credential was relevant for this job or business.

15

coverage. To expand our estimation sample, we utilize data from the Employer-Provided Health
Benefits topical module, collected between May and August 2010 in Wave 6 of the SIPP.
The Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module asked all respondents aged 15
and over who held a job or owned a business as of the end of the reference period whether their
main job or business offered a pension or retirement plan to anyone.19 If a respondent replied
affirmatively, the topical module then asked whether the respondent participated in one of these
plans. Respondents who did not participate then selected all of the reasons why they had no
coverage. Several of these reasons indicate ineligibility to receive a retirement or pension plan
offer.20 We use these responses to derive a variable that takes a value of 1 for respondents who
participated in or were eligible for a retirement or pension plan through their main job or
business and a value of 0 for all other respondents aged 15 and over who worked in the civilian
labor force at the end of the reference period. We link this variable to licensing and certification
variables from Wave 13 and to demographics and characteristics of the main job or business
from Wave 11 Core SIPP data.
Our expanded measure of employer-sponsored health insurance offers stems from both
Core SIPP and the Employer-Provided Health Benefits topical module. Core SIPP asked all
respondents whether they had health insurance coverage in their own name or in someone else’s
name. Respondents with health insurance then replied whether a current employer sponsored
19

This topical module defines the respondent’s main job or business according to the following algorithm. For
respondents who held multiple jobs at the end of the four-month reference period, the main job is the one on which
the respondent worked the most weeks during the reference period. The topical module designates the main
business using the same criterion for respondents who owned multiple businesses at the end of the reference period.
If a respondent worked an equal number of weeks at two or more jobs, the main job is the one on which the
respondent usually worked the most hours. If a respondent worked an equal number of weeks at two or more
businesses, the main business is the one on which the respondent earned the most during the reference period. If a
respondent held a job and owned a business at the end of the reference period, the topical module asks about
retirement plans associated with the largest earnings source during the four-month reference period.
20
The reasons that indicate ineligibility are: the employer offered no plan to anyone in the respondent’s type of job,
the respondent was not working at the job long enough to qualify, the respondent was too old or too young to
qualify, and the respondent was ineligible by virtue of being a part-time or temporary employee.

16

this health insurance plan. The topical module asked working respondents aged 15 and over
without health insurance sponsored by their current employer whether their employer offered
health insurance to anyone. Respondents answering affirmatively then chose the reason why
they did not participate. One of these reasons indicates ineligibility to receive a health insurance
offer. We use these responses to derive a variable that takes a value of 1 for respondents who
participated in or were eligible for an employer-provided health insurance plan and a value of 0
for all other respondents aged 15 and over who worked in the civilian labor force at the end of
the reference period. We link this variable to the licensing and certification variables from Wave
13 and to demographics and characteristics of jobs or businesses from Wave 6 Core SIPP data.
Although these previous topical modules afford the benefit of expanding the set of labor
market outcomes that we can examine, one key obstacle impedes our use of these data.
Specifically, the Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates topical
module does not offer data regarding when respondents attained their credentials. Consequently,
we can observe licensure and certification status as of September through December 2012, but
this information is unobservable as of January through April 2012 and May through August
2010. One potential solution is to assume that workers’ licensure and certification status
remained unchanged across all three reference periods. This assumption seems more likely to
hold for the reference period January through April 2012 than for May through August 2010.
Under this assumption, our primary explanatory variable of interest would suffer from
measurement error to the extent that respondents attained credentials or allowed credentials to
lapse between these three reference periods.
We pursue an alternative solution that restricts the estimation sample, likely resulting in
less measurement error but also diminished external validity. In particular, we assume that a

17

worker’s licensure and certification status in Wave 13 matched that worker’s status in a previous
wave if the respondent’s “main” occupational spell in Wave 13 was ongoing in that preceding
wave. Workers in a licensed occupation may not practice by law without the credential, so
workers whose licenses lapse likely change occupations. Similarly, employers might view a
certification as a signal of a worker’s quality, so workers whose certifications lapse may be more
likely to change occupations. Thus, we restrict our sample to include only those workers whose
main occupational spell in Wave 13 was ongoing in the relevant previous wave. For the
Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module, we further require that a worker’s
occupation on the main job or business was the same in Wave 13 and Wave 11. Note that the
Employer-Provided Health Benefits topical module collects information about benefits on any
job or business. Consequently, our indicator variable for health insurance offers will suffer from
measurement error to the extent that workers provide information about health insurance plans
on jobs or businesses for which their licenses and certifications were irrelevant.
4. Empirical Approach
Before turning to our results, we briefly sketch the empirical approach that we take. The
main goal of this study is to assess the impact of holding a license on various labor market
outcomes. The first question we will address is whether those obtaining a license earn a wage
premium. To do so, we will estimate regressions of the following form:
(1)

,

where the dependent variable,
i,

, is the log of hourly wages in month m for individual

indicates whether individual i holds a license (under Definition 1 or Definition 2),

is a vector of independent variables that does not vary by month,
variables that does vary by month, and

is the error term.

18

is a vector of explanatory

Besides hourly wages, as noted, we are also interested in assessing the impact of
licensing status on other outcomes, including the probability of employment, of being offered
employer-sponsored health insurance, and of being offered a retirement plan. Representing these
1-0 outcomes as

, we estimate regressions of the following form:

(2)
If

.

is drawn from a normal distribution, then equation (2) implies a probit. Regardless of

whether we are estimating a wage regression or a regression for a limited dependent variable,
sample weights are used, and standard errors are estimated via balanced repeated replication
(BRR) in order to take into account the complex survey design of the SIPP.
One must be cautious about interpreting the coefficient

as causal, given that those with

a license may differ from those without a license in ways unobserved by the econometrician.21
With our cross-sectional data, we control for observable heterogeneity within the limits of the
data. For each of our outcomes, we estimate specifications with no occupation controls, with 2digit occupation fixed effects and then with 3-digit occupation fixed effects. In these cases,
identification is coming from within-occupation comparisons, which may be across states with
different licensing requirements or within a state between those who have attained a license and
those who have not. It should also be noted that to the degree there is measurement error in
determining licensing status, the coefficient on licensing will be biased toward zero.22 Although
the SIPP module likely has less measurement error in licensing status than would be the case if

21

See Kleiner and Krueger (2013) for some discussion of the difficulty of finding viable instruments for licensing.
To gauge an aspect of this attenuation bias, we estimate average wage differentials across workers with and
without a credential in various universally licensed occupations. Physicians and surgeons without a license or
certification do not earn significantly less than physicians and surgeons with a license or certification, although this
coefficient was estimated relatively imprecisely (standard error 16.6 percent). However, registered nurses without a
license or certification earn 24.7 percent (standard error 8.3 percent) lower wages than registered nurses with a
license or certification after controlling for observable characteristics. We find qualitatively similar results when we
classify license attainment status according to Definition 2.
22

19

we imputed licensing status on the basis of regulations, we have noted anomalies that suggest the
presence of measurement error nonetheless.
5. Results
In this section, we assess the benefits accruing to workers with a professional license or
certification. We first report the wage gains associated with these credentials. We then examine
whether the source of a credential or the requirements to earn or maintain a credential matter for
wages. Next, we consider the nonwage benefits of license and certification attainment. We
study these effects both in Wave 13 Core data and in data from previous topical modules. After
documenting the average impact of professional licenses and certifications on wages and
nonwage benefits, we close by analyzing the distributional effects of these credentials.
5.1. Wages
We begin in Tables 5 through 8 by performing a wage analysis similar to that in Kleiner
and Krueger (2013). We restrict the sample to person-month observations from respondents who
were employed in the civilian labor force at the end of the month. We additionally restrict the
sample to observations from respondents who provided valid data on union status and whose
implied hourly wages fell between $5 and $100. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) employ sample
selection criteria that differ from ours along two dimensions: they set a different standard for
outliers in the upper tail of the hourly wage distribution, and they allow for almost no imputed
data. Although the estimation sample in Kleiner and Krueger (2013) contains only one wage
observation per respondent, our sample contains up to four. We also control for the same set of
observables to the extent possible; our explanatory variables do not include measures of math
and reading skills, we replace a quadratic in work experience with a quadratic in age, and we
create a service worker indicator variable based on industry codes. Finally, we assume that a

20

worker’s licensure and certification status remained unchanged over the reference period of May
through November 2012.
First, we estimate the impact of professional license and certification attainment on
wages.23 Panel A of Table 5 presents the results of regressions that do not distinguish between
licensed and certified workers.24 Column (1) illustrates that workers who have attained either of
these credentials earn approximately 23.6 percent higher wages on average.25 Columns (2)
through (4) document that, once we account for observable heterogeneity, the wage premium
associated with these credentials falls. Estimates in column (4) suggest that workers with a
license or certification earn approximately 6.5 percent (standard error 0.9 percent) higher wages
on average controlling for detailed occupation. By comparison, union workers earn
approximately 18.2 percent (standard error 1.1 percent) higher wages on average than nonunion
workers after accounting for observable heterogeneity including detailed occupation. Gittleman
and Kleiner (forthcoming) also conclude that the union wage effect outstrips the licensing wage
effect.
We favor the estimates in column (4) of Table 5. These estimates exploit only wage
variation within 3-digit occupations to identify the effect of a credential, thereby mitigating
potential selection bias. This strategy yields a comparable interpretation of the estimated wage
premium relative to the corresponding estimate in existing studies that focus on a more limited
set of occupations. Since our identification strategy relies on variation in credential attainment
within 3-digit occupations, we do not interpret our estimate of 6.5 percent as the wage premium
23

The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job or business implied by monthly earnings, usual weekly
hours worked, and number of weeks worked during that month.
24
Unless otherwise stated, all comparisons in the text are significant at the 90 percent level. The estimates discussed
here are based on responses from a sample of the population and may differ from the actual values because of
sampling variability and other factors. For information on sampling and nonsampling error, see United States
Census Bureau, Survey of Income and Program Participation, “Source and Accuracy Statements,”
http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/sipp/tech-documentation/source-accuracy-statements.html.
25
Throughout, as an approximation, we equate log points with percentage differences.

21

accruing to all licensed or certified individuals.26 In the absence of measurement error, wage
variation within universally licensed 3-digit occupations (e.g., physicians and surgeons, lawyers)
would not contribute to the identification of our preferred estimate of the effect of a credential.
Only wage variation within certified or partially licensed 3-digit occupations (e.g., accountants
and auditors, elementary and middle school teachers) would contribute to the identification of
our preferred estimate of the effect of a credential. However, Table 3 shows that some workers
in universally licensed 3-digit occupations report having no license or certification, which
suggests that we do not identify the true effect of a credential due to measurement error.
Our inability to distinguish confidently between licensed and certified workers according
to Definition 1 implies that the estimated wage premium in Panel A of Table 5 is a weighted
average of the gains accruing to licensed and certified workers. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) fail
to reject the hypothesis of no certification wage premium, although they do show evidence that
workers with a license earn a wage premium. These conclusions suggest that the wage premium
according to Definition 1 underestimates the wage effect of a license. This might explain why
our estimate falls below the consensus range of licensing wage premia between 10 percent and
15 percent that Kleiner and Krueger (2013) cite. In Panel B of Table 5, we utilize the source of a
worker’s credential to distinguish between licensed and certified workers. Column (4) implies
that, according to Definition 2, licensed workers earn approximately 5.0 percent higher wages on
average relative to workers who have no credential and workers who have a certification.

26

Note that the variation in credential attainment that we exploit in this paper may be either within-state variation or
across-state variation. We also estimated the regressions in Tables 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, and 13 including state fixed
effects to exploit only within-state variation in credential attainment. Only one coefficient estimate changed in sign
or statistical significance; after controlling for observables including detailed occupation, licensed workers were
more likely than unlicensed and uncredentialed workers to receive employer-sponsored health insurance offers (see
Panel B of Table 13). Estimates are available upon request.

22

Table 6 summarizes the results of regressions that include indicators for licensed and
certified workers according to Definition 2. Column (4) notes that after controlling for
observable heterogeneity including detailed occupation, licensed workers earn approximately 6.2
percent (standard error 1.0 percent) higher wages on average than unlicensed and uncertified
workers. Certified workers earn approximately 7.3 percent (standard error 1.3 percent) higher
wages on average than unlicensed and uncertified workers. One potential reason why these
results differ from those in Kleiner and Krueger (2013) is that the SIPP yields relatively precise
estimates of certification wage effects, owing to its large sample size. We cannot reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the indicators for licensed and certified workers are
equal. These estimates should differ only because licenses are required for entry into an
occupation, whereas certifications are not. To the extent that we accurately classify workers’
licensure and certification status, this finding suggests that the signal that a credential sends
might influence wages more than the labor supply restrictions that licensing policies impose.
Tables 7, 8, and 9 decompose the wage effects of professional licenses and certifications.
In particular, Table 7 analyzes how the wage gain varies with the level of the jurisdiction that
issues the credential. We restrict the estimation sample to individuals who provided valid data
about the source of their credential. Respondents selected only one issuing body, so we cannot
determine how levels of jurisdiction interact to have an impact on wages.27 Table 7 reports
evidence that only credentials issued by local governments are not associated with higher wages
on average, regardless of whether we control for observable heterogeneity. Estimates in column
(4) control for detailed occupational affiliation. Relative to workers with no credential, workers
27

By contrast, Kleiner and Krueger (2013) employ data that allowed respondents to select all relevant levels of
jurisdiction. They show how each type of jurisdictional interaction affects wages. They conclude that, after
controlling for observable heterogeneity including detailed occupation, only state-issued credentials have any wage
effect in isolation. They estimate significant wage premia associated with credentials that were issued by both the
state and federal government and credentials that were issued by both the state and local government.

23

with a federally issued credential earn 8.9 percent (standard error 2.7 percent) higher wages,
workers with a state-issued credential earn 6.1 percent (standard error 1.1 percent) higher wages,
and workers with a privately issued credential earn 7.3 percent (standard error 1.3 percent)
higher wages on average. Thus, we join Kleiner and Krueger (2013) in concluding that federally
issued and state-issued credentials exert a significant influence on wages, whereas locally issued
credentials do not appear to influence wages. However, our data also reveal that privately issued
credentials are associated with a comparable wage premium relative to federally issued
credentials and state-issued credentials. This underscores an advantage of the SIPP topical
module relative to the survey that Kleiner and Krueger (2013) use, as that survey did not request
information about privately issued credentials.
Table 8 investigates how various requirements to attain a license have an impact on
wages.28 We restrict the estimation sample to individuals who provided valid data about these
requirements. Column (5) of Panel A shows that after controlling for observable heterogeneity
including detailed occupation, workers who take courses or training to achieve the credential
earn 6.6 percent (standard error 2.3 percent) higher wages on average. Similarly, workers who
take periodic exams or continuing education classes to maintain the credential earn 5.5 percent
(standard error 1.4 percent) higher wages on average. Panel B reports that these requirements
are also associated with a wage premium when we classify licensed workers according to
Definition 2. Workers who demonstrate skills on the job or pass an exam to obtain their
credentials do not seem to earn higher wages on average. We reject the hypothesis that none of

28

In the appendix, we examine the relationship between wages and whether or not a respondent indicated that a
license was required. Although we do not know if respondents are interpreting this as a legal requirement, the
exercise is similar to an analysis in Kleiner and Krueger (2013). The results in the appendix show that having a
license when it is not required has no influence on wage determination, but, when it is required, licensing raises
wages by 8.4 percent. This wage premium is larger than the one associated with a certification requirement,
although the difference is not statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level.

24

these three licensing requirements helps determine wages. Moreover, column (4) of Panel A
suggests that workers with a credential who do not need to meet any of these three requirements
earn lower wages than workers with no credential. Column (5) of Panel B yields a
corresponding inference when we classify licensed workers according to Definition 2. Kleiner
and Krueger (2013) find no evidence of higher wages among workers who must meet these
requirements to attain their licenses. They fail to reject the hypothesis that no licensing
requirement helps determine wages in models that control for observable heterogeneity. The
contrast in our inferences relative to those of Kleiner and Krueger (2013) might stem from the
relative precision with which we estimate the wage effects of licensing requirements.
Some policymakers and policy analysts claim that licenses and certifications are
particularly important for individuals with lower levels of traditional educational attainment. For
example, a credential might signal high quality especially effectively in labor market segments in
which potential service providers have lower than average levels of traditional educational
attainment. To evaluate this hypothesis, Table 9 allows for heterogeneous licensing wage effects
by quartile in the distribution of average education levels by occupation.29 We restrict the
estimation sample to individuals who provided valid occupation data. Column (4) of Panel A
reveals that licensed or certified workers in each quartile of the distribution of average education
levels by occupation earn more on average relative to workers with no credential.30 We cannot
reject the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates for each quartile are equal. On the other hand,
Column (4) of Panel B reports that according to Definition 2, licensed workers in the second,
third, and fourth quartiles earn, respectively, 5.4 percent, 2.9 percent, and 8.1 percent more than

29

To our knowledge, no existing study has allowed explicitly for heterogeneous licensing wage effects by
occupation. Ewert (2014) concludes that a credential by own education has heterogeneous wage effects.
30
Sample weights were used to calculate average education levels by occupation. The quartile cutoffs for this
distribution are located at 12.73, 13.67, and 15.08 years of education.

25

unlicensed workers. In testing for the presence of heterogeneous effects, we reject the
hypotheses that the coefficients on the fourth and first quartiles are equal and that the coefficients
on the fourth and third quartiles are equal.
5.2. Nonwage Benefits from Wave 13 Core Data
We next exploit SIPP data on nonwage benefits in order to determine whether licenses
and certifications confer gains along these dimensions as well. In this section, we discuss the
results of analyses for the reference period of May through November 2012 using Wave 13 Core
data. These analyses assume that a worker’s licensure and certification status remained
unchanged over the reference period.
Table 10 presents the estimated coefficients and marginal effects of a probit regression
that explains monthly employment status as a function of person-level and job-level observables.
We restrict the estimation sample to respondents aged 18 through 64 who worked in the civilian
labor force in Wave 13 and those who did not work in Wave 13 but were on layoff, looked for
work, or were unable to find work. Estimation sample members who did not work in Wave 13
worked in at least one previous wave of the 2008 SIPP panel. The dependent variable takes a
value of 1 for individuals who were employed during a particular reference month and 0 for all
other individuals. Although existing studies have examined the relationship between licensing
and employment at the macroeconomic level, we are aware of no examinations of this
relationship at the microeconomic level.31 Panel A reports that individuals with a professional
license or certification are 1.5 percent more likely on average to be employed in a particular
month, controlling for observable characteristics of the current or most recent job including
detailed occupation. Panel B decomposes this result by licensure and certification status
31

See Adams, Jackson, and Ekelund (2002) for one study of the relationship between licensing and employment at
the macroeconomic level. They estimate labor supply and labor demand functions for cosmetologists.

26

according to Definition 2. Both licensed and certified individuals bear a significantly higher
likelihood of employment on average than individuals with no credential. We cannot reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the indicators for licensed and certified workers are
equal.
Finally, we investigate in Table 11 whether licensed or certified workers benefit from
more generous employer-provided health insurance. We restrict the sample to respondents who
were employed at the end of any reference month. Among the set of civilian workers aged 18
through 64 who had health insurance coverage through their employer, our dependent variable
indicates whether this employer paid for the entire health insurance premium. Panel A reveals
that workers with a professional license or certification are 3.6 percent more likely on average to
receive more generous employer-provided health insurance offers. This advantage is 2.0 percent
after controlling for observable heterogeneity including detailed occupation. Panel B
decomposes this result by licensure and certification status according to Definition 2. Both
licensed and certified workers are more likely to receive more generous employer-provided
health insurance offers relative to workers without these credentials. We cannot reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the indicators for licensed and certified workers are
equal.
5.3. Nonwage Benefits from Previous Topical Modules
We now link the Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational Certificates
topical module to previous topical modules in order to expand the set of nonwage benefits and
broaden our estimation sample. Recall that we restrict the sample to individuals whose main
occupational spell in Wave 13 was ongoing in the relevant previous wave.32 We then assume
32

Restricting the estimation sample to individuals who had the same occupation on the main job or business in
Wave 13 and Wave 11 reduces the sample size from 39,822 to 17,966. Restricting the estimation sample to

27

that a respondent’s observed licensure or certification status in Wave 13 matched the
unmeasured, corresponding status in that previous wave. Regressions include demographics and
the characteristics of jobs or businesses using Core SIPP data from that previous wave. Our
examination of the Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module and the EmployerProvided Health Benefits topical module assumes a reference period of January through April
2012 and May through August 2010, respectively.
Table 12 details results from the Retirement and Pension Plan Coverage topical module
from Wave 11 of the SIPP. Among the set of individuals aged 18 through 64 who were
employed in the same civilian occupation on the main job or business in Wave 13 as in Wave 11,
the dependent variable indicates whether respondents received a retirement or pension plan offer.
Panel A documents that workers with a professional license or certification are 10.7 percent
more likely to receive retirement and pension plan offers on average. Workers with these
credentials are 3.4 percent more likely to receive such offers on average after we control for
observable heterogeneity including detailed occupation. Panel B of Table 12 decomposes this
estimate by licensure and certification status according to Definition 2. Both licensed and
certified workers are more likely to receive retirement or pension plan offers than workers
without these credentials. By contrast, Gittleman and Kleiner (forthcoming) find no evidence
that workers who are covered by a licensing law have better access to retirement or pension
plans. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the indicators for
licensed and certified workers are equal.
Table 13 contains evidence from the Employer-Provided Health Benefits topical module
to Wave 6 of the SIPP. Among the set of individuals aged 18 through 64 whose main civilian
individuals whose main occupational spell in Wave 13 was ongoing in Wave 6 reduces the sample size from 53,849
to 13,573.

28

occupational spell in Wave 13 was ongoing in Wave 6, the dependent variable indicates whether
respondents received an employer-provided health insurance offer. Recall that Core SIPP data
include information on such offers only for respondents who had no health insurance coverage.
Utilizing a previous topical module more than doubles the sample size. This revised estimation
sample yields different inferences about the impact of professional licenses and certifications on
employer-provided health insurance offers.33 Panel A of Table 13 notes that workers with a
license or certification are 5.0 percent more likely to receive employer-provided health insurance
offers on average. This advantage is 2.2 percent after controlling for observable heterogeneity
including detailed occupation. Panel B of Table 13 analyzes how this effect varies by licensure
and certification status according to Definition 2. Only certified workers appear more likely to
receive these nonwage benefits than workers without a license or certification. By contrast,
Gittleman and Kleiner (forthcoming) find no evidence that workers who are covered by a
licensing law have better access to employer-provided health insurance plans. We cannot reject
the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the indicators for licensed and certified workers
are equal.
Our decision to restrict the sample to occupation stayers would bias the preceding
estimates if workers with a license or certification were differentially likely to change
occupations in response to nonwage benefits. Two countervailing tendencies might give rise to
such behavior. First, to the extent that nonwage benefits are distributed uniformly across
workers in occupations, we expect credentialed workers without these benefits to be less likely to
change occupations relative to uncredentialed workers without these benefits. Higher average
nonwage benefit offer rates suggest that credentialed workers would be more likely to gain
33

When we use Core SIPP data only, we find no evidence that licensed or certified individuals are differentially
likely to receive employer-sponsored health insurance offers. Estimates are available upon request.

29

access to these benefits by switching employers; switching occupations might require
abandoning the credential. Second, to the extent that nonwage benefits are distributed
disproportionately within occupations to workers with high ability, we expect credentialed
workers without these benefits to be more likely to change occupations relative to uncredentialed
workers without these benefits. Higher average nonwage benefit offer rates suggest that
credentialed workers without nonwage benefits fall lower in the within-occupation distribution
of ability relative to uncredentialed workers without these benefits. Groes, Kircher, and
Manovskii (2014) note that workers who are relatively low or relatively high in the withinoccupation distribution of wages are more likely to change occupations than workers in the
middle of this distribution. This finding suggests that among those with no nonwage benefits,
credentialed workers are more likely to change occupations than uncredentialed workers.
Consequently, the direction of any sample selection bias is ambiguous a priori.
5.4. Distributional Effects
We have documented that professional licenses and certifications are associated with
significant wage and nonwage benefits on average. We also might consider whether these
credentials affect workers differentially across the wage distribution. To that end, our final
exercise examines the distributional effects of licenses and certifications, following Kleiner and
Krueger (2013). Tables 14 and 15 present the results when we classify workers’ licensure and
certification status according to Definition 1 and Definition 2, respectively. In particular, we
compute the predicted log wage and squared error for each person-month observation. We then
compare the conditional mean log wage and mean squared error both overall and within quartiles
of the predicted wage distribution resulting from a regression that omits licensure and

30

certification status. 34 We refer to this distribution as the predicted uncredentialed wage
distribution in Table 14 and the predicted unlicensed wage distribution in Table 15. As a
benchmark, we report these findings in tandem with the results of an analogous analysis of the
distributional effects of unions.35
Panel B of Table 14 demonstrates that licensed or certified workers have significantly
larger conditional log wages overall than workers who do not have these credentials. This trend
is also evident within each quartile of the predicted uncredentialed wage distribution.

Panel B

of Table 15 leads to the same qualitative inferences. Panel A in Tables 14 and 15 illustrates that
union members also appear to have larger conditional mean log earnings than non-union
workers, both overall and within each quartile of the predicted nonunion wage distribution. Our
conclusions generally corroborate the evidence of Kleiner and Krueger (2013).
Panel B in Tables 14 and 15 reveals a more nuanced impact of professional licenses and
certifications on wage dispersion. Contrasting the mean squared error across workers with a
license or certification and workers without these credentials, Table 14 suggests that these
credentials increase wage dispersion overall. However, this statistic obscures the differential
impact of a credential on wage dispersion across the predicted uncredentialed wage distribution.
In particular, wage dispersion appears to be higher in the bottom quartile of this distribution
among workers with a license or certification. On the other hand, wage dispersion appears to be

34

For ease of comparison with Kleiner and Krueger (2013), we assume that the wage effect of a credential does not
vary across the predicted wage distribution. This implies that the difference in conditional mean log wages between
credentialed and uncredentialed workers varies across the predicted wage distribution only to the degree that the
difference between credentialed and uncredentialed workers’ observables other than credential status vary across
this distribution. Consequently, the conditional mean log wage comparisons in Tables 14 and 15 serve as evidence
for heterogeneous effects of credentials only if the requirements to attain a credential bind differentially across the
predicted wage distribution. We have also replicated Tables 14 and 15 assuming that the estimated wage effect of a
credential does vary across the predicted wage distribution. Estimates are available upon request.
35
Card (1996) and Freeman (1982) show that unions reduce wage dispersion. Freeman and Medoff (1984) argue
that unions view reducing wage variance as a stated objective. Kleiner (2006) states that neither professional
associations nor regulatory officials aim to explicitly reduce wage dispersion.

31

lower in the top quartile of the predicted uncredentialed wage distribution for workers with a
license or certification. Table 15 documents the same qualitative effect of licensing on wage
dispersion when we classify workers’ licensure status according to Definition 2, except licensing
seems not to have an impact on wage dispersion overall. Panel A in Tables 14 and 15 yields the
anticipated inference that unions are associated with less wage dispersion both overall and at the
top of the predicted nonunion wage distribution. Kleiner and Krueger (2010, 2013) find no
evidence that licensing has an impact on wage dispersion, either overall or in any quartile of the
predicted unlicensed wage distribution.
6. Conclusions
Taking advantage of the Professional Certifications, Licenses, and Educational
Certificates topical module in the thirteenth wave of the 2008 SIPP, we have examined a number
of labor market outcomes to see whether they differ by licensing status. The use of the SIPP
offers a number of advantages over other data sets, including a direct measure of attainment, a
large sample size, and a rich set of explanatory variables. The ability to link to previous topical
modules has also enabled us to extend the analysis beyond merely estimating a wage premium.
Nonetheless, the SIPP topical module does have an important limitation in that it is sometimes
difficult to distinguish between those who have a license and those who have a certification. As
a result, throughout our analysis we have used two definitions for licensing status: one in which
we try to distinguish between license and certification holders and one in which we do not. It
turns out, however, that the results are broadly consistent across the two definitions. After
controlling for observable heterogeneity, including occupational status, those with a license earn
higher pay, are more likely to be employed, and have a higher probability of receiving retirement
and pension plan offers.

32

While the SIPP data enable us to say much about the direction and magnitude of the
impact of credentials on various labor market outcomes, unavoidably, in part because of the
difficulty in distinguishing between the licensed and the certified, we have less to say about the
mechanisms that lead to our results. As a result, other researchers, using a variety of data sets
and approaches, have ample scope to continue trying to better understand this important labor
market institution.

33

References
Adams, A. Frank, John D. Jackson, and Robert B. Ekelund Jr. 2002. "Occupational Licensing in
a ‘Competitive’ Labor Market: The Case of Cosmetology." Journal of Labor Research
23(2): 261–278.
Bielick, Stacey, Stephanie Cronen, Celeste Stone, Jill M. Montaquila, Shelley Brock Roth, and
Sharon Boivin. 2013. “The Adult Training and Education Survey (ATES) Pilot Study:
Technical Report.” NCES 2013-190. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics,
http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2013190.
Card, David, 1996. “The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal
Analysis.” Econometrica 64(4): 957–979.
Ewert, Stephanie. 2014. “Racial Inequality in Expanded Measures of Educational Attainment.”
Unpublished manuscript, U.S. Census Bureau.
Ewert, Stephanie, and Robert Kominski. 2014. “Measuring Alternative Educational
Credentials: 2012.” Household Economic Studies P70-138, U.S. Census Bureau,
http://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/p70-138.pdf.
Freeman, Richard B. 1982. “Union Wage Practices and Wage Dispersion within
Establishments.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36(1): 3–21.
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
Books.
Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, Milton, and Simon Kuznets. 1945. Income from Independent Professional Practice.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gittleman, Maury, and Morris M. Kleiner. Forthcoming. “Wage Effects of Unionization and
Occupational Licensing Coverage in the United States.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review.
Graddy, Elizabeth. 1991. “Interest Groups or the Public Interest—Why Do We Regulate Health
Occupations?” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 16(1): 25–49.
Greene, Karen. 1969. “Occupational Licensing and the Supply of Nonprofessional Manpower.”
Manpower Research Monograph No. 11. Manpower Administration (DOL), Washington
D.C.
Groes, Fane, Philipp Kircher, and Iourii Manovskii. 2014. “The U-Shapes of Occupational
Mobility.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
34

Hirsch, Barry T., and Edward J. Schumacher. 2004. “Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due
to Earnings Imputation.” Journal of Labor Economics 22(3): 689–722.
Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “Rising Occupational and Industry
Mobility in the United States: 1968–97.” International Economic Review 49(1): 41–79.
Klee, Mark A. 2013. “How Do Professional Licensing Regulations Affect Practitioners? New
Evidence.” SEHSD Working Paper No. 2013-30, U.S. Census Bureau.
Kleiner, Morris M. 2000. “Occupational Licensing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4):
189–202.
Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. Licensing Occupations: Enhancing Quality or Restricting
Competition? Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Kleiner, Morris M., and Alan B. Krueger. 2010. “The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational
Licensing.” British Journal of Industrial Relations 48(4): 676–687.
Kleiner, Morris M. and Alan B. Krueger. 2013. “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of
Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics 31(2):
S173–202.
Kleiner, Morris M., and Evgeny Vorotnikov. 2015. “The Economic Effects of Occupational
Licensing Among the States.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota.
Law, Marc T., and Mindy S. Marks. 2009. “The Effects of Occupational Licensing Laws on
Minorities: Evidence from the Progressive Era.” Journal of Law and Economics 52(2):
351–366.
Perloff, Jeffrey M. 1980. “The Impact of Licensing Laws on Wage Changes in the Construction
Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics 23(2): 409–428.
Shapiro, Carl. 1986. “Investment, Moral Hazard and Occupational Licensing.” Review of
Economic Studies 53(5): 843–862.
Smith, Adam. 1937. The Wealth of Nations. Modern Library Edition. New York: Random
House. (Orig. pub. 1776.)
Wheelan, Charles J. 1999. “Politics or Public Interest? An Empirical Examination of
Occupational Licensure.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Zabel, Jeffrey E. 1998. “An Analysis of Attrition in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and
the Survey of Income and Program Participation with an Application to a Model of Labor
Market Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources 33(2): 479–506.

35

Table 1
Characteristics of Licensed and Certified Workers
Definition 1

Variable
Total
Gender:
Male
Female
Education level:
Less than H.S.
High school
Some college
College (BA)
Postgraduate
Race and
Ethnicity:
White
Hispanic
Black
Other
Age:
25 or under
26–54
55 or older
Union status:
Union
Nonunion
Private or public:
Private company
Public
Industry:
Service-providing
Goods-producing

Definition 2

Percent
Licensed
or Certified
28.0

SD
44.9

26.1
30.1

43.9
45.9

13,035
12,668

16.8
23.0

37.4
42.1

8.4
15.3
29.7
32.4
49.6

27.7
36.0
45.7
46.8
50.1

1,672
6,220
9,016
5,669
3,126

5.0
9.7
19.9
24.1
38.5

31.4
16.8
24.7
23.3

46.4
37.4
43.2
42.3

18,010
2,652
2,540
2,501

14.5
29.8
31.3

35.2
45.7
46.4

43.1
26.1

Percent
N
Licensed
25,703
19.7

Percent
SD
Certified
39.8
8.0

SD
27.1

N
25,601

8.9
6.9

28.5
25.4

12,971
12,630

21.8
29.6
39.9
42.8
48.7

2.9
5.4
9.5
8.1
10.9

16.9
22.6
29.4
27.2
31.2

1,665
6,197
8,969
5,655
3,115

22.4
11.1
17.3
15.7

41.7
31.4
37.9
36.4

8.7
5.4
6.9
7.4

28.2
22.6
25.4
26.2

17,943
2,640
2,523
2,495

3,318
17,442
4,943

9.5
20.9
23.3

29.3
40.6
42.3

4.8
8.7
7.7

21.3
28.1
26.6

3,310
17,375
4,916

49.5
43.9

2,712
22,321

34.6
17.9

47.6
38.4

8.2
8.0

27.5
27.1

2,698
22,242

25.7
40.8

43.7
49.2

21,572
3,974

16.9
35.7

37.5
47.9

8.5
4.9

27.9
21.7

21,486
3,958

30.2
18.7

45.9
39.0

20,692
4,799

22.0
10.0

41.4
30.0

7.9
8.4

27.0
27.7

20,608
4,782

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and
Topical Module

36

Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of at least one
reference month. Summary statistics exclude imputed values. The reference period is May through November 2012.
Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition 2
identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if a private body issued the credential.
"White," "Black," and "Other" categories include both Hispanic and non-Hispanic workers. Union status, public or private
employer, and type of work represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. We determine the main job in a
particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. Industry represents supersector according to industries in the
2000 Census industry classification system.

37

Table 2
Requirements for Becoming Licensed or Certified
Definition 1
% of Licensed
or Certified
Workers
Facing
Variable
Requirement
S.D.
N
Requirement:
Courses or
Training
93.0
25.4 7,211
Skills or exam
92.0
27.3 7,183
Continuing
Education
69.5
46.1 7,080
Level of
government:
Federal only
4.8
21.4 7,160
State only
64.1
48.0 7,160
Local only
2.3
15.1 7,160
Private only
28.7
45.3 7,160

Definition 2
% of
Certified
Workers
Facing
S.D. Requirement

S.D.

N

93.4
91.9

24.8
27.2

92.1
91.8

26.9
27.4

7,133
7,111

73.4

44.2

60.3

48.9

7,019

6.8
89.9
3.3
0

25.1
30.1
17.8
0

0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0

7,160
7,160
7,160
7,160

% of
Licensed
Workers
Facing
Requirement

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical
Module
Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of at least one
reference month. Summary statistics exclude imputed values. The reference period is September through December 2012.
Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition 2
identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if a private body issued the credential.

38

Table 3
Most Common Occupations for Credentialed Workers: Definition 1
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Occupation

Registered nurses
Elementary and middle school teachers
Nursing, psychiatric, and home health aides
Driver/sales workers and truck drivers
Secondary school teachers
Lawyers
Managers, all other
Hairdressers, hairstylists, and cosmetologists
Physicians and surgeons
Accountants and auditors

N
1854
1783
845
767
719
598
526
437
421
363

Percent
Licensed or
Certified
85.7
75.2
56.1
40.8
77.6
77.2
23.6
89.4
81.4
33.3

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave
13 Core and Topical Module
Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the
end of at least one reference month. Summary statistics exclude imputed values. The reference period is May
through November 2012. Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and
workers who have a license. Occupations represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. We
determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. Most common
occupations have the largest number of person-month observations with a license or certification within the
occupation. These estimates are representative of SIPP data and not of the U.S. population in general.

39

Table 4
Most Common Occupations for Credentialed Workers: Definition 2
Rank
1
2

Occupation
Elementary and middle school teachers
Registered nurses

N
1683
1563

Percent
Licensed
71.1
72.7

3

Secondary school teachers
Nursing, psychiatric, and home health
aides

693

75.2

636

42.8

560
491

30.0
63.7

7

Driver/sales workers and truck drivers
Lawyers
Hairdressers, hairstylists, and
cosmetologists

351

71.8

8
9
10

Physicians and surgeons
Managers, all other
Accountants and auditors

337
300
264

66.2
13.4
24.3

4
5
6

Occupation
Registered nurses
Managers, all other
Driver/sales workers and truck
drivers
Nursing, psychiatric, and home
health aides
Automotive service technicians
and mechanics
Electricians

N
279
226

Percent
Certified
13.0
10.1

194

10.4

189

12.7

141
129

22.8
26.9

Retail salespersons
Computer scientists and
systems analysts
Lawyers
Insurance sales agents

125

5.3

116
103
100

17.4
13.4
24.0

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module
Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of at least one reference month. Summary
statistics exclude imputed values. The reference period is May through November 2012. Definition 2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body
issued the credential and certified if a private body issued the credential. Occupations represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. We
determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. Most common occupations have the largest number of personmonth observations with a license or certification within the occupation. These estimates are representative of SIPP data and not of the U.S. population in
general.

40

Table 5
Effect of Licensing and Certification on Wages
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or certified
0.236*** 0.080*** 0.076*** 0.065***
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
2
R
0.033
0.340
0.441
0.514
N
77,294
75,793
75,605
75,605
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
R2
N
Controls?
Occupation fixed
effects?

0.217*** 0.061*** 0.067*** 0.050***
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
0.022
0.338
0.440
0.513
77,059
75,562
75,374
75,374
N
Y
Y
Y
N

N

2-digit

3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module
Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the
5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level. Sample
includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as
of the end of a reference month with implied hourly wages on the main job between
$5 and $100. Regressions exclude person-month observations with imputed implied
hourly wage, licensure status, and union status. Regressions in columns (3) and (4)
also exclude observations with imputed occupation. The reference period is May
through November 2012. The estimates in this table result from OLS regressions.
The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job as implied by monthly
earnings and profits, weeks worked at the main job in that month, and usual weekly
hours worked on the main job. We determine the main job in a particular month as
the primary source of earnings in that month. Definition 1 does not distinguish
between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition
2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential. Other
controls in columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic in age, years of education, union
status, a government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed
indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian
indicator, and region fixed effects. Union status, government worker, service worker,
self-employed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job
or business. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3-digit
occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification
system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's
adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses.

41

Table 6
Effect of Licensing and Certification on Wages
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Definition 2:
Licensed
0.240*** 0.072*** 0.078*** 0.062***
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Certified
0.229*** 0.100*** 0.075*** 0.073***
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
2
R
0.033
0.340
0.441
0.514
N
77,059
75,562
75,374
75,374
Controls?
N
Y
Y
Y
Occupation fixed
effects?
N
N
2-digit
3-digit
Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module
Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the
5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level.
Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor
force as of the end of a reference month with implied hourly wages on the main job
between $5 and $100. Regressions exclude person-month observations with imputed
implied hourly wage, licensure status, and union status. Regressions in columns (3)
and (4) also exclude observations with imputed occupation. The reference period is
May through November 2012. The estimates in this table result from OLS
regressions. The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job as implied by
monthly earnings and profits, weeks worked at the main job in that month, and usual
weekly hours worked on the main job. We determine the main job in a particular
month as the primary source of earnings in that month. Definition 2 identifies a
worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if a
private body issued the credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include a
quadratic in age, years of education, union status, a government worker indicator, a
service worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic
indicator, a black indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed effects. Union
status, government worker, service worker, self-employed worker, and occupation
represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. In columns (3) and (4),
respectively, we use 2-digit and 3-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000
Census occupational classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated
replicate weights using Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors
listed in parentheses.

42

Table 7
Effect of Licensing and Certification Jurisdiction on Wages
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Federal government 0.287*** 0.144*** 0.114*** 0.089***
(0.031)
(0.030)
(0.028)
(0.027)
State government
0.244*** 0.071*** 0.077*** 0.061***
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
Local government
0.040
-0.033
0.046
0.036
(0.048)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.034)
Private
0.229*** 0.100*** 0.075*** 0.073***
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.013)
2
R
0.034
0.340
0.441
0.514
N
77,059
75,562
75,374
75,374
Controls?
N
Y
Y
Y
Occupation fixed
effects?
N
N
2-digit
3-digit
Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module
Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at
the 5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level.
Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian
labor force as of the end of a reference month with implied hourly wages on the
main job between $5 and $100. Regressions exclude person-month observations
with imputed implied hourly wage, credential status, source of credential, and union
status. Regressions in columns (3) and (4) also exclude observations with imputed
occupation. The reference period is May through November 2012. The estimates
in this table result from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is hourly wage on
the main job as implied by monthly earnings and profits, weeks worked at the main
job in that month, and usual weekly hours worked on the main job. We determine
the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month.
Private organizations include industries, businesses, companies, nonprofit
organizations, professional associations, and other private associations. Other
controls in columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic in age, years of education, union
status, a government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed
indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian
indicator, and region fixed effects. Union status, government worker, service
worker, self-employed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers'
main job or business. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational
classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using
Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses.

43

Table 8
Effect of Licensing Requirements on Wages
Variable
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or certified
Courses or training
Skills or exam
Continuing education
R2
N
F-test: all requirements = 0 (p-value)
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Courses or training
Skills or exam
Continuing education
R2
N
F-test: all requirements = 0 (p-value)
Controls?
Occupation fixed effects?

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.109*** 0.070*
-0.061* -0.069**
-0.034
(0.030)
(0.042)
(0.036)
(0.030)
(0.028)
0.137*** 0.096*** 0.069** 0.093*** 0.066***
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.028)
(0.025)
(0.023)
-0.023
0.009
0.017
0.007
(0.035)
(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.021)
0.145*** 0.103*** 0.071*** 0.055***
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.014)
0.034
77,226
0.000

0.038
76,831
0.000

0.343
75,342
0.000

0.443
75,158
0.000

0.516
75,158
0.000

0.030*
0.003
0.046***
-0.014
-0.020*
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.012)
0.223*** 0.133*** 0.052** 0.061*** 0.054***
(0.015)
(0.027)
(0.024)
(0.021)
(0.019)
0.007
-0.006
-0.009
-0.003
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.018)
0.147*** 0.108*** 0.070*** 0.056***
(0.019)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.014)
0.034
77,022
0.000
N
N

0.038
76,669
0.000
N
N

0.343
75,184
0.000
Y
N

0.443
75,000
0.000
Y
2-digit

0.516
75,000
0.000
Y
3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave
13 Core and Topical Module

44

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the 5% confidence level,
and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level. Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who
were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of a reference month with implied hourly wages on the
main job between $5 and $100. Regressions exclude person-month observations with imputed implied hourly
wage, licensure status, licensing requirements, and union status. Regressions in columns (3) and (4) also
exclude observations with imputed occupation. The reference period is May through November 2012. The
estimates in this table result from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job as
implied by monthly earnings and profits, weeks worked at the main job in that month, and usual weekly hours
worked on the main job. We determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in
that month. Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have
a license. Definition 2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential. Other
controls in columns (3)–(5) include a quadratic in age, years of education, union status, a government worker
indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a
black indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed effects. Union status, government worker, service
worker, self-employed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. In
columns (4) and (5), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000
Census occupational classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's
adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses.

45

Table 9
Heterogeneous Effects of Licensing and Certification on Wages
Variable
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or Certified × 1st (Bottom) Quartile
-0.049** -0.084***
(0.022)
(0.021)
Licensed or Certified × 2nd Quartile
-0.071*** -0.082***
(0.018)
(0.016)
Licensed or Certified × 3rd Quartile
0.226***
0.131***
(0.015)
(0.015)
Licensed or Certified × 4th (Top) Quartile
0.492***
0.215***
(0.013)
(0.014)
2
R
0.079
0.352
N
77,294
75,793
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed × 1st (Bottom) Quartile

-0.097***
(0.026)
-0.117***
(0.022)
0.185***
(0.018)
0.462***
(0.013)
0.057
77,059
N
N

Licensed × 2nd Quartile
Licensed × 3rd Quartile
Licensed × 4th (Top) Quartile
R2
N
Controls?
Occupation fixed effects?

-0.128***
(0.025)
-0.108***
(0.019)
0.102***
(0.018)
0.185***
(0.015)
0.347
75,562
Y
N

(3)

(4)

0.031
(0.021)
0.018
(0.016)
0.065***
(0.014)
0.160***
(0.015)
0.443
75,605

0.061***
(0.021)
0.062***
(0.018)
0.054***
(0.015)
0.081***
(0.018)
0.514
75,605

-0.003
(0.025)
0.001
(0.020)
0.050***
(0.016)
0.154***
(0.016)
0.442
75,374
Y
2-digit

0.012
(0.024)
0.054***
(0.019)
0.029*
(0.017)
0.081***
(0.019)
0.513
75,374
Y
3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave 13 Core
and Topical Module

46

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the 5% confidence level, and ***
denotes significant at the 1% confidence level. Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the
civilian labor force as of the end of a reference month with implied hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100.
Regressions exclude person-month observations with imputed implied hourly wage, licensure status, union status, and
occupation. The reference period is May through November 2012. The estimates in this table result from OLS
regressions. The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job as implied by monthly earnings and profits, weeks
worked at the main job in that month, and usual weekly hours worked on the main job. We determine the main job in a
particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. Quartiles reflect position in the distribution of average
education levels by occupation. Quartile cutoffs for this distribution are 12.73, 13.67, and 15.08 years of education.
Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition
2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include
a quadratic in age, years of education, union status, a government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a selfemployed indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed
effects. Union status, government worker, service worker, self-employed worker, and occupation represent
characteristics of workers' main job or business. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3-digit
occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification system. We employed 160 balanced
repeated replicate weights using Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses.

47

Table 10
Effect of Licensing and Certification on the
Likelihood of Employment
Variable
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or certified
0.342*** 0.245***
(0.043)
(0.047)
[0.026]
[0.015]
N
103,191
101,249
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Certified

N
Controls?
Occupation fixed effects?

0.385***
(0.053)
[0.029]
0.275***
(0.065)
[0.021]
102,791
N
N

0.308***
(0.061)
[0.018]
0.167**
(0.077)
[0.010]
100,849
Y
N

(3)

(4)

0.232*** 0.235***
(0.052)
(0.057)
[0.013]
[0.015]
99,975
84,117
0.294*** 0.306***
(0.067)
(0.070)
[0.017]
[0.019]
0.161**
0.168*
(0.079)
(0.087)
[0.009]
[0.011]
99,579
83,805
Y
Y
2-digit
3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module

48

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the 5%
confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level. Sample includes all
respondents aged 18–64 who worked in Wave 13 and those who did not work in Wave 13 but
were on layoff, looked for work, or were unable to find work. Sample members who did not
work in Wave 13 worked in at least one previous wave of the 2008 SIPP panel. Regressions
exclude person-month observations with imputed licensure status and employment status.
Regressions in columns (3) and (4) also exclude observations with imputed occupation.
Regressions also exclude individuals who were contingent workers on their main job and
individuals who responded that their usual number of hours worked varied on the main job.
The reference period is May through November 2012. The estimates in this table result from
probit regressions. The dependent variable takes value 1 for employed person-month
observations and 0 for unemployed observations and not-in-the-labor-force observations
according to the Current Population Survey definitions. Definition 1 does not distinguish
between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition 2
identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if a
private body issued the credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic in
age, years of education, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian
indicator, region fixed effects, a married indicator, a disabled indicator, a school enrollment
indicator, an indicator for any own children in the household, number of own children in the
household, number of own children in the household under age 18, union status, a
government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed indicator,
establishment size effects, and a full-time worker indicator. Union status, government
worker, service worker, self-employed worker, establishment size, full-time worker, and
occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. For respondents who
did not work any month in the reference period, these variables represent characteristics of
the most recent job or business. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification
system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's adjustment factor
0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses. We present marginal effects in
brackets.

49

Table 11
Effect of Licensing and Certification on the Generosity of
Employer-Provided Health Benefit Offers
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or
certified
0.157*** 0.119*** 0.103*** 0.089**
(0.029)
(0.032)
(0.034) (0.037)
[0.036]
[0.026]
[0.023] [0.020]
N
13,497
13,470
13,340
12,578
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Certified

N
Controls?
Occupation fixed
effects?

0.160*** 0.113*** 0.100*** 0.088**
(0.031)
(0.035)
(0.038) (0.042)
[0.037]
[0.025]
[0.022] [0.019]
0.170*** 0.158*** 0.128** 0.111**
(0.051)
(0.052)
(0.052) (0.055)
[0.039]
[0.035]
[0.028] [0.024]
13,450
13,423
13,294
12,532
N
Y
Y
Y
N

N

2-digit

3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module

50

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at
the 5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level.
Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian
labor force as of the end of at least one reference month and who had employersponsored health insurance. Regressions exclude person observations with
imputed licensure status and health insurance premium information. Regressions
in columns (3) and (4) also exclude observations with imputed occupation.
Regressions also exclude individuals who were contingent workers on their main
job and individuals who responded that their usual number of hours worked varied
on the main job. The reference period is May through November 2012. The
estimates in this table result from probit regressions. The dependent variable
takes value 1 if a respondent's employer paid the entire health insurance premium
and 0 for all other respondents with employer-provided health coverage. We
determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in
that month. Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a
certification and workers who have a license. Definition 2 identifies a worker as
licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if a private
body issued the credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic
in age, years of education, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black
indicator, an Asian indicator, region fixed effects, a married indicator, union
status, self-employed status, establishment size effects, a full-time worker
indicator, an indicator for any own children in the household, number of own
children in the household, and number of own children in the household under age
18. Union status, establishment size effects, full-time worker, self-employed
worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job or business.
We determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings
in that month. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and 3-digit
occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification
system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's
adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses. We
present marginal effects in brackets.

51

Table 12
Effect of Licensing and Certification on the Likelihood of
Employer-Provided Retirement and Pension Plan Offers
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or
certified
0.277*** 0.078*** 0.106*** 0.127***
(0.022)
(0.028)
(0.032)
(0.036)
[0.107]
[0.022]
[0.029]
[0.034]
N
17,966
16,739
16,662
16,307
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Certified

N
Controls?
Occupation fixed
effects?

0.286***
(0.024)
[0.110]
0.257***
(0.042)
[0.099]
17,906
N

0.072**
(0.031)
[0.021]
0.095**
(0.048)
[0.028]
16,683
Y

N

N

0.101*** 0.122***
(0.037)
(0.043)
[0.028]
[0.032]
0.118** 0.144***
(0.048)
(0.052)
[0.033]
[0.038]
16,608
16,256
Y
Y
2-digit

3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 11 Core and Topical Module and Wave 13 Core and
Topical Module

52

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at
the 5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level.
Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian
labor force at the end of the reference period and who worked in the same
occupation on the main job in Waves 11 and 13. We determine the main job in a
particular month of Wave 13 as the primary source of earnings in that month. SIPP
determines the main job in the Wave 11 topical module according to the following
algorithm. For respondents who held multiple jobs at the end of the four-month
reference period, the main job is the one on which the respondent worked the most
weeks during the reference period. The topical module designates the main
business using the same criterion for respondents who owned multiple businesses
at the end of the reference period. If a respondent worked an equal number of
weeks at two or more jobs, the main job is the one on which the respondent usually
worked the most hours. If a respondent worked an equal number of weeks at two
or more businesses, the main business is the one on which the respondent earned
the most during the reference period. If a respondent held a job and owned a
business at the end of the reference period, the topical module asks about
retirement plans associated with the largest earnings source during the four-month
reference period. Regressions exclude person observations with imputed licensure
status and retirement and pension plan offers. Regressions in columns (3) and (4)
also exclude observations with imputed occupation. Regressions also exclude
individuals who were contingent workers on their main job in Wave 11 and
individuals who responded that their usual number of hours worked varied on the
main job in Wave 11. The reference period is January through April 2012. The
estimates in this table result from probit regressions. The dependent variable takes
value 1 for workers who were offered retirement and pension plans on the main job
and 0 for workers who were not offered these plans. Definition 1 does not
distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have a
license. Definition 2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued
the credential and certified if a private body issued the credential. Other controls in
columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic in age, years of education, a female indicator, a
Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian indicator, region fixed effects, a
married indicator, union status, self-employed status, establishment size effects, a
full-time worker indicator, an indicator for any own children in the household,
number of own children in the household, and number of own children in the
household under age 18. Union status, establishment size effects, full-time worker,
self-employed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main
job or business in Wave 11. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit
and 3-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational
classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using
Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in parentheses.
We present marginal effects in brackets.

53

Table 13
Effect of Licensing and Certification on the Likelihood of
Employer-Provided Health Benefit Offers
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or certified
0.161*** 0.039 0.105** 0.117**
(0.031) (0.043) (0.047) (0.050)
[0.050] [0.008] [0.020] [0.022]
N
13,573 12,358 12,335 11,486
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Certified

N
Controls?
Occupation fixed
effects?

0.142***
(0.033)
[0.044]
0.202***
(0.047)
[0.063]
13,521
N
N

0.003
0.071
0.083
(0.044) (0.051) (0.055)
[0.001] [0.014] [0.016]
0.127* 0.171** 0.181**
(0.068) (0.069) (0.073)
[0.025] [0.033] [0.034]
12,312 12,289 11,443
Y
Y
Y
N

2-digit

3-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, Wave 6 Core and Topical Module and Wave 13 Core and
Topical Module
Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant
at the 5% confidence level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence
level. Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the
civilian labor force at the end of the reference period and whose occupation in
the main job in Wave 13 was also ongoing in Wave 6. We determine the main
job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month.
Regressions exclude person observations with imputed licensure status and
health insurance offers. Regressions in columns (3) and (4) also exclude
observations with imputed occupation. Regressions also exclude individuals
who were contingent workers on their job in Wave 6 and individuals who
responded that their usual number of hours worked varied on the job in Wave 6.
The reference period is May through August 2010. The estimates in this table
result from probit regressions. The dependent variable takes value 1 for workers
who received employer-provided health insurance offers and 0 for workers who
did not receive these offers. Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers
who have a certification and workers who have a license. Definition 2 identifies
a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the credential and certified if
a private body issued the credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include a
quadratic in age, years of education, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a
black indicator, an Asian indicator, region fixed effects, a married indicator,
union status, self-employed status, establishment size effects, a full-time worker
indicator, an indicator for any own children in the household, number of own
children in the household, and number of own children in the household under
age 18. Union status, establishment size effects, full-time worker, selfemployed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job

54

or business in Wave 6. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit and
3-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational
classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights
using Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate the standard errors listed in
parentheses. We present marginal effects in brackets.

55

Table 14
Distributional Wage Effects of Licensing and Unionization: Definition 1
Variable
Panel A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Predicted Nonunion Wage Quartile
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4) Total
Conditional mean ln(wage):
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
- Union-non
- p-value
Conditional mean squared error Ln(wage):
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
- Union-non
- p-value
Observations:
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
Panel B

2.455
2.654
2.471
0.198
0.000

2.809
2.962
2.832
0.152
0.000

2.995
3.205
3.033
0.210
0.000

3.186
3.342
3.201
0.156
0.000

2.856
3.078
2.884
0.222
0.000

0.175
0.208
0.177
0.033
0.030

0.224
0.170
0.216
-0.055
0.000

0.257
0.165
0.240
-0.092
0.000

0.277
0.194
0.269
-0.084
0.000

0.233
0.178
0.226
-0.054
0.000

16,907
1,370
18,277

16,566
2,739
19,305

15,596
3,484
19,080

17,230
1,713
18,943

66,299
9,306
75,605

Predicted Uncredentialed Wage
Quartile
(1)
(2)
(3)

Conditional mean ln(wage):
- Uncredentialed
- Credentialed
- Total
- Credentialed-uncredentialed
- p-value
Conditional mean squared error Ln(wage):
- Uncredentialed
- Credentialed
- Total
- Credentialed-uncredentialed
- p-value
Observations:
- Uncredentialed
- Credentialed
- Total
56

(4) Total

2.437
2.644
2.472
0.207
0.000

2.796
2.906
2.823
0.110
0.000

2.983
3.095
3.022
0.112
0.000

3.170
3.306
3.219
0.137
0.000

2.818
3.054
2.884
0.237
0.000

0.170
0.198
0.175
0.028
0.026

0.222
0.244
0.227
0.022
0.107

0.240
0.244
0.242
0.004
0.730

0.267
0.244
0.259
-0.023
0.039

0.221
0.237
0.226
0.016
0.012

15,139
3,237
18,376

14,623
4,561
19,184

12,296
6,809
19,105

12,007
6,933
18,940

54,065
21,540
75,605

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave 13
Core and Topical Module
Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of
a reference month with implied hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100. Regressions exclude personmonth observations with imputed implied hourly wage, licensure status, union status, and occupation. The
reference period is May through November 2012. Panel A presents the distributional impact of unions on both
wages and wage dispersion. Columns (1) through (4) present mean conditional log wages and mean squared errors
within the first through fourth quartiles of the nonunion wage distribution. Panel B presents the distributional
impact of licenses and certifications on both wages and wage dispersion. Columns (1) through (4) present mean
conditional log wages and mean squared errors within the first through fourth quartiles of the uncredentialed wage
distribution. In both panels, column (5) presents these statistics for the entire sample. Conditional mean log wage
and mean squared error of log wage result from averages of predicted values from an OLS regression that controls
for a quadratic in age, years of education, union status, licensure and certification status, a government worker
indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black
indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed effects. Implied hourly wage, union status, government worker,
service worker, self-employed worker, and occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job or business.
We determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. The predicted
nonunion wage quartile results from a regression that drops union status from the set of controls and adds 2-digit
occupation fixed effects. The predicted uncredentialed wage quartile results from a regression that drops licensure
and certification status from the set of controls and adds 2-digit occupation fixed effects. Definition 1 does not
distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who have a license. We use 2-digit
occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification system. We employed 160
balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate p-values.

57

Table 15
Distributional Wage Effects of Licensing and Unionization: Definition 2
Variable
Panel A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Predicted Nonunion Wage Quartile
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4) Total
Conditional mean ln(wage):
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
- Union-non
- p-value
Conditional mean squared error Ln(wage):
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
- Union-non
- p-value
Observations:
- Nonunion
- Union
- Total
Panel B

2.457
2.656
2.472
0.199
0.000

2.810
2.963
2.833
0.153
0.000

2.995
3.205
3.034
0.210
0.000

3.183
3.337
3.198
0.154
0.000

2.856
3.078
2.884
0.222
0.000

0.174
0.200
0.176
0.026
0.075

0.223
0.176
0.216
-0.047
0.000

0.261
0.166
0.244
-0.095
0.000

0.278
0.194
0.270
-0.085
0.000

0.233
0.179
0.227
-0.054
0.000

16,902
1,352
18,254

16,452
2,766
19,218

15,540
3,481
19,021

17,210 66,104
1,671 9,270
18,881 75,374

Predicted Unlicensed Wage
Quartile
(1)
(2)
(3)

Conditional mean ln(wage):
- Unlicensed
- Licensed
- Total
- Licensed-unlicensed
- p-value
Conditional mean squared error Ln(wage):
- Unlicensed
- Licensed
- Total
- Licensed-unlicensed
- p-value
Observations:
- Unlicensed
- Licensed
- Total
58

(4) Total

2.449
2.638
2.472
0.189
0.000

2.810
2.901
2.825
0.092
0.000

2.997
3.090
3.021
0.093
0.000

3.185
3.313
3.219
0.128
0.000

2.840
3.059
2.884
0.218
0.000

0.171
0.202
0.175
0.031
0.057

0.226
0.239
0.228
0.013
0.415

0.246
0.235
0.243
-0.010
0.422

0.265
0.244
0.260
-0.021
0.075

0.225
0.234
0.227
0.010
0.160

16,093
2,178
18,271

16,017
3,119
19,136

14,140
4,950
19,090

13,890 60,140
4,987 15,234
18,877 75,374

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Wave
13 Core and Topical Module
Note: Sample includes all respondents aged 18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the
end of at least one reference month with implied hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100.
Regressions exclude person-month observations with imputed implied hourly wage, licensure status, union
status, and occupation. The reference period is May through November 2012. Panel A presents the
distributional impact of unions on both wages and wage dispersion. Columns (1) through (4) present mean
conditional log wages and mean squared errors within the first through fourth quartiles of the nonunion wage
distribution. Panel B presents the distributional impact of licenses on both wages and wage dispersion.
Columns (1) through (4) present mean conditional log wages and mean squared errors within the first
through fourth quartiles of the unlicensed wage distribution. In both panels, column (5) presents these
statistics for the entire sample. Conditional mean log wage and mean squared error of log wage result from
averages of predicted values from an OLS regression that controls for a quadratic in age, years of education,
union status, licensure status, a government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed
indicator, a female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed
effects. Implied hourly wage, union status, government worker, service worker, self-employed worker, and
occupation represent characteristics of workers' main job or business. We determine the main job in a
particular month as the primary source of earnings in that month. The predicted nonunion wage quartile
results from a regression that drops union status from the set of controls and adds 2-digit occupation fixed
effects. The predicted unlicensed wage quartile results from a regression that drops licensure status from the
set of controls and adds 2-digit occupation fixed effects. We determine the main job in a particular month as
the primary source of earnings in that month. Definition 2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental
body issued the credential. We use 2-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census
occupational classification system. We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's
adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate p-values.

59

Appendix Table
Effects of Required Licensing and Certification on Wages
Variable
Panel A: Definition 1
Licensed or certified
Licensed or certified × Required
R2
N
Panel B: Definition 2
Licensed
Licensed × Required
Certified
Certified × Required
R2
N
Controls?
Occupation fixed effects?

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.151***
0.016
0.012
0.017
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.012)
0.109*** 0.083*** 0.088*** 0.068***
(0.019)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.014)
0.035
77,190

0.341
75,689

0.442
75,501

0.515
75,501

0.114*** -0.024
-0.010
-0.002
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.016)
0.152*** 0.117*** 0.112*** 0.084***
(0.023)
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.018)
0.205*** 0.070*** 0.044** 0.045**
(0.028)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.020)
0.039
0.049*
0.054*
0.049*
(0.034)
(0.029)
(0.028)
(0.025)
0.035
76,994
N
N

0.341
75,497
Y
N

0.443
75,309
Y
2-digit

Source: Authors' calculation from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation, Wave 13 Core and Topical Module

60

0.515
75,309
Y
3-digit

Note: * denotes significant at the 10% confidence level, ** denotes significant at the 5% confidence
level, and *** denotes significant at the 1% confidence level. Sample includes all respondents aged
18–64 who were employed in the civilian labor force as of the end of a reference month with implied
hourly wages on the main job between $5 and $100. Regressions exclude person-month
observations with imputed implied hourly wage, licensure status, credential requirement, and union
status. Regressions in columns (3) and (4) also exclude observations with imputed occupation. The
reference period is May through November 2012. The estimates in this table result from OLS
regressions. The dependent variable is hourly wage on the main job as implied by monthly earnings
and profits, weeks worked at the main job in that month, and usual weekly hours worked on the main
job. We determine the main job in a particular month as the primary source of earnings in that
month. Definition 1 does not distinguish between workers who have a certification and workers who
have a license. Definition 2 identifies a worker as licensed if a governmental body issued the
credential. Other controls in columns (2)–(4) include a quadratic in age, years of education, union
status, a government worker indicator, a service worker indicator, a self-employed indicator, a
female indicator, a Hispanic indicator, a black indicator, an Asian indicator, and region fixed effects.
Union status, government worker, service worker, self-employed worker, and occupation represent
characteristics of workers' main job or business. In columns (3) and (4), respectively, we use 2-digit
and 3-digit occupational affiliation according to the 2000 Census occupational classification system.
We employed 160 balanced repeated replicate weights using Fay's adjustment factor 0.5 to estimate
the standard errors listed in parentheses.

61

