                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SOVEREIGN DEFAULT, DEBT RESTRUCTURING, AND RECOVERY RATES:
               WAS THE ARGENTINEAN “HAIRCUT” EXCESSIVE?

                                           Sebastian Edwards

                                         Working Paper 20964
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20964


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




I thank Alvaro Felipe García and Jorge Bromberg for their assistance. Subsection 2.2 draws, partially,
on a report prepared for White & Case LLP in September, 2012. As always, discussions with Ed Leamer
have been very useful. I also thank participants at UCLA’s finance seminar for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Sovereign Default, Debt Restructuring, and Recovery Rates: Was the Argentinean “Haircut”
Excessive?
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 20964
February 2015
JEL No. F34,F41,F65,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

I use data on 180 sovereign defaults to analyze what determines the recovery rate after a debt restructuring
process. Why do creditors recover, in some cases, more than 90%, while in other cases they recover
less than 10%? I find support for the Grossman and Van Huyk model of “excusable defaults”: countries
that experience more severe negative shocks tend to have higher “haircuts” than countries that face
less severe shocks. I discuss in detail debt restructuring episodes in Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and
Greece. The results suggest that the haircut imposed by Argentina in its 2005 restructuring (75%) was
“excessively high.” The other episodes’ haircuts are consistent with the model.


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                          1


1.         Introduction
           Between 1997 and 2013 there were 24 sovereign bond defaults and debt restructurings in
the global economy. The three better known cases are the Russian default of 1998, the Argentine
default of 2001, and the Greek default of 2012. But there were many others, including defaults
and restructurings in the Ukraine, Cameroon, and Uruguay. In almost every one of these
episodes investors incurred considerable losses. According to Moody’s (2013, p. 6):


                             “[T]he losses imposed on creditors in sovereign restructurings have
                             frequently been very large… Further, the variation around the average
                             sovereign loss has been extremely high – losses have varied from as low
                             as 5% to as high as 95%.”


An important question, then, is what explains these large differences in “haircuts.”. Why, for
example, did investors in Uruguayan bonds suffer a 7% haircut in 2003, while those that had
invested in neighboring Argentina had losses in excess of 75% in 2005? This question is
particularly pertinent since many analysts have argued that the circumstances of the Argentine
and Uruguayan defaults were very similar.1
           In this paper I use data on 180 debt restructurings, for both sovereign bonds and
sovereign syndicated bank loans, to analyze the determinants of the magnitude of recovery rates
and haircuts. I use the results from the empirical analysis to evaluate whether some well known
restructuring episodes resulted in “excessively high” losses. In particular, I focus on the
Argentine restructuring of 2005, an episode that has generated controversy and that resulted in a
U.S. Supreme Court decision that is changing the way in which foreign debt contracts are
written. In order to present a comparison with Argentina, I also analyze in some detail the cases
of two of its neighbors: Uruguay and Chile. Finally, I use the empirical results to investigate
some aspects of the Greek restructuring of 2012.
           The analysis is in the spirit of the “excusable default” model developed by Grossman and
Van Huyck (1989). According to this work, in a world with rational lenders and borrowers, and
reputational constraints, sovereign debt is never repudiated. It is restructured when the debtor



1
    See, for example, the discussion in Edwards (2010).
                                                         2


faces (very) bad states of the world. In this setting, investors may lose some of their money, but
(almost) never all of it. The extent of losses depends on the severity of external shocks that hit
the sovereign debtor.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 I provide some background,
and I analyze data on 180 bank loans and bond restructurings between 1978 and 2010; these are
all the restructurings for which there is enough information. I also present a fairly detailed
analysis of the Argentine restructuring of 2005, arguably the most controversial episode in recent
memory. In Section 3, I present regressions’ estimates for a number of “haircut” equations. The
results indicate that, with other things given, losses depend on the state of the world faced by the
debtor; the more severe the shocks that hit the sovereign in the period preceding the
restructuring, the lower the recovery rate (and the higher the haircut). These results are consistent
with the main implications of the Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) model of “excusable
defaults,” and are robust to the time period, variables’ definition, equations’ specification, and
estimation techniques (least squares or instrumental variables). In this Section I also present a
number of extensions, and I discuss robustness issues. In Section 4 I analyze the regressions’
residuals to determine whether some restructuring episodes resulted in “excessively high” or
“excessively low” haircuts. This discussion concentrates on the Argentine restructuring of 2005,
and on the cases of Chile, Greece and Uruguay. The analysis suggests that, given Argentina’s
circumstances, the 2005 haircut (approximately 75%) was “unusually high,” in the sense that its
residuals are statistically “very large,” or outliers. I also find that the recovery rate in Chile’s
restructurings of 1984-1990 were consistent with the model’s implications, as was the recovery
rate in Uruguay’s restructuring of 2003. Finally, in this section I use out of sample forecasts to
compute the “appropriate” haircut in Greece’s restructuring of 2012. I find that the model’s
prediction is similar to the actual Greek haircut (64%). Finally, in Section 5 I present some
concluding remarks and I discuss directions for future research. There are two appendixes: in
Appendix A I present the model; Appendix B includes the data sources.
2.      Background and preliminary international comparisons
        The data set includes 162 bank loan restructurings and 18 bond exchanges. 2 The
sovereigns involved are from all parts of the world: Africa (60), Asia (8), Europe (25, mostly


2
 The basic data were assembled by Cruces and Trebesch (2013). This is the largest data set on restructurings and
haircuts. Benjamin and Wright (2009), for example, used a data set with 90 episodes in their analysis on
                                                        3


former communist nations), Latin America (72), and the Middle East (15). In this paper the loss,
or “haircut,” incurred by an investor as a consequence of a debt restructuring and exchange is
defined as follows: 3


        (1)


Where                            and                          are the present values of the new and old
securities (bank loans or bonds), respectively. The present value of the “old security” is
calculated under the assumption that the debtor abides by the terms of the original contract. The
“yield at exit,” or rate of return of the new security at the date of the exchange, is used to
discount the income streams of both securities. In equation (1) investor losses are calculated on
the date of the exchange.
        Using this approach, Cruces and Trebesch (2013) estimated that the average losses
(across different bonds) incurred by investors that participated in Argentina’s 2005 exchange
amounted to 76.8%. This figure is similar to calculations made by other authors for Argentina:
Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006), estimated a haircut ranging from 71% to 75%, Bedford et
al (2005) calculated investors’ losses of 70%, and according to Díaz-Cassou et al (2008) the
Argentina 2005 haircut ranged between 71% and 75%, depending on the type of debt exchanged.
        A limitation of equation (1) is that it ignores the (possible) value of warrants or
contingent “kickers” that are triggered after certain variable (export prices, terms of trade, or
GDP) surpass a predetermined threshold. 4 Cruces and Trebesch (2013, p 65) justify disregarding
the kickers in their computations as follows:


                 “[T]he portion of state contingent payments is usually not very large…
                 [Historically,] some clauses paid…and others did not… [A]fter the Bradies the




restructuring delays. For an even more comprehensive list of sovereign defaults, see Beers and Naduau (2014). This
data set, however, dos not have data on recovery rates.
3
  See the discussion in Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006) on alternative ways of measuring losses.
4
  Twelve of the 180 restructurings included a warrant linked to either the terms of trade or GDP: Honduras 1989,
Costa Rica 1990, Mexico 1990, Venezuela 1990, Nigeria 1991, Uruguay 1991, Bolivia 1993, Bulgaria 1994,
Ecuador 1995, Bosnia 1997 Cote d’Ivoire 1998, and Argentina 2005.
                                                      4


                only relevant case is Argentina in 2005… Against this backdrop, and to avoid
                bias, we decided to disregard state contingencies in our haircut calculations.”


        Although this is correct for most episodes, it is not so for the Argentine exchange of
2005. In this instance the warrants were detachable from the new bonds six months after the
exchange, and they could be traded independently of the underlying securities – this was not the
case in any of the other restructurings with contingent payments.5 Starting in late 2004,
investment banks developed models to value the Argentine warrants, and by late February 2005,
when the exchange was coming to an end, there was generalized agreement that their value was
approximately 2 cents on the dollar.6 In November 2005, when they became detachable, the
warrants were traded in the vicinity of 3 cents on the dollar. Eventually, however, and due to
high commodity prices and Argentina’s fast rate of growth, their price increased significantly.
Given these facts, in this paper I adjust the Cruces and Trebesch (2013) estimate of Argentina’s
2005 haircut downward by the consensus value of the warrants at the time of the exchange (2
cents on the dollar). Consequently, in the analysis that follows I will use 74.8% as the basic
estimate for Argentina’s 2005 haircut. Following Cruces and Trebesch (2013) own line of
argument, I have not made adjustments to the other 11 episodes that included contingent
payments. In Section 3.3, however, I discuss alternative ways of addressing this issue.
2.1     International comparisons
        In Table 1 I present the list of countries in the data set. I include the date of the
restructuring and the magnitude of the “haircut.” Episodes with losses in excess of Argentina’s
2005 haircut appear in italics. As may be seen, there are 25 such cases; I discuss this subsample
below. In Table 2 I provide summary statistics on haircuts for the complete sample, and for a
number of subsamples by type of debt and region. I also include the estimate for the Argentina
2005 haircut. As may be seen, losses foisted on Argentine investors were significantly higher




5
 See Miyajima (2006).
6
 See, for example, Costa, Chamon and Ricci (2008), Miyajima (2006), HSBC’s “EM Portfolio Strategy” (July 21,
2005), and Sandleris and Wright (2013).
                                                         5


than the mean and median across all episodes (37% and 32% respectively), as well as across any
of the subsamples.7
        In Figure 1 I present a histogram for the 180 haircuts. The value of the Argentine 2005
haircut (74.6%) is shown with a vertical black line. An analysis of Figure 1 and of the data
behind it (Table 1) shows the following: (a) the distribution is “bimodal,” suggesting that the
data may come from two different populations.8 (b) There are only 25 episodes with haircuts in
excess of that imposed by Argentina in 2005. As noted, these countries appear in italics in Table
1. (c) Countries with haircuts in excess of Argentina’s 74.8% are very different from Argentina.
Eighteen of them correspond to very poor African countries, another four are among the poorest
nations in Central and South America – Bolivia, Guyana, Honduras and Nicaragua --, and many
of them were subject to wars and/or major civil conflicts (Iraq, Bosnia and Herzegovina).9
2.2     The Argentine default and restructuring in historical perspective
        On December 23 2001, Argentina defaulted on its debt. Two weeks later the peso was
devalued by 30%, and a ten-year experiment with a currency board and a fixed exchange rate
(one peso equal to one dollar) came to an end. During the years leading to the crisis the
Argentine economy was subject to a number of severe external shocks: the terms of trade
declined, global interest rates increased, and capital inflows slowed significantly, in part as a
result of contagion stemming from the Russian 1998 crisis.10 The road to devaluation and default
was traumatic: throughout 2001 there were massive demonstrations, riots, bank runs, a
suspended IMF program, and a deposit freeze. On December 9, 2001, President Fernando de la
Rúa resigned, and five months later, Nestor Kirchner, the former Governor of the province of
Entre Ríos, was elected president. When he took over, Argentina was facing a severe economic
and political crisis: growth was negative, unemployment exceeded 20%, the public debt was in
arrears, relations with the IMF were strained, and the currency had lost 2/3 of its value.11



7
  To put things into perspective, analyses of the Greek sovereign restructuring of 2012 based on the same
methodology indicate that the aggregate haircut (across all restructured bonds) was of the order of 60%. See
Zettelmeyer, Trebesch and Gulati (2013).
8
  The Jarque-Bera tests are 13.3 and 7.8 respectively, rejecting the hypothesis of normality at a very high
significance level.
9
  These four countries, plus Haiti, form the “poorest five” group in Latin America and the Caribbean.
10
   For details on the Argentine crisis of 2001-02 see, for example, Edwards (2002), Bluestein (2005), and IMF
(2004). Most of these shocks were temporary. See Section 4 of this paper for a discussion on the magnitude of these
shocks.
11
   See, Bluestein (2005).
                                                           6


         Soon after taking office, Kirchner decided to restructure the external government debt. In
September 2003 the Argentine government made an offer to investors to exchange defaulted
bonds for new ones. This proposal became known as the “Dubai Guidelines,” and implied an
average reduction of the face value of the debt of approximately 75%. Investors balked at the
stiff losses, and asked for better conditions. Negotiations ensued, and a new offer was formally
made in June 2004 under the moniker of “Dubai Plus.” The terms of this proposal were very
similar to the original ones, and implied losses (in present value terms) for bondholders of
approximately 75%.12
         Investors had until February 28, 2005 to exchange their old securities for new ones. Three
new bonds were available: (1) A “Par Bond” with the same face value as the old bonds, but
significantly longer maturity (35 years). The coupon would increase gradually through time from
1.33% to 5.25%. Amortization was expected to begin in 2029.13 (2) A “Discount Bond” with a
significant face value reduction. The coupon was 8.28% for the USD-denominated bonds and
5.83% for the (inflation adjusted) peso-denominated bonds.14 And (3), a “Quasi Par” bond that,
for all practical purposes, was a combination of the other two bonds.15 Under the “Dubai Plus”
scheme past due interest (PDI) was only recognized partially. Interest coupons not paid before
the default date of December 23, 2001 were included in the exchange offer. However, PDI
corresponding to the December 2001-December 2003 period was excluded. All three exchange
options were subject to a GDP growth “kicker.” Starting in 2006, bond holders could receive an
extra payment in the eventuality that GDP growth exceeded a predetermined threshold.16



12
   See IMF (2004) for a detailed timeline of earlier events. See, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006) for details on
the negotiations.
13
   These bonds were available in a number of currencies – US Dollars, Euros, Yen, and Argentine pesos indexed to
the local consumer price index (CPI). The initial coupon was very low, but would increase gradually through time
(from 1.33% to 5.25%). Amortization was expected to begin in 2029.
14
   These securities were also available in US Dollars, Euros, Yen, and Argentine pesos indexed to the local
consumer price index (CPI). They had 30 years maturity and amortization would begin in 2024. The exchange
would take place at 33.7% of the original face value. This fact led the popular press to report that investors’ haircut
amounted to 66.3%. This computation, however, is based in the incorrect methodology for the reasons discussed in
the text.
15
   These securities had a 42 year maturity, were exchanged for 69.6% of the original face value and had a coupon
rate of 3.31% that was capitalized during the first ten years. Amortization was to begin in 2036. These Quasi Par
bonds were only available in (inflation adjusted) pesos.
16
   The conditions for this payment to kick were: growth in the preceding year had to exceed 3% and total payments
could not exceed 48% of the original value of each bond. See, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006). According to
Cruces and Trebesch (2013), investment banks were not sure how to value this GDP kicker. In November 2005, six
months after the exchange had taken place, the GDP-linked warrants were to become detachable.
                                                        7


        When the exchange window closed on February 28, 2005, 76.2% of bondholders had
tendered their defaulted bonds and had accepted new bonds in exchange. This rate of
participation (76.2%) was low from a comparative perspective; in the seventeen sovereign debt
restructurings/exchanges between 1999 and 2010, 96% of investors had accepted the new terms
suggested by the sovereign. At the time of the exchange Argentina’s congress passed a law
prohibiting the government from making better offers in the future to those investors that had not
tendered their defaulted bonds. This legislation was known as “ley candado” (lock-in or clam-
down law). The provision forbidding better offers to holdouts was also introduced as a clause in
the new bonds – the so called RUFO clause. The prohibition for better offers and the RUFO
clause was to expire on December 31, 2014.17
        In 2010, Argentina reopened the bond exchange and offered identical terms as in 2005 to
those that had not tendered their defaulted securities. An additional group of investors decided to
exchange their bonds. The main reason for accepting the offer five years later was the realization
that Argentina’s congress was not going to amend the “ley candado” that prohibited the
government from improving the terms of the exchange. But not everyone came into the fold:
bondholders representing approximately 7% of the original debt decided to hold on to the old
securities and to press for better terms. There were two types of holdouts: retail investors and
funds specialized in distressed debt that had been buying defaulted bonds in the secondary
market. Two of these funds took Argentina to court in the U.S., arguing that the haircut was
unusually high, and that the country had the ability to make improved payments. The case slowly
made its way through the U.S. Judicial System, and in mid-2014 it reached the Supreme Court.
On June 16, 2014 the Supreme Court refused to hear the case, and left in place a lower court
ruling mandating Argentina to make a payment to the “holdouts.” The argument by the lower
court was that the pari passu clause required Argentina to treat all (new and old) investors
equally: if the holders of exchanged bonds received a coupon payment, those holding old bonds
should also be paid. 18 After the Supreme Court decision, frantic negotiations between the
holdouts and the Argentine government began. By July 30, 2014, the deadline imposed by the



17
  Cruces and Trebesch (2013).
18
  A number of news media stories covered, in detail, the Supreme Court decision and the implications of the lower
court ruling. See, for example, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-06-16/argentina-rejected-by-u-s-high-court-
on-defaulted-bonds.html
                                                         8


Court, no agreement had been reached, and on August 1, 2014, Argentina was declared by the
ISDA to be in default.19
         Throughout this process Argentina’s position was that given the shocks faced by the
country in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and the hardship suffered by the Argentine people
after the January 2002 devaluation, the Dubai terms were reasonable, and the country would not
improve its offer. For Argentina, the 2001 default was, to use the terminology of Grossman and
Van Huyk (1989), “excusable,” and the terms of the exchange were fair and in line with the
historical experience on debt restructurings under similar conditions. This view became clear on
June 22, 2014, when the Presidency of Argentina published a full page ad in the New York
Times, titled “Argentina wants to continue paying its debts but they won’t let it.”
3.       Explaining recovery rates and “haircuts”: A regression analysis
         In this Section I use the cross country data set described above to estimate a series of
haircut regressions. These estimates are then used, in Section 4, to evaluate whether the
Argentine restructuring of 2005 resulted in “unusual” and “excessively high” losses to investors.
Within this framework, a haircut would be “excessive” if that episode is an “outlier.” On the
other hand, a haircut would conform to the historical evidence if fitted values from the regression
analysis are not significantly different from the actual haircut. I also rely on these results to
analyze the “appropriateness” of the haircuts in the Uruguayan restructuring of 2003, the Chilean
restructurings of 1984-1990, and the Greek restructuring of 2012.
3.1      The empirical model
         In an important paper, Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) argued that in a world where
reputation is valuable, sovereign loans should be seen as state contingent claims.20 Creditors
know that under (very) bad states of the world the borrower will have an excuse to restructure its
debts, and will act accordingly. Sovereigns, on the other hand, recognize that if they incur in a
non-justifiable default they will ruin their reputation and will not be able to borrow in the future.




19
   The government of Argentina claimed that it had not defaulted in late July 2014. The reason, according to
Argentina, was that it had made a deposit covering the July 2014 coupon payment to new bondholders in the Bank
of New York. Judge Thomas Griesa, however, forbade the bank from paying these investors if Argentina was
unwilling to pay the holders of old bonds that had brought the case to court. This ruling has generated significant
discussion among economists regarding the future of sovereign restructurings.
20
   On the “excusable default” model see, for example, the discussion in Yue (2010). See, also, Alfaro and Kanczuk
(2009).
                                                       9


In this setting there is no outright debt repudiation, only restructurings.21 But not all
restructurings are alike; in some cases the losses are very high, while in others the haircuts are
relatively low. The actual level of the haircut is the result of a negotiation between creditors and
the debtor, and depends on how devastating is the bad state of the world that affected the
sovereign. The more severe the negative shocks, the higher will be the fraction of the debt that
will be forgiven (in present value) and, thus, the higher will be the haircut. If creditors and
debtors agree on the nature and intensity of these negative shocks, negotiations will be short and
creditors will accept new terms. If, however, there is disagreement on the nature of the shocks,
negotiations may be quite long, until both parties agree on the actual depth of these disturbances.
See Appendix A for a discussion of the model.
             Consider the following empirical model that captures the key implications of the
Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) analysis:


             (2)                                                                                        .


     , the     , the   , and the     are regression coefficients to be estimated. The        are (one or
more) explanatory variables in the spirit of Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) that capture the
severity of the shocks that hit country i during a time window                   that precedes the actual
exchange; these are the “excusable” shocks related to bad states of the world. The              s are
variables that capture other circumstances of country i in the period immediately preceding the
restructuring, such as its debt to GDP ratio. The          s are covariates that summarize the conditions
of the global economy around the time of each exchange, including whether the global economy
is in a recession. The         are characteristics of the debt exchange itself that may affect the
magnitude of the haircut.          is a (possibly heteroskedatic) error term. An important feature of
equation (2) is the timing of the different variables: when negotiating the haircut, creditors and
sovereign consider the shocks that affected the debtor during a window of time that goes from,
approximately, the payments’ suspension, to the negotiation. In that sense,                  refers to a
window of time prior to the decision on the actual magnitude of the haircut. Benjamin and
Wright (2009) calculated that for their data set restructuring processes took, on average, eight

21
  Restructurings may be delayed and take some time, but they eventually occur. See Benjamin and Wright (2009)
for an analysis on delays.
                                                         10


years. For the episodes considered in this paper, the average restructuring took 6 years; in the
empirical analysis I consider different lengths for this window. The                 s and the     s also enter into
the regression with a lag. However, this lag needs not be the same as the one for the excusable
shocks variable. For more details on the lag structure used in the estimation, see the discussion in
Sections 3.2 and 3.3. In every equation I included regional dummy variables.
         In order to construct an indicator of “bad states of the world” I inquired if at any time
during the six years preceding the debt restructuring the country in question was subject to any of
the following shocks:22 (1) War, civil conflict, coup d’état, or coup attempt. (2) A major GDP
contraction of at least 8%. (3) A major deterioration in its terms of trade, of at least 15%. And (4)
a severe currency crisis that implied a devaluation of, at least, 20%.23 The “bad states of the
world” indicator        was then defined as the sum of the number of shocks suffered by each
county. This index is equal to 0 if none of these shocks took place during the six years preceding
the restructuring, and takes the value of 4 if all four shocks were present. Its regression
coefficient is expected to be positive in equation (1): countries that have been subject to a
succession of severe (excusable) shocks will tend to receive a more lenient treatment during
restructuring negotiations and, thus, there will be a lower recovery rate for investors. In Section
3.3 I discuss the results obtained when other windows for the excusable shocks are used, and
when alternative measures for these shocks are used.
         I included the following        s variables that capture each country’s circumstances at the
time of the restructuring negotiations:
                 Debt to GDP ratio: This variable is defined as the ratio of debt to the country’s
                  GDP subject to restructuring, and is measured the year prior to the exchange. Its
                  coefficient is expected to be positive: with other things given, countries with a
                  higher debt burden will require large debt relieve to move to a sustainable
                  situation. Thus, they will be able to be treated more leniently.


22
   A number of historical analyses, including Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), have concluded that the three shocks
considered here have usually been present during major debt crises. A six year window covers, in the vast majority
of cases, the default itself and the restructuring. For 108 episodes with data the mean time elapsed between default
and restructurings was 6.2 years. Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) don’t include wars and coups in their analysis; they do
include banking crises.
23
   More specifically, a devaluation crisis is defined as an abrupt increase in the value of foreign currency (the U.S.
dollar) of at least 20% that takes place after a period of relative exchange rate stability That is, large annual
devaluations stemming from the adoption of a crawling peg or other type of managed currency regime are not
considered to be a crisis.
                                                        11


                Poor: This variable takes the value of 1 if the country in question is among the
                 poorest in the world. These include countries in South Saharan Africa, the four
                 poorest nations in Central and South America – Bolivia, Honduras, Guyana, and
                 Nicaragua –, Pakistan and Vietnam.24 Its coefficient is expected to be positive.
                 Payment difficulties in poor counties are easier to qualify as “excusable.”


        The following variables ( ) that capture the state of the global economy at the time of
each negotiation were also included in the estimation:
                Recession: This variable takes a value of 1 if during the year of the restructuring
                 the U.S. economy was in recession. The timing of recessions comes from the
                 National Bureau of Economic Research.
                Global interest rates: The yield on the 10 year U.S. Treasury note six months
                 prior to the restructuring was included. A higher yield implies tighter global
                 financial conditions. It is expected that the coefficient of this variable will be
                 negative, as creditors will tend to be less “generous” if financial conditions are
                 tight. I also considered alternative lags; this didn’t affect the results in any
                 significant way.
                Nineties: This is a dummy that takes the value of 1 after the year 1990. This is
                 meant to capture the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the fact that in the years that
                 followed a number of former Warsaw Pact countries began to reform their
                 economies, sought global financing, and restructured their old debts.


        In some of the regressions I included two binary              variables that summarize some
aspects the debt exchange/restructuring:
            Brady deal: This variable takes the value of 1 if the exchange in question was part of
             the Brady deal from the early 1990s. Its coefficient is expected to be positive, since at
             the time of the Brady agreements the official and private sectors were committed to




24
  The cutoff point is a GDP per capita in PPP dollars of 4,000 in 2010. Most of these nations, however, have a GDP
per capita below 2,000 PPP dollars. Many of these countries -- but not all of them -- eventually became eligible for
the IMF and World Bank’s HIPC debt relief program.
                                                          12


             make significant concessions in order to solve the debt problem that had paralyzed
             many poor and middle income countries for up to a decade.
            Donor funded: Takes a value of 1 if the international donor community – IMF, World
             Bank, regional development banks, and/or bilateral aid agencies – provided funds to
             facilitate the exchange. Its coefficient is expected to be positive, as the aid community
             only provides financial assistance to countries that are restructuring their debts if they
             deem them to be in significant difficulties (more on this below).


3.2      Basic results
         In Table 3 I present the basic regression results; White heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are reported.25 Equations (3.1) and (3.2) are for 1978-2010. Equations (3.3) and
(3.4), on the other hand, are for 1988-2010, a period with more reliable data.26
         Overall, these results are satisfactory. First, the coefficient for the “bad state of the
world” variable is always significantly positive, as expected. This is consistent with the
Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) view that countries subject to a larger number of (very)
negative shocks have a greater “excuse” for not paying their debts fully, and will tend to obtain
better terms when restructuring them. The coefficients of the “debt to GDP” and “poor” variables
are also positive, as expected, and in all but one of the regressions they are significant. With
other things given, poorer countries get higher debt forgiveness (and creditors get a stiffer
haircut), as do countries with a higher debt burden. The coefficients of the global economy
variables suggest that haircuts are lower when global liquidity is tighter. Also, and after
controlling for other factors, haircuts have tended to be higher if the restructuring takes place
during a global recession. The “nineties” variable, which appears in two regressions, is
significant in one of them. Most of the regional dummies are significant. Whether a particular
restructuring was part of the Brady Deal makes no difference; episodes where donors provided
additional funds were characterized, with other things given, by lower recovery rates and higher
haircuts. An interesting result is that the point estimates for the coefficients of the “bad states of


25
   Jarque-Bera tests on the residuals from OLS estimates reject the null of homoskedastic errors. The same test
indicates that the use of White-corrected estimates solve the problem.
26
   Notice that in equations (3.1)-(3.2) there are 153 observations. The reason for this for some episodes there are no
data for all the covariates. This is particul;arly so during the early years. See Cruces and Trebesch (2013) for a
discussion on data quality and reliability.
                                                  13


the world” indicator and the “poor” variable are always smaller when the “donor funded”
variable is included. A possible explanation for this is that the “donor funded” variable captures
the official aid organizations’ assessment of whether a particular country had been subject to
major “excusable” shocks and, thus, is deserving of better treatment (I return to the “donor
funded” variable in Section 3.3 when I present instrumental variable results). As may be seen,
the R-squared is quite high, and in most equations it is in the neighborhood of 0.6; only in one of
the estimates it is below 0.5.
       The results in Table 3 include data for bank loans’ restructurings and bonds’
restructurings. An interesting question is whether there are differences in the determinants of
recovery rates across these two types of securities. Unfortunately, given the low number of bond
exchanges during the period (only 18) it is not possible to estimate separate regressions for bonds
and bank loans. As an alternative I ran a number of equations with a “bond exchange” dummy
variable. This was included both on its own as well as interacted with some of the main
covariates. The results obtained are reported in Table 4. As may be seen, the bond dummies are
insignificant, and the previous results regarding the main determinants of the haircut rates are
maintained.
       In the regressions reported in Tables 3 and 4 the indicator for bad sates of the world is
defined as the sum of four major shocks. An interesting question refers to the individual
contribution of each of these shocks to the explanation of haircuts. Regressions with each
“excusable” shock entered separately confirm the results reported above: countries that
experience major negative shocks tend to impose more severe haircuts. As may be seen from
Table 5, the most important “bad state of the world” shock is Wars and civil conflicts. Its
coefficient is the highest and it is always significant at the 5% or 1% levels. Interestingly, the
coefficient for “currency crises” is not significant in the two regressions where it is included. A
possible explanation is that large devaluations have been quite common among developing
countries, and that on their own – that is, when not accompanied by major output collapses or an
armed conflict –, currency crises are not considered to be an “excusable” shock by creditors.
3.2    Robustness, extensions, and possible endogeneity
       In this section I deal with some robustness issues, and I discuss whether the results are
sensitive to the definition of certain variables, time periods, and equation specification. I also
                                                   14


deal with possible endogeneity problems. Due to space consideration most of the estimates
discussed in this section are not reported in tables; they are, however, available on request.
        Alternative measures of investors’ losses: The analysis presented above relied on
equation (1) to compute of investors’ losses. An alternative measure of haircuts compares the
face value of the old debt to the market value of the new debt. In the literature, this alternative
approach to computing investors’ losses has received the name of “market haircut,” and is
equivalent to discounting the old debt flows by the coupon interest rate, and the new debt by the
“yield at exit.” In many instances the differences between the two measures are small; in others,
however, they can be quite significant. For the complete sample the difference between both
measures is -3.0%, and the median is 0. When the haircut regressions in Tables 3 through 5 are
re-estimated using the market haircut as a dependent variable the results don’t change in any
significant way. In particular, it is still the case that there is a positive association between the
severity of the shocks and the magnitude of the haircuts. (Results available on request).
        Different windows for the covariates: I re-estimated the equations reported above using
larger windows for defining the “bad states of the world” indicator. More specifically, I
considered 8, 10 and 12 years windows. I also considered different lags (longer) for the other
regressors. The results obtained confirmed the main findings in Tables 3 through 5, and provided
support to the main implications of the “excusable defaults” model. Results available on request.
        Alternative definition of “bad states of the world”: The “bad states of the world” variable
used in Tables 3, 4 and 5 above was defined as an additive index. This means that having two
negative shocks is twice as bad as having one, and facing four shocks is twice as bad as facing
two. It is possible to argue, however, that the effect of major shocks is more than additive, and
that countries that experience many of these shocks simultaneously go through significant
hardship. In order to explore whether the definition of this variable affects the results I
constructed an exponential “bad states of the world indicator” as follows:                      .
Where n is the number of shocks that affected this particular country in the six year window
prior to the restructuring. The results obtained when this definition of “bad states” is used are
presented in Table 6. As may be seen, they confirm those reported above, and provide support to
the “excusable” default model.
        Nonlinearities and interactive terms: In an effort to understand better the determinants of
investors’ losses in debt restructurings I explored whether higher order terms of the bad state of
                                                         15


the world variables were significant, and whether interactive terms played a role. In particular, I
investigated if interactions between a number of the regressors and other covariates played a
significant role – in Table 4 I present the interaction between a “bond exchange” dummy and
several covariates. The answers to both of these questions are negative; I found no role for
interactions or nonlinearities.
           Face value reduction: Some debt restructurings include a reduction in the face value of
the debt – or face value haircut --, while others are confined to extending maturity, reducing
coupon rates, and/or defining a grace period with no payments of principal. Fifty seven of the
180 episodes in this paper included face value reductions. Argentina 2005 is one of them, with an
average (across bonds) face value reduction of 29.4%. For the complete sample the mean face
value reduction is 16.1%, and the median is zero. I estimated a number of probit regressions to
investigate whether the bad states of the world index(es) help explain if, in a particular
restructuring, there was face value reduction. These regressions indicate that countries with more
severe shocks, a higher debt burden and poor have a higher probability of having a reduction in
the face value of the debt. The results are available on request.
           Warrants and kickers: As noted above, most authors have ignored the value of GDP and
terms of trade-contingent kickers in their calculations of haircut rates. Some authors, such as
Cruces and Trebesch (2013), have made the (correct) point that in the vast majority of cases
these claims had a very low (or zero) value at the moment of the exchange; other authors have
ignored them without much explanation. In this paper, in contrast, I explicitly subtracted the
value of the Argentina 2005 GDP-linked warrant when calculating the haircut magnitude for that
episode. However, I assigned a value of zero to kickers in the other 11 cases that included them
in the restructuring agreement. In order to explore the robustness of the results, I considered two
alternative approaches: (1) I followed Cruces and Trebesch (2013) and others, and ignored
contingent components in all cases27; and (2) I made an effort to assign values to kickers in the
other 11 episodes that included them -- for Argentina I still used 2 cents on the dollar.28 The
results obtained, confirm those discussed above: haircuts tend to be higher in countries that are
subject to more severe “bad state of the world,” have higher debt burdens, and are poorer (results
available on request).


27
     See, Chamon, Costa and Ricci (2008), and Sandleris and Wright (2013).
28
     See, for example, Miyajima (2006).
                                                         16


         Possible endogeneity issues: The results in Tables 3 through 6 were obtained using
White-corrected least squares. An important question, however, is whether these estimates may
be subject to some endogeneity problems. Inspection of the equations indicates that almost every
regressor is either an exogenous variable or, given, the lags structure, a predetermined variable.
The clearly exogenous variables are: terms of trade changes, U.S. interest rates, and recessions in
the United States. The predetermined covariates include “coups and wars,” a variable that is
defined within a window that begins one year prior to the restructuring and extends to 6, 8 or 10
years into the past. This is also de case with the “debt to GDP ratio” and the “poor” indicator,
both defined with a one year lag. However, the one covariate that is entered contemporaneously
and that may be subject to endogeneity is “donor funded,” a variable that measures whether the
official (multilateral and/or bilateral) aid organizations provided funding during the
restructuring.29 In order to deal with this potential problem I estimated a number of equations of
the type of (2) using instrumental variables. The following instruments were used: A binary
variable that takes the value of 1 if the country was included by the IMF and World Bank in the
original (1996) list of countries for the HIPC program. Naturally, this variable can only take the
value 1 after 1996. A dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the country had been approved
by the IMF for a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility loan in the window comprised from one
year prior to the debt restructuring to 6 years prior to this event.30 The third instrument is an
index that measures the number of coups and wars during the ten years prior to each
restructuring.
         The results obtained under instrumental variables are in Table 7. As may be seen, the
results confirm the main conclusions from Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6: there is support for the
implications for the “excusable default” model and, by and large, the other covariates continue to
have the expected signs and are significant. The point estimates for the excusable default
variables are similar to those in the preceding tables; the point estimates for the “donor funded”
covariate are somewhat smaller, but still positive and significant at conventional levels.




29
   Someone could argue that the aid agencies only provided funding for the restructuring if there was a high enough
“haircut” imposed on private creditors (a “bail-in” requirement for providing additional funds). Although there is no
evidence that this was the way in which these agencies acted, it is still possible that something along these lines
happened.
30
   The data are from Dreher (2006) and from the IMF website.
                                                 17


4.     Was Argentina’s 2005 haircut excessive? A residuals’ analysis
       In the preceding section I reported twenty haircut equations. These estimates showed that
the results are robust to variables’ definitions, periods considered, specifications, and estimation
methods (White-corrected least squares or instrumental variables). These estimates may be used
to inquire whether haircuts in particular episodes conformed to the predictions of the model or if,
on the contrary, they were excessively high or low. This is what I do in this Section for the
Argentine exchange of 2005, the Chilean restructurings of 1984-1990, and the Uruguayan
exchange of 2003. I also use these results to investigate, using an out of sample forecast, the
Greek sovereign debt restructuring of 2012.
       A good starting point is the analysis of fitted values for the Argentina 2005 haircut. These
fitted values range from a minimum of 36.0% to a maximum of 60.1%. As may be seen this
range doesn’t include the actual haircut resulting from the Argentina 2005 restructuring: 74.6%.
The mean for the 20 fitted values is 47.1%, and the median is 45.7%; the standard deviation is
7.3%. Although these numbers are significantly higher than the mean and median for all episodes
reported in Table 2 (37% and 32%), they are still much smaller than the actual haircut imposed
by Argentina to investors in 2005.
       Another way of saying this is that the residuals for the Argentina 2005 episode are
positive and very large in every regression. In what follows I rely on two “influence statistics” to
investigate formally whether Argentina 2005 is an outlier in the empirical analysis: I use the R-
student standardized test, and the DFFITS test. In order to provide some context I also analyze
the residuals from debt restructuring episodes in two of Argentina’s neighbors: (1) Chile in 1984-
1990, and (2) Uruguay in 2003; I also discuss briefly, and in light of these results, the Greek
restructuring of 2012.
       Residuals’ analysis for Argentina: The R-student standardized residual test for episode i
is defined as follows:


                                                  .


The DFFITS test, on the other hand, is defined as:
                                                         18


                                                =                             ,


where,      is the original residual for episode i,           is the variance of the residuals if the
observation corresponding to episode i is excluded from the analysis, and                    is the i-th diagonal
element of the                    matrix. In order to have a broad view I used the residuals from the
equations reported in Tables 3 through Table 5. That is, the analysis includes 13 estimates. This
means that there are a total of 26 residual tests (13 for the R-student and 13 for the DFFITS).
         The results obtained from this analysis are quite revealing. In 21 out of the 26 tests the
Argentine 2005 debt restructuring is a statistical outlier. 31 In Figure 2 I present, as an illustration,
the two residual tests – including the critical 95% bands – for equation (5.5) in Table 5.
According to the R-student standardized test, only three episodes are outliers: Argentina 2005,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Ukraine 1998. Only the latter has negative residuals and, thus,
had an “unusually low” haircut. The DFFIT test, on the other hand, identifies four outliers:
Argentina 2005, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cote d’Ivoire 1998, and Iraq 2006. As may be seen,
Argentina appears in both lists, indicating that the haircut imposed on investors in in 2005 was
“excessively high” from a comparative perspective.
         An interesting question is what makes Argentina 2005 an outlier observation. The answer
is in three parts: (1) Argentina was hit by two of the four bad states of the world shocks: output
collapse, and currency devaluation. Even though the crisis and the default were surrounded by
considerable political instability, the country maintained constitutional rule and the institutions of
the state continued to function. In addition, in the years preceding the crisis the terms of trade
declined by only 9%. While this is clearly a negative shock, it is not large enough to qualify as a
“bad state of the world.”. Indeed, in Argentina’s modern history there have been numerous
occasions where the terms of trade have declined significantly more than 9%.32 As a
consequence, in the regression analysis the “Bad States” index takes a value of “2” for


31
  In some of these tests the Argentina’s 2005 residual was on the boarder of the outlier bands.
32
  Argentina’s terms of trade have historically been quite volatile, and a 9% decline is well within what is normal.
Indeed, an analysis of Argentina’s recent past provides strong support for the notion that declines in terms of trade
are common, cyclical and temporary. For example, in 1974, Argentina’s terms of trade deteriorated by 14%, and in
1975 they dropped further by 11%. In the next three years, however, the terms of trade improved by 23%, 15% and
8%, respectively. This terms-of-trade cycle repeated itself in the mid-1980s: in 1986, the price of Argentine exports
relative to its imports declined by 21%, and in 1987 they dropped by an additional 11%. In each of the next three
years they improved by 29%, 8% and 10%, respectively.
                                                        19


Argentina, while in many countries it was greater. (2) Argentina is not a poor country. It is true
that this crisis was severe and resulted in a significant increase in the poverty headcount and
unemployment, but even in 2002 Argentina was not a “poor country,” as are many of the nations
that were able to obtain significant debt relief when restructuring their debts. And (3), the
amount of debt exchanged was not high enough as to justify a 75% haircut. The issue here is not
whether this was a large and massive exchange – which, of course, it was –, but whether the debt
to GDP ratio was high enough as to justified the magnitude of the haircut. At USD 65 billion,
Argentina’s 2005 sovereign restructuring was the second highest ever in absolute terms, and as a
proportion of GDP it was the tenth highest in the modern history of sovereign restructuring. And
yet, this was not enough as to explain, according to the model, such a massive haircut. As noted,
in the equations reported above the fitted values for the Argentina 2005 episode ranged from
36% to 60%. These figures are significantly lower than the 74.8% actual haircut.
        Chile and Uruguay: In order to provide context, I compare Argentina’s episode to
restructurings in two of its neighbors: Chile and Uruguay.
        In 1982, and after an experiment with fixed exchange rates (the value of the U.S. dollar
was rigidly fixed at 39 pesos), Chile faced a major crisis. Most banks went under, the currency
lost two thirds of its value, output collapsed by 15%, and unemployment skyrocketed to 25%. In
1983 Chile defaulted on its sovereign debt, and long and protracted negotiations with the banks
began. The restructuring was in stages and agreements with creditors were signed in 1984, 1986,
1987 and 1990. The haircuts were 8.4%, 31.7%, 14.7% and 17% respectively, and the weighted
average for the complete episode was 27.3%.33 During this long process, debt equivalent to 95%
of GDP was renegotiated. This was significantly higher than in Argentina 2005.34 The influence
statistics indicate that Chile is not an outlier; indeed, the (the weighted average of the) fitted
value(s) for its haircut is remarkably similar to the actual haircut: 26.9% vs. 27.3%. The Chilean
haircut was neither unusually high, nor unusually low.
        During the late 1990s and early 2000s, Uruguay was affected by a number of negative
shocks similar to those that hit Argentina. In late 2002, and in the face of a run on the currency,
output collapse, and severe contagion form Argentina, Uruguay declared a five days bank



33
   The weighted average is from the four episodes when the equation corresponds to 1978-2010. It is for 1990 only
when the estimate is restricted to 1988-2010.
34
   See Edwards and Edwards (1991) for details.
                                                          20


holiday. In April 2003, a restructuring proposal was presented to creditors. At the end of the
process 93% of bondholders exchanged their bonds. In this operation, and in contrast with
Argentina’s restructuring two years later, there was no face value reduction. Due to its timing, to
Uruguay’s proximity to Argentina, and to the structural similarity of both countries, this episode
has often been used as a comparison to the Argentine exchange. Some, however, have argued
that in the case of Uruguay the “haircut was excessively low.” 35 The influence statistics
calculated from the equations reported in this paper provide evidence suggesting that in the case
of Uruguay the haircut imposed on investors was neither low nor high; it was “appropriate.”
         Greece: An interesting question is what does this analysis, which relies on data up to
mid-2010, has to say about the Greek restructuring of April 2012. Using the same present value
methodology used in this paper, Zettelmeyer, Trebesch and Gulati (2013), calculated the haircut
in this episode was 64%. For Greece the key covariates have the following values: the “Bad
States” indicator is equal to 1 (output collapse only), “Poor” is 0, “Debt to GDP” is 0.966, “Ten
Year” is equal to 2%, and “Europe” is equal to 1. I used the nine equations in Tables 4 and 5 to
obtain estimates for the “appropriate” Greek haircut, from the perspective of this analysis. These
estimates ranged from 81% to 52%. The mean of the nine estimates is 62.9%, very close to the
actual 64% haircut; the median is 60.8%, and the standard deviation is 9.2%.36
5.       Concluding Remarks
         Most studies on debt restructurings and haircuts rely on the concept of “debt
sustainability.” The idea is that a restructuring process should reduce the debt to the point where
the debt to GDP ratio is “sustainable.” Roubinbi and Setser (2004, p. 171), for example, state that
in order to achieve sustainability, “the overall debt burden has to be consistent with the country’s
overall capacity to make payments.”37 Even though these sustainability-based models are useful



35
   In fact, Uruguay suffered more severe terms of trade shock than Argentina. It experienced a currency crisis, and a
GDP collapse similar to that of Argentina. See Edwards (2010).
36
   At the time of this writing Greece is once again facing debt problems and there is talk of a new restructuring. For
a discussion and some estimates see, for example, Philippon (2015).
37
   A simple version of this methodology may be described as follows: First, the analyst determines the country’s
“capacity to make payments.” Say, interest payments should not exceed X% of GDP per year. Second, the debt to
GDP ratio that is consistent with payments not exceeding X% of GDP is calculated. This is called the “sustainable”
debt to GDP ratio. The “appropriate haircut” is then computed as the amount by which the current debt needs to be
reduced in order to make the actual debt to GDP ratio equal to the “sustainable” ratio. In Edwards (2003), for
example, I developed a model along these lines to analyze whether the proposed debt forgiveness for Nicaragua
under the HIPC program would have generated a sustainable debt to GDP path into the future.
                                                 21


and are used profusely – indeed I constructed one for assessing Nicaragua’s HIPC debt reduction
program, Edwards (2003) –, they have some limitations. The two most important ones are: (a) It
is not easy to determining the “capacity to make payments,” to quote Roubini and Sester (2004,
p.171). Is it the same for all countries? Does it change through time? What does it depend on?
And (b), calculating the observed ratio of debt to GDP is not trivial. The basic problem is that
this implies comparing a number expressed in foreign currency (foreign debt) to a number
expressed in domestic currency (GDP). In most cases the current exchange rate is used to convert
GDP in domestic currency into GDP in foreign currency (U.S. dollars). However, it is easy to see
the problem with this approach: after a large devaluation – say from 1 peso equal to 1 dollar, to 3
pesos to 1 dollar –, GDP denominated in dollars shrinks to one third of the value it had
immediately prior to the currency event. There are number of possible ways for dealing with
these issues. For example, GDP in PPP dollars may be used. This is a significantly more stable
figure that GDP converted using spot exchange rates. Another alternative is to use an estimate of
the long run “equilibrium” real exchange rate to make the GDP conversion.
       In this paper, however, I have used a different approach for evaluating the
“appropriateness” of haircuts after a debt restructuring. I used a data set that includes every
sovereign restructuring between 1978 and 2010 to explain the extent of investors’ losses. The
regression results are broadly in agreement with the “excusable default” approach to
restructurings: countries that have suffered very severe shocks – including wars, armed conflicts,
coup d’état, output collapses, and major declines in the terms of trade – end up having larger
haircuts than countries that have not faced these major disturbances. Very poor countries and
nations with larger debt burdens also have larger haircuts. The residuals from these regressions
are then used to investigate whether the haircut in a particular episode conforms to the
predictions from the empirical model. An analysis of the residuals from 20 regressions indicates,
consistently, that the haircut imposed by Argentina in its 2005 restructuring was unusual and
excessively high (in most regressions the residuals exceeded two times the standard error of the
regression). The analysis presented here suggests that an “appropriate” haircut in the Argentine
exchange of 2005 would have been in the vicinity of 47%, significantly lower than the actual
“haircut” of 74.8%. The empirical analysis also indicates that the haircuts in Chile’s (1984-1990)
restructurings were “appropriate,” as was the haircut in Uruguay’s exchange of 2003. In addition,
                                                          22


and out of sample forecast suggests that for Greece a haircut in the vicinity of the actual figure
was consistent with the historical evidence.
         There are a number of possible directions for future research. First, it would be
interesting to analyze the length of time that elapses between default and restructuring. Benjamin
and Wright (2009) documented that during early restructurings – almost all of which were for
syndicated bank loans – this time period was very long, exceeding, on average, 8 years. More
recent bond restructurings, however, have been very quick. The Uruguay exchange of 2003, for
example, took 63 days (in contrast, the Argentine exchange of 2005 took almost 1,300 days). A
second direction for future research has to do with the potential role played by international
reserves in the restructuring process. Defaults take place when international reserves are very
low, but still positive.38 For example, the Argentine default of December 23, 2001, took place
when the country still had approximately USD 20 billion in reserves (equivalent to 7% of GDP at
the pre-devaluation exchange rate and almost 20% of GDP at the post evaluation exchange rate).
An interesting question is how the reserves position of a country affects the haircut losses
incurred by investors. In principle, one would expect that the higher the reserves at hand, the
lower the haircut and, thus the higher the recovery rate. A third promising avenue of research
would be to estimate jointly a probability model on whether countries do restructure their debts
and a model of the magnitude of the haircut, in case the answer to the first question is positive. A
class of models that could be fruitfully used in this analysis would include “treatment models.”




38
  See Aizenman and Lee (2007) for an analysis of the role of international reserves in debt crises. See, also,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2010).
                                                   23


Figure 1: Haircuts Histogram: All Episodes

20
                                                                    Series: HAIR3
                                                                    Sample 1 180
16                                                                  Observations 180

                                                                    Mean           0.370278
12                                                                  Median         0.321000
                                                                    Maximum        0.970000
                                                                    Minimum       -0.098000
                                                                    Std. Dev.      0.272680
 8
                                                                    Skewness       0.615634
                                                                    Kurtosis       2.490602
 4
                                                                    Jarque-Bera   13.31631
                                                                    Probability   0.001284
 0
         0.0         0.2         0.4         0.6        0.8   1.0
                                       24




                   Figure 2: Influence Statistics and Outliers
                                 Influence Statistics
                                      RStudent
              3

              2

              1
Argentina
              0

             -1

             -2

             -3
                    16
                    20
                    36
                    45
                    53
                    58
                    64
                    74
                    83
                    91
                     1
                     9




                   104
                   112
                   117
                   130
                   137
                   144
                   155
                   160
                   168
                   174
                   179
                                       DFFITS
            1.5

            1.0

            0.5

            0.0

            -0.5

            -1.0

            -1.5
                    16
                    20
                    36
                    45
                    53
                    58
                    64
                    74
                    83
                    91
                     1
                     9




                   104
                   112
                   117
                   130
                   137
                   144
                   155
                   160
                   168
                   174
                   179




                                     Argentina
                                             25


TABLE 1: Sovereign Restructurings, 1978-2010: Years and Estimated “Haircuts”
COUNTRY                    YEAR   HAIRCUT         COUNTRY           YEAR   HAIRCUT

Albania                    1995      0.804        Dom. Rep (Bank)   2005      0.113
Algeria                    1992      0.087        Dominica          2004      0.540
Algeria                    1996      0.235        Ecuador           1983      0.063
Argentina                  1985      0.303        Ecuador           1984      0.057
Argentina                  1987      0.217        Ecuador           1985      0.154
Argentina                  1993      0.325        Ecuador           1995      0.422
Argentina (Global)         2005      0.748        Ecuador           2000      0.383
Belize                     2007      0.237        Ecuador           2009      0.677
Bolivia                    1988      0.927        Ethiopia          1996      0.920
Bolivia                    1993      0.765        Gabon             1987      0.079
Bosnia and Herzegovina     1997      0.896        Gabon             1994      0.162
Brazil                     1983     -0.098        Gambia,The        1988      0.493
Brazil                     1984      0.017        Grenada           2005      0.339
Brazil                     1986      0.192        Guinea            1988      0.261
Brazil                     1988      0.184        Guinea            1998      0.870
Brazil                     1992      0.270        Guyana            1992      0.892
Brazil                     1994      0.293        Guyana            1999      0.910
Bulgaria                   1994      0.563        Honduras          1989      0.732
Cameroon                   2002      0.855        Honduras          2001      0.820
Cameroon                   2003      0.855        Iraq              2006      0.894
Chile                      1983      0.007        Jamaica           1978      0.022
Chile                      1984      0.084        Jamaica           1979      0.035
Chile                      1986      0.317        Jamaica           1981      0.152
Chile                      1987      0.143        Jamaica           1984      0.181
Chile                      1990      0.170        Jamaica           1985      0.317
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1980      0.296        Jamaica           1987      0.328
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1983      0.382        Jamaica           1990      0.440
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1984      0.301        Jordan            1993      0.546
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1985      0.370        Kenya             1998      0.457
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1986      0.354        Liberia           1982      0.357
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1987      0.268        Macedonia, FYR    1997      0.346
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)   1989      0.506        Madagascar        1981      0.190
Congo, Rep.                2007      0.908        Madagascar        1984      0.413
Costa Rica                 1983      0.394        Madagascar        1987      0.137
Costa Rica                 1985      0.356        Madagascar        1990      0.527
Costa Rica                 1990      0.719        Malawi            1983      0.285
Cote d'Ivoire              1998      0.628        Malawi            1988      0.392
Cote d'Ivoire              2010      0.552        Mauritania        1996      0.900
Croatia                    1996      0.110        Mexico            1983     -0.002
Cuba                       1983      0.429        Mexico            1985      0.022
Cuba                       1984      0.442        Mexico            1985      0.054
Cuba                       1985      0.495        Mexico            1987      0.181
Dom. Rep.                  1986      0.499        Mexico            1988      0.563
Dom. Rep.                  1994      0.505        Mexico            1990      0.305
Dom. Rep. (Bonds)          2005      0.047        Moldova           2002      0.369
                                                  26


(Table 1, Continuation)
COUNTRY                    YEAR   HAIRCUT              COUNTRY                 YEAR    HAIRCUT

Moldova (Gazprom)          2004       0.563            Russian Federation      1997        0.262
Morocco                    1986       0.235            Russia (GKOs.)          1999        0.460
Morocco                    1987       0.213            Russia (MinFin3)        2000        0.515
Morocco                    1990       0.403            Russia (PRINs & IANs)   2000        0.508
Mozambique                 1987       0.486            Sao Tome and Principe   1994        0.900
Mozambique                 1991       0.900            Senegal                 1984        0.288
Nicaragua                  1980       0.261            Senegal                 1985        0.313
Nicaragua                  1981       0.485            Senegal                 1990        0.357
Nicaragua                  1982       0.563            Senegal                 1996        0.920
Nicaragua                  1984       0.417            Yugoslavia              1983        0.065
Nicaragua                  1995       0.920            Yugoslavia              1984       -0.075
Niger                      1984       0.374            Yugoslavia              1985        0.145
Niger                      1986       0.458            Yugoslavia              1988        0.197
Niger                      1991       0.820            Serbia and Montenegro   2004        0.709
Nigeria                    1983       0.012            Seychelles              2010        0.562
Nigeria                    1983       0.021            Sierra Leone            1995        0.886
Nigeria                    1984      -0.028            Slovenia                1995        0.033
Nigeria                    1987       0.193            South Africa            1987        0.085
Nigeria                    1988       0.415            South Africa            1989        0.127
Nigeria                    1989       0.301            South Africa            1993        0.220
Nigeria                    1991       0.401            Sudan                   1985        0.546
Pakistan (Bank)            1999       0.116            Tanzania                2004        0.880
Pakistan (Bond)            1999       0.150            Togo                    1988        0.460
Panama                     1985       0.120            Togo                    1997        0.923
Panama                     1994       0.151            Trinidad and Tobago     1989        0.155
Panama                     1996       0.349            Turkey                  1979        0.222
Paraguay                   1993       0.292            Turkey                  1979        0.195
Peru                       1980      -0.046            Turkey                  1981        0.085
Peru                       1983       0.063            Turkey                  1982        0.170
Peru                       1997       0.639            Uganda                  1993        0.880
Philippines                1986       0.426            Ukraine (OVDPs)         1998        0.118
Philippines                1987       0.154            Ukraine (Chase)         1998        0.147
Philippines                1990       0.428            Ukraine (ING)           1999       -0.083
Philippines                1992       0.254            Ukraine (Global)        2000        0.180
Poland                     1982       0.406            Uruguay                 1983        0.007
Poland                     1982       0.629            Uruguay                 1986        0.243
Poland                     1983       0.525            Uruguay                 1988        0.203
Poland                     1984       0.269            Uruguay                 1991        0.263
Poland                     1986       0.375            Uruguay                 2003        0.098
Poland                     1988       0.244            Venezuela               1986        0.099
Poland                     1989       0.120            Venezuela               1988        0.042
Poland                     1994       0.490            Venezuela               1990        0.367
Romania                    1982       0.329            Vietnam                 1997        0.520
Romania                    1983       0.317            Yemen, Republic of      2001        0.970
Romania                    1986       0.123            Zambia                  1994        0.890

Source: Based on Cruces and Trebesch (2013). Episodes with a haircut higher than 0.748 (Argentina’s
haircut in 2005) appear in italics.
                                         27


                 Table 2: Summary Statistics for Haircuts: 1978-2010

                  Mean                Median              Standard
                                                          deviation
All episodes      37.0%                32.1%                27.3%
Bank loans        37.1%                37.6%                21.6%
Bond exchanges    36.9%                31.7%                27.9%
Africa            46.5%                39.5%                29.4%
Asia              32.6%                34.0%                17.9%
Europe            30.0%                19.7%                26.4%
Latin America     31.8%                28.1%                26.2%
Argentina 2005    74.8%                  --                   --
                                                            28


TABLE 3: Haircut equations: White-corrected standard errors
     Eq Name:           (3.1)         (3.2)          (3.3)         (3.4)
      Period          1978-2010     1978-2010      1988-2010     1988-2010

   BAD STATES            0.050         0.037          0.074         0.069
                       [2.600]**     [1.995]**      [2.469]**     [2.638]**

    DEBT_GDP              0.334         0.242         0.428         0.257
                       [2.828]***     [1.695]*     [2.883]***      [1.330]

       POOR               0.360         0.234         0.419         0.231
                       [5.856]***    [3.316]***    [5.655]***    [2.872]***

      TEN_YR             -0.021        -0.023        -0.044        -0.013
                       [-2.065]**    [-2.503]**    [-2.722]***    [-0.864]

      NINETY              0.202        0.050           --             --
                       [4.091]***     [0.871]

   RECESSION             0.031          0.083         0.129         0.129
                        [0.601]       [1.705]*      [1.726]*      [1.996]**

         C                0.325         0.432         0.541         0.348
                       [3.067]***    [4.148]***    [4.003]***     [2.636]**

      AFRICA             -0.195        -0.195        -0.158         -0.179
                       [-2.436]**    [-2.211]**     [-1.559]      [-1.715]*

        ASIA             -0.165         -0.132        -0.127       -0.120
                       [-2.192]**     [-1.797]*     [-1.611]*     [-1.517]

     EUROPE              -0.156        -0.117        -0.128        -0.112
                       [-2.286]**     [-1.480]      [-1.458]      [-1.120]

      LATAM              -0.089         -0.111       -0.066        -0.076
                       [-1.624]*      [-1.723]*     [-0.880]      [-0.953]

   BRADY DEAL              --          0.066           --           0.068
                                      [1.016]                      [1.161]

 DONOR FUNDED              --           0.392          --           0.405
                                     [7.330]***                  [7.663]***

   Observations:          153          153            90             90
    R-squared:           0.541        0.668          0.462         0.655
    F-statistic:        16.730        23.525         7.633         13.482

NOTES: t-statistics in brackets. * denotes significant at 10%; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                            29


TABLE 4: Haircut equations with Bond Dummies:
White-corrected standard errors
     Eq Name:           (4.1)         (4.2)          (4.3)         (4.2)
      Period          1988-2010     1988-2010      1978-2010     1978-2010

   BAD STATES             0.081         0.080         0.048         0.048
                       [2.723]***    [2.673]***     [2.499]**     [2.491]**

    DEBT_GDP              0.432         0.434         0.327         0.327
                       [2.752]***    [2.748]***    [2.644]***    [2.635]***

       POOR               0.421         0.423         0.343         0.343
                       [5.150]***    [5.101]***    [5.720]***    [5.689]***

      TEN_YR             -0.022        -0.022        -0.028        -0.027
                        [-0.960]      [-0.964]     [-2.815]***   [-2.793]***

      NINETY              0.207        0.206          0.201         0.201
                       [2.647]***    [2.617]**     [4.153]***    [4.131]***

   RECESSION             0.060         0.059          0.042         0.042
                        [0.784]       [0.773]        [0.850]       [0.854]

         C               0.286         0.288          0.395         0.395
                        [1.416]       [1.414]      [3.917]***    [3.908]***

      AFRICA             -0.206        -0.204        -0.191         -0.191
                       [-2.202]**    [-2.157]**    [-2.572]**     [-2.555]**

        ASIA             -0.207        -0.209        -0.167         -0.167
                       [-2.566]**    [-2.525]**    [-2.265]**     [-2.243]**

     EUROPE              -0.200        -0.199         -0.145        -0.145
                       [-2.125]**    [-2.097]**     [-1.932]*     [-1.923*]

      LATAM              -0.091        -0.091         -0.083        -0.083
                        [-1.413]      [-1.397]      [-1.741]*     [-1.731]*

       BOND              -0.043        -0.030        -0.121        -0.123
                        [-0.304]      [-0.183]      [-0.879]      [-0.761]

   BOND*BAD3             0.001         -0.004         0.012         0.013
                        [0.018]       [-0.050]       [0.160]       [0.151]

   BOND *DEBT            -0.282        -0.300        -0.128        -0.127
                        [-0.594]      [-0.598]      [-0.285]      [-0.268]

   BOND *POOR              --          -0.062          --           0.006
                                      [-0.481]                     [0.053]

   Observations:          90             90            153          153
    R-squared:           0.520         0.520          0.557        0.557
    F-statistic:         6.328         5.808         13.440        12.391

NOTES: t-statistics in brackets. * denotes significant at 10%; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                            30


TABLE 5: Haircut equations with Separate Bad States of the World:
White-corrected standard errors, 1988-2010
     Eq Name:            (6.1)          (6.2)         (6.3)         (6.4)         (6.5)

    COUP_WAR              0.195          --            --             --          0.204
                       [2.904]***                                               [2.639]**

    COLLAPSE               --          0.111           --             --          0.052
                                     [2.093]**                                   [0.932]

        TOT                --            --           0.189           --          0.170
                                                    [2.296]**                   [2.311]**

      CRISIS               --            --            --          -0.007         -0.017
                                                                  [-0.142]       [-0.394]

    DEBT_GDP              0.207        0.267          0.348         0.238         0.156
                        [1.925]*      [1.269]       [1.826]*       [1.094]       [0.796]

       POOR               0.234         0.296         0.195         0.283         0.160
                       [3.879]***    [3.352]***    [3.173]***    [2.874]***     [2.338]**

      TEN_YR             -0.018        -0.013        -0.019        -0.013         -0.015
                        [-1.300]      [-0.902]      [-1.320]      [-0.843]       [-1.103]

   RECESSION             0.097          0.120         0.124         0.115          0.121
                        [1.498]       [1.833]*      [1.902]*      [1.791]*       [1.856]*

   BRADY_DEAL            0.070         0.066          0.030         0.058         0.091
                        [1.342]       [1.093]        [0.497]       [0.905]       [1.614]

DONOR_FUNDED              0.317         0.397         0.434         0.407          0.342
                       [5.062]***    [7.486]***    [8.586]***    [7.725]***     [5.110]***

         C                0.433        0.339          0.450         0.424          0.383
                       [3.659]***    [2.479]**     [3.215]***    [2.893]***     [3.206]***

      AFRICA             -0.149        -0.170         -0.171        -0.225        -0.073
                       [-1.919]*      [-1.506]      [-1.753]*     [-1.767]*      [-0.870]

        ASIA             -0.083        -0.101        -0.126        -0.157         -0.127
                        [-0.983]      [-1.188]      [-1.280]      [-1.623]       [-1.521]

     EUROPE              -0.020        -0.047        -0.054        -0.021         -0.037
                        [-0.247]      [-0.458]      [-0.525]      [-0.182]       [-0.411]

      LATAM              -0.055        -0.041        -0.103        -0.091         -0.053
                        [-0.776]      [-0.459]      [-1.145]      [-0.978]       [-0.720]

   Observations:          98            92             94            92            90
    R-squared:           0.657        0.622           0.643        0.602          0.690
    F-statistic:        14.956        11.981         13.427        10.991        11.929

NOTES: t-statistics in brackets. * denotes significant at 10%; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                            31


TABLE 6: Haircut equations with Exponential Bad States of the World:
White-corrected standard errors, 1988-2010
     Eq Name:           (5.1)         (5.2)          (5.3)         (5.4)
      Period          1978-2010     1988-2010      1988-2010     1988-2010

     BAD_EXP             0.0066       0.0055         0.0085        0.0091
                       [2.933]***    [2.124]**     [2.801]***    [4.506]***

    DEBT_GDP            0.2322         0.1666        0.4213        0.2844
                       [1.976]**      [1.915]*     [3.078]***     [1.732]*

       POOR              0.3579        0.2112        0.4311        0.2042
                       [8.482]***    [4.638]***    [7.867]***    [3.492]***

      TEN_YR            -0.0207       -0.0233        -0.0496       -0.0232
                       [-2.075]**    [-2.521]**    [-3.256]***    [-1.672]*

      NINETY             0.1956       0.0440           --             --
                       [4.137]***     [0.827]

   RECESSION             0.0146        0.0750        0.1213        0.1215
                        [0.307]       [1.663]*      [1.692]*      [1.949]*

         C               0.3754        0.4675        0.6265        0.4526
                       [3.496]***    [4.480]***    [4.706]***    [3.483]***

      AFRICA            -0.2090       -0.1858        -0.1713       -0.1496
                      [-3.080]***    [-2.441]**     [-1.969]*     [-1.721]*

        ASIA            -0.1531       -0.1087       -0.1282       -0.0883
                       [-1.948]*      [-1.354]      [-1.544]      [-1.000]

     EUROPE             -0.1280       -0.0926       -0.0828       -0.0738
                       [-1.783]*      [-1.123]      [-0.932]      [-0.772]

      LATAM             -0.0683       -0.0888       -0.0710       -0.0802
                        [-1.164]      [-1.293]      [-0.931]      [-1.011]

   BRADY_DEAL              --         0.0651           --          0.0666
                                      [1.104]                      [1.232]

DONOR_FUNDED               --          0.3952          --          0.3962
                                     [8.011]***                  [8.147]***

   Observations:          168          168            98             98
    R-squared:           0.512        0.640          0.483         0.664
    F-statistic:        16.478        22.953         9.140         15.457

NOTES: t-statistics in brackets. * denotes significant at 10%; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                              32


TABLE 7: Haircut equations 1988-2010:
Instrumental variables
     Eq Name:           (7.1)           (7.2)         (7.3)
     Dep. Var:        HAIRCUT         HAIRCUT       HAIRCUT

   BAD STATES              --            0.070          0.067
                                      [2.701]***     [2.910]***

    COUP_WAR              0.242            --            --
                       [3.038]***

    COLLAPSE              0.069            --            --
                        [1.690]*

        TOT               0.138            --            --
                        [1.868]*

      CRISIS             -0.029            --            --
                        [-0.742]

    DEBT_GDP             0.188           0.270         0.286
                        [1.087]         [1.404]      [1.759]*

       POOR               0.186          0.252          0.156
                       [2.901]***     [3.053]***     [2.974]***

      TEN_YR             -0.020         -0.016         -0.012
                        [-1.356]       [-0.975]       [-0.813]

   RECESSION             0.106           0.130         0.111
                        [1.736]         [1.982]       [1.823]

   BRADY_DEAL             0.085          0.066         0.075
                        [1.680]*        [1.118]       [1.346]

DONOR_FUNDED             0.249           0.361          0.396
                       [2.255]**      [4.193]***     [5.479]***

         C                0.359          0.370         0.259
                       [3.352]***      [2.613]**     [2.340]**

Regional Dummies          NO             YES            NO

   Observations:          90              90            90
    R-squared:           0.677           0.653         0.639
    F-statistic:        14.893          11.062        18.072

NOTES: t-statistics in brackets. * denotes significant at 10%; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
For a discussion on the instruments, see the text.
                                                    33


                                              Appendix A

            Sovereign borrowing and excusable default: A Conceptual framework
        In this Appendix I discuss the Grossman and Van Huyck (1989) model of sovereign
borrowing and default, which provides the conceptual bases for the empirical analysis in this
paper. In this model there is no money and, thus, currency crises are ruled out. There is a risk
free security with a rate of return ρ, and loans are for one period. There are no capital controls.
Sovereign borrowers can invest in a risk free technology, or can purchase the risk free security.
Lenders, on the other hand, face a competitive market and are risk neutral.
        Borrowers maximize the present value of consumption. Their objective function is:


(A.1)


Conventional notation is used. δ is the consumer’s discount rate, and E(…) is the expectations
operator, conditional on all available information. Consumption is given by the sum of three
elements:


(A.2)                                    .


Where           is a function that captures the return from last period’s borrowing (      );   is
the stochastic component of income, and depends on the state of the world (see below for
details); and   is debt service in period t. It is assumed that       ; that is, the borrower cannot
buy insurance that will cover them if there is a very bad state of the world. Also, for simplicity, it
is assumed that borrowing cannot be used for consumption; a relaxation of this assumption
would not affect the results in a fundamental way. The F function has the following properties:


                             , and           , if
                             , and            if         .
                                                     34


That is. the return from investing in the local technology exceed the opportunity cost up to a
point B; from that point on the marginal productivity of output is equal to the world risk free rate
of return .
        The    are drawn from a stationary probability distribution            with mean . The
discreet z realizations range from a “good” state of the world Z to the worst possible state of the
world    . Naturally,               .
        In equilibrium, creditors’ expected income across all states of the world – each of them
with a probability        -- is equal to the risk-free return. Assuming that an amount       is lent in
period t, this implies:


(A.3)


                plays a key role in the model. It is the creditor’s expectation of the sovereign’s
debt servicing decision for period t+1. It is assumed that in forming this expectation creditors
know borrowers preferences and utility function – that is they know          --, and that they know the
sovereign’s payment plans into the future. Thus, lenders know sovereign’s debt servicing plan
           , which is generally contingent on the state of the world. The actual solution of the
model will depend on this                   plan. Below I consider three cases for           .
        To summarize, a utility maximizing sovereign will have to make three simultaneous
decisions: how much to borrow today             , how much debt to service today       , and what type
of plan to adopt for future debt service payments. This payments plan          is contingent on the
states of the world       . This payment decision will determine the nature of the equilibrium. In
the rest of this appendix I consider three cases:
        Case1: Precommitment. Assume that the sovereign can credibly precommit to follow a
payment strategy that is strictly depending on the realization of the state of the world         . This
plan is denoted as             , which is equal to                           . In this case there will be
full risk shifting from the sovereign to the lender. Both the amount borrowed and the the
payment plan will be time invariant:


(A.4)                                   ,
                                                         35


(A.5)                                                         .


Actual debt service will depend on the sign of                       . In the bad state of world
     , and payment will be less than debt plus interest. This is the “excusable default” solution. In
this case, the haircut will depend on the severity of the negative shocks, and will be equal to
            , the difference between the mean of the stochastic component of income and the bad
state of the world realization.
           Case 2: Repudiation: Assume now that instead of precommitting, the sovereign
maximizes utility without any concern regarding its reputation or ability to borrow in the
future.39 The simple and myopic maximization of (A.1) implies, for all states of the world, that
           If the creditor anticipates this plan, then            , for all states of the world. This is a
suboptimal outcome with no borrowing; if borrowing does happen, the debt would be fully
repudiated.
           Case 3: Reputation: Assume, finally, that although the sovereign cannot strictly
precommit, it does care about its reputation. The creditor, in turn, takes into account the
borrower’s past behavior to elucidate its payment intentions in the future; creditors have rational
expectations, and use information about the past to form its expectations about the future. In this
case, it never pays for the borrower to mislead the creditor; that is, in every period                     , the
sovereign validates the expectations that the creditor formed about the contingent payment plan
             . This plan, then, is the best plan within the class of incentive compatible payment
plans. Under most values of , and sovereign’s degree of risk aversion (curvature of the ultilty
function), the reputational equilibrium implies an amount of borrowing lower than in the
precommittment case, and incomplete risk shifting from the borrower to the lender. The payment
function              will be state contingent, and under bad states of the world (when
       debt service will fall short of the debt plus interest. That is, in a bad state of the world there is
an “excusable” partial default. The magnitude of the default, or haircut, will depend on
That is, the haircut will be larger, the more severe are the negative shocks that affect the
sovereign.



39
  Whether sovereigns can actually precommit is an open question. Indeed, in the absence of international
bankruptcy courts (or equivalent institutions), it is not possible.
                                               36


                                         Appendix B:

                                         Data Sources

Wars and civil conflicts: Integrated Network for Social Conflict Research
       (http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/inscr.htm).

Coups and coups attempts: Peace Research Institute of Oslo (PRIO), Norway
       (http://www.prio.no/).

Output collapse: Constructed from raw data form the World Development Indicators.

Currency Crises: Constructed from raw data form the World Development Indicators.

Poor: Constructed from data from the World Development Indicators.

Recessions: Constructed from data on recessions from the National Bureau of Economic
       Research.

Ten year Treasury yield: Federal Reserve of St. Louis, FRED data base.

Haircuts: Basic data from Cruces and Trebesch (2013).

Characteristics of restructuring deals: Basic data from Cruces and Trebesch (2013).
                                               37


                                           References
Aizenman, J., & Lee, J. (2007). International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist views,
theory and evidence. Open Economies Review, 18(2), 191-214.
Alfaro, L., & Kanczuk, F. (2005). Sovereign debt as a contingent claim: a quantitative approach.
Journal of International Economics, 65(2), 297-314.
Bedford, P., & Irwin, G. (2008). Reforming the IMF's Lending-into-arrears Framework. Bank of
England.
Beers, D. T. & Nadeau J. S. (2014) Introducing a new database of sovereign defaults, Bank of
Canada
Benjamin, D., & Wright, M. L. (2009). Recovery before redemption: A theory of delays in
sovereign debt renegotiations. Working Paper, University of California at Los Angeles.
Blustein, P. (2005). And the money kept rolling in (and out). Public Affairs, New York.
Chamon, M., Costa, A., & Ricci, L. (2008). Is There a Novelty Premium on New Financial
Instruments? The Argentine Experience with GDP-Indexed Warrants. IMF Working Papers, 1-
40.
Cruces, J. J., & Trebesch, C. (2013). Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3), 85-117.
Díaz-Cassou, J., Erce, A., & Vázquez-Zamora, J. J. (2008). Recent episodes of sovereign debt
restructurings: a case-study approach. Banco de Espana Occasional Paper, (0804).
Dreher, A. (2006). IMF and economic growth: The effects of programs, loans, and compliance
with conditionality. World Development, 34(5), 769-788.
Edwards, S. (1986). The pricing of bonds and bank loans in international markets: An empirical
analysis of developing countries' foreign borrowing. European Economic Review, 30(3), 565-
589.
Edwards, S. (2002). The great exchange rate debate after Argentina. The North American
Journal of Economics and Finance, 13(3), 237-252.
Edwards, S. (2003). Debt relief and fiscal sustainability. Review of World Economics, 139(1),
38-65.
Edwards, S. (2010). Left behind: Latin America and the false promise of populism. University of
Chicago Press.
Edwards, S. & Edwards A.C. (1991). Monetarism and liberalization: The Chilean experiment.
University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, H., & Van Huyck, J. B. (1989). Sovereign debt as a contingent claim: Excusable
default, repudiation, and reputation. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
IMF Evaluation Office (2004), “The Role of the IMF in Argentina, 1991-2001,” Washington
D.C..
                                                 38




Integrated Network for Social Conflict Research (http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/inscr.htm).
Miyajima, K. (2006). How to evaluate GDP-linked warrants: price and repayment capacity.
International Monetary Fund.
Moody’s Investors Services, (2013) “The aftermath of foreign defaults,” in Sovereign Default
Series, 7 October, 2013.
Peace Research Institute of Oslo (PRIO), Norway (http://www.prio.no/).
Philippon, T. (2015). “Fair Debt Relief for Greece: New Calculations” VoxEu,
http://www.voxeu.org/article/fair-debt-relief-greece-new-calculations
Reinhart, C. M., & Rogoff, K. (2009). This time is different: eight centuries of financial folly.
Princeton University Press.
Roubini, N., & Setser, B. (2004). Bailouts or bail-ins? Responding to financial crises in emerging
economies. Peterson Institute Press: All Books.
Sandleris, G., & Wright, M. L. (2013). GDP-indexed bonds: A tool to reduce macroeconomic
risk?. The future of sovereign borrowing in Europe.
Sturzenegger, F., & Zettelmeyer, J. (2006). Debt defaults and lessons from a decade of crises.
MIT Press.
Yue, V. Z. (2010). Sovereign default and debt renegotiation. Journal of International Economics,
80(2), 176-187.
Zettelmeyer, J., Trebesch, C., & Gulati, M. (2013). The Greek debt restructuring: an autopsy.
Economic Policy, 28(75), 513-563.
