                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE WEALTH OF WEALTHHOLDERS

                                           John Ameriks
                                          Andrew Caplin
                                            Minjoon Lee
                                         Matthew D. Shapiro
                                         Christopher Tonetti

                                        Working Paper 20972
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20972


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




This research is supported by a program project grant from the National Institute of Aging P01-
AG026571. The Vanguard Group, Inc. supported the data collection through the Vanguard Research
Initiative (VRI). Vanguard’s Client Insight Group and IPSOS SA were responsible for implementing
the VRI survey and provided substantial input into its design. The design of the VRI benefited from
the collaboration and assistance of Wandi Bruine de Bruin (Leeds), Alycia Chen (CMU), Brooke
Helppie McFall (Michigan), Joseph Briggs (NYU), Ann Rodgers (Michigan), Annette Bonner
(Vanguard Group), and Wendy O’Connell (IPSOS SA). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by John Ameriks, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Wealth of Wealthholders
John Ameriks, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti
NBER Working Paper No. 20972
February 2015
JEL No. D91,E21,H31,J14

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper introduces the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI), a new panel survey of wealthholders
designed to yield high-quality measurements of a large sample of older Americans who arrive at retirement
with significant financial assets. The VRI links survey data with a variety of administrative data from
Vanguard. The survey features an account-by-account approach to asset measurement and a real-time
feedback and correction mechanism that are shown to be highly successful in eliciting accurate measures
of wealth. Specifically, the VRI data reflect unbiased and precise estimates of wealth when compared
to administrative account data. The VRI sample has characteristics similar to populations meeting
analogous wealth and Internet access eligibility conditions in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS)
and Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). To illustrate the value of the VRI, the paper shows that
the relationship between wealth and expected retirement date is very different in the VRI than in the
HRS and SCF—mainly because those surveys have so few observations where wealth levels are high
enough to finance substantial consumption during retirement.

John Ameriks                                        Matthew D. Shapiro
The Vanguard Group, Inc.                            Department of Economics
PO Box 2600, MS V36                                 University of Michigan
Valley Forge PA 19482                               611 Tappan St
john_ameriks@vanguard.com                           Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
                                                    and NBER
Andrew Caplin                                       shapiro@umich.edu
Department of Economics
New York University                                 Christopher Tonetti
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                         Stanford University
New York, NY 10012                                  Graduate School of Business
and NBER                                            655 Knight Way
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu                               Stanford, CA 94305-7298
                                                    tonetti@stanford.edu
Minjoon Lee
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor MI 48109-1220
minjoon@umich.edu


The Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI) website is available at:
http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI
Vanguard Research Initiative: Survey 1 Documentation and Tabulations is available at:
http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/papers/VRI-Document1.pdf
Vanguard Research Initiative: Survey Overview is available at:
http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/survey_overview.html
                                          1. Introduction

As defined benefit pension plans become rare and as the generosity of a pay-as-you-go Social

Security system becomes increasingly limited by aging of the population, households are

increasingly responsible for financing their own retirement. Hence, understanding how

individuals’ financial assets affect their retirement decisions and well-being in retirement is of

utmost importance for understanding behavior and the welfare of the retired population, as well

as policy changes that may affect them. Though the transition from a defined benefit to a defined

contribution retirement system has been underway for decades, about half of households

approaching or in retirement have relatively low financial assets. Datasets designed to represent

the population, therefore, have surprisingly little information on older Americans with wealth

sufficient to finance a non-trivial fraction of their retirement consumption. Our research fills this

gap by producing an innovative new dataset containing a large number of households with

significant financial assets to potentially use in retirement. To highlight the value of these new

data, the paper shows that the relationship between wealth and retirement plans differs

dramatically over the range of wealth that is sufficient to sustain consumption in retirement

compared to that in the population reflected in standard datasets such as the Health and

Retirement Study and the Survey of Consumer Finance.

       This paper presents results from a collaboration between the Vanguard Group, Inc. and

academic researchers to provide measurements and analysis surrounding the behavior,

preferences, expectations, and information of older Americans managing spending in retirement.

Specifically, the paper presents findings from the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI), which

provides high-quality, linked administrative and survey data on a large sample of households that

face or will soon face the problem of managing assets in retirement. The VRI attempts to
improve on measurements relative to surveys that are justifiably called the gold standard for

wealth measurement—namely, the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and the Survey of

Consumer Finances (SCF)—along multiple dimensions:

   First, we target the population of interest—i.e., older Americans with nontrivial financial
    assets. Even though the overall sample sizes are similar, the HRS and SCF actually have
    relatively small samples of the population of interest. The HRS—since it is representative of
    the entire age-eligible population—has many respondents with trivial wealth. The SCF—
    since it is representative of the overall population—has many respondents who are younger.

   Second, using a combination of administrative and survey data, we can address the question
    of whether—apart from having non-negligible wealth—the Vanguard population is different
    from the overall population. We draw respondents from two lines of business—those with
    individual and those with employer-sponsored accounts. We find that, especially for the
    employer-sponsored sample, the Vanguard population is broadly representative of the U.S.
    older population with non-negligible financial wealth and Internet eligibility. The VRI is
    broadly representative of households in the upper half of the wealth distribution.

   Third, we take a comprehensive account-based approach to measuring assets. Under this
    approach, respondents are asked to report their financial assets account-by-account. The aim
    of this approach—which is used selectively in the HRS and SCF—is to get information from
    respondents in the form that they have it or think of it rather than by requesting responses
    using accounting or economic categories that may not be meaningful to them.

   Fourth, we employ a set of survey techniques designed to elicit more accurate survey
    measures of financial assets. Respondents give meaningful nicknames to their accounts. The
    survey provides a summary of accounts and balances at various stages, so respondents can
    check whether they missed or double-counted accounts or misreported balances.
    Respondents can then make corrections without having to reenter correct items.

   Fifth, we use the administrative data to validate the survey responses. We are able to show
    that our novel survey approach provides unbiased measures of the level of assets as opposed
    to the understatement typically observed in survey responses. Additionally, we can show that
    our correction mechanism does reduce the variance of response errors.

Given the cost and difficulty of collecting asset data from respondents, our use of account data

and survey data in tandem provides a roadmap for augmenting or replacing survey-based

measures of assets in large-scale surveys. Therefore, in addition to its specific findings, this




                                                  2
paper documents and analyzes an approach that could be applied very broadly for improving

measurement of wealth.1

       This paper shows the importance of having ample observations in the relevant range of

wealth by analyzing the non-linear relationship between wealth and retirement horizon. There is

a puzzling finding in the literature on wealth and retirement: even following very large stock

market declines—such as in 2000 to 2002 and 2007 to 2009—changes in wealth have either a

small or no effect on retirement or on retirement plans of older Americans. Comparing changes

in retirement rates between defined-contribution (DC) and defined-benefit (DB) pension holders

for the period 1992–1998 using the HRS, Sevak (2002) finds that DC pension holders tended to

reduce retirement age more during the stock market boom in the 1990s. Coronado and Perozek

(2003) and Kthitatrakun (2004), by comparing expected and actual retirement age, show that a

wealth gain caused by a stock market boom reduces retirement age compared to households’

previous expectations. In contrast, Goda, Shoven and Slavov (2012), Hurd, Reti and Rohwedder

(2012) and Kezdi and Sevak (2004), using risky asset holdings in the HRS data as a measure of

exposure to the stock market, estimate the wealth effect on the retirement decision and find no

evidence of such an effect. Coile and Levine (2004) focus on aggregate labor supply measures

from the HRS and Current Population Survey and also find no evidence. Using pre- and post-

crash interviews from the CogEcon survey conducted in 2007 and 2009, McFall (2011) finds a



1
  This research is therefore related to an emerging program to augment or replace survey data
with administrative records, including private account data. See Gelman et al. (2014) for high-
frequency spending and income data; Kapteyn and Ypma (2007) for earnings data; Agarwal, Liu,
and Souleles (2007) for credit card data to measure the response of spending to income; Aguiar
and Hurst (2007) for linking administrative data on price paid to survey data on demographics
and time use. For the difficulties of measuring wealth and earnings in surveys, see Juster and
Smith (1997). For systematic bias in economic measurement in surveys, see Gorodnichenko and
Peter (2007) and Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2014). See Krimmel, Moore, Sabelhaus, and Smith
(2013) for problems with the timeliness of asset data, which are addressed by the VRI approach.


                                                3
relationship between wealth change and retirement age in the expected direction, though the

estimated size of the effect is modest.2

       The VRI is designed to have greater power to detect these effects by collecting a large

amount of high-quality asset data for households where such changes in wealth might be more

relevant. Therefore, it addresses the problem, identified by Poterba (2014), Poterba, Venti, and

Wise (2011) and Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010), that in the survey datasets

commonly used in this literature, most households do not have significant retirement wealth or

stock market exposure. In this paper, we estimate the relationship between wealth and retirement

plans in the VRI, HRS, and SCF. We demonstrate that this relationship is highly non-linear and

that we can estimate the effect of wealth at the relevant range of wealth levels to be significant

only when we have dense observations in that range. We then show, for households with enough

wealth to typically have significant stock market exposure, that the expected retirement horizon

varies significantly with wealth.

       Admittedly, such estimates from the VRI are “out of sample” for the population of older

Americans in the US—about half of whom have little wealth and little exposure to the stock

market. Making such out-of-sample inferences is precisely the aim of the VRI. As noted at the

outset of the paper, policy changes and changes in employer offering of pensions are pushing

older Americans to save and invest for their retirement through 401(k) and similar accounts. To

understand the ultimate effects of this transformation of the retirement landscape, data such as

those from the VRI are essential. There is the concern, however, that the VRI respondents are



2
  Some studies use other sources of variations in wealth changes. Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote
(2001) use lottery windfall gains, while Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1993) use inheritance
information in IRS data and Joulfaian and Wilhelm (1994) use inheritance data in the PSID.
Estimated effects are mostly modest, with the exception of Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen
(1993), who find a sizeable effect.


                                                 4
different—not just because they have significant retirement savings, but because they are

different from the population in terms of their demographics, socioeconomic status, or other

characteristics. Are Vanguard clients so special that they are not a valid population for drawing

inferences more generally? We address this question head-on in the paper. We show that

Vanguard clients are different from the HRS and SCF respondents mainly because they have

more financial wealth. For HRS and SCF respondents of similar wealth, education and other

attributes are not that different. This is particularly true in the subsets of HRS and SCF

respondents with 401(k) plans, compared to the Vanguard employer-sponsored sample. Our

approach to sampling Vanguard respondents—drawing separately from individual clients and

those in employer-sponsored plans—substantially obviates concerns about selection. The VRI

employer-sponsored sample has a retirement/wealth relationship that looks quite similar to the

overall VRI sample. We conclude that the findings from the VRI are driven by having dense

observations of households with significant levels of wealth and stock market exposure, not by

differences in households that select Vanguard as a financial institution.



  2. Innovations in Wealth Measurement: Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI) Approach

What makes the VRI innovative? First, it surveys financial wealth by accounts, not by asset

classes. Its aim is to ask respondents to report numbers that closely correspond to how they

receive statements and to how they might classify assets. The approach avoids asking

respondents to map their balances into accounting or economic constructs, and does not require

them to do addition or distribution of amounts. Second, after each step where the survey

instrument elicits the composition or amount of assets, it shows a summary of responses in

tabular form and allows respondents to modify their answers. Third, the survey is integrated with




                                                 5
administrative data. Administrative data create the sample frame, allow validation of survey

responses, and create a high-frequency panel of asset data. In this section of the paper, we

describe the design of the VRI sample and how the wealth measurements are implemented in the

VRI survey.

       Table 1 shows in tabular form the main survey design elements and how they compare

with those of the HRS and SCF. Section 4 provides a detailed comparison of these surveys.3

2.1. The VRI Sample Design

The administrative data and, more generally, the collaboration with Vanguard are critical in

achieving the VRI objective of creating a large sample of older wealthholders. By construction,

Vanguard clients have some wealth. Additionally, information in the Vanguard administrative

data on customer type, account balances, age, geography, and use of the Internet are all essential

for creating the sample. This information allows us to reach a large population of relevant

households.

       The population for the VRI is Vanguard Group account holders aged 55 and older who

are Web-survey eligible (must be registered for use of the Vanguard website, have a valid email

address, and have logged on in the past six months). We stratified the sample based on the

following characteristics from the administrative data: individual versus employer-sponsored

accounts; age; and administratively-single status. We sampled evenly from five-year age

intervals from 55 to 74 and from 75 and above. For those under 65, we divided the sample

evenly between the two client types. After age 65, those in the employer-sponsored line tend to

exit this group as they roll over their employer-sponsored accounts into IRAs accounts (either at




3
 Ameriks et al. (2014) describes the VRI in greater detail. Readers interested in the specifics of
sampling, testing, and design, as well as in more-detailed tabulations, are referred to that paper.


                                                 6
Vanguard or elsewhere). For this age group, we sample the types in the proportion they appear in

the population.

       A variety of research questions are more difficult to answer in the context of multi-person

households. There are relatively few single households in the Vanguard population. Thus, we felt

it useful to oversample singles to secure an adequate sample size of singles. The administrative

data contain an imperfect indicator of single status. In particular, Vanguard constructs a

household indicator by using common address and joint registration. Being in a single-member

household using this indicator is strongly, but not perfectly, correlated with the survey measure

of single status. Using information on the relationship between the survey and administrative

measures of single status in a pilot survey, we increased the sampling rate of administratively-

single accounts in the production survey. See Ameriks et al. (2014).

       These sampling criteria are all imposed ex ante based on the administrative data. To draw

the sample that we invited to complete the survey, we randomly selected from the specified

populations of account holders. We monitored our success at hitting the desired sample

proportions, but made no adjustments after drawing the sample. We did not impose quotas of any

kind on responses.

2.2. Survey Measurement of Wealth in the VRI

A key innovation of the VRI approach is to elicit assets on a comprehensive, account-by-account

basis. This section describes this approach. The next section will show that it yields highly

accurate measurements of assets.4 Appendix A shows screen shots of the wealth section for a

hypothetical respondent. The steps in the wealth section are as follows.



4
 The VRI approach is unique in taking a comprehensive, account-based approach to wealth
measurement. The HRS and SCF take approaches that mix the account- and asset-class
approaches. For non-retirement assets, the HRS asks respondents to aggregate the balances


                                                 7
       Step 1: Account Type. The respondents are shown a list of 15 account types divided into

groups. The rows in Table 2 after Total Financial Assets show the types. The major groups are

“Tax deferred-retirement accounts” (IRA, employer sponsored plans, pension with account

balance, and other retirement assets); “Savings/Investment accounts that are not in a tax-deferred

retirement plan or account” (checking, savings, money market mutual funds, CDs, brokerage,

and directly held securities); “Insurance-related accounts” (annuities with cash value and life

insurance with cash balance); “Educational accounts”; and “Other.” The survey displays a table

with these account types and a checkbox for having each type.

       Step 2. Number of accounts. The survey shows a list of account types that the respondent

has checked in step 1. The respondent is asked to indicate the number of each type of account

using a drop-down menu.

       Step 3. Nicknames of accounts; verification. The survey then shows a list of accounts.

The respondent is asked to give a nickname for each account. After the respondent enters all the

nicknames, the survey displays a summary table (see Appendix A, Figure A-A4). Respondents

are then asked whether all the information is correct. If not, they are asked whether they want to



across accounts into the following asset classes: stocks and stock mutual funds; bonds and bond
mutual funds; checking, savings, and money market accounts; and CDs, government bonds, and
Treasury bills. The SCF takes a mixed approach. For checking, savings/money market, and
mutual funds, it asks for the number of accounts and the balance for each account. For CDs,
savings bonds, individual stocks, and brokerages, it asks for asset-class totals as in the HRS. For
IRAs, it asks for an inventory of types of IRA (regular, Roth, rollover) and then asks for total by
type.
   For pensions, the HRS and SCF take a pension-by-pension approach. The SCF household
head reports up to three separate pension accounts for each household member; the HRS
respondent and spouse report up to three separate pension accounts. The HRS 2012 has taken a
step toward creating a longitudinal record of pensions. The HRS asks about IRAs (up to three
accounts per respondent and spouse) as part of the pension module. The bifurcated structure of
the HRS wealth measures (household basis for non-retirement assets and individual basis for
pensions and retirement accounts) results from a strategic design decision made at the outset of
the HRS to collect pension data as part of the labor section rather than the wealth section.


                                                 8
correct the list of accounts (either add or delete an account type or change the number of

accounts for any type). Depending on their answers, they are brought back to either step 1 or

step 2.

          Step 4. Balances. The survey then loops over accounts. Respondents are asked to input

the balance of each account by its nickname.

          Step 5. Summary table of balances; verification. The survey displays a summary table of

accounts as well as a total (see Figure A-A6). For each account, there are checkboxes for

“referred to records.” There is also a checkbox at the bottom of the table that asks whether

everything is correct. If the respondent checks “No, I need to go back and make an update,” the

screen updates with two checkboxes asking whether the respondent needs to add/delete accounts

or correct the dollar amount. (Both can be checked. See Figure A-A7.) If the respondent

indicates a need to correct amounts, the account summary table updates with a new column of

checkboxes asking which need to be corrected. (See Figure A-A8.) The survey asks only for the

required corrections. Specifically, if the respondent clicks on the “add/delete account” box, they

are taken back to step 1 with all previous responses pre-filled. On the other hand, if the

respondent needs to correct only the amounts, the survey returns to step 4. Once the respondent

returns to step 5, the respondent is again asked if the answers are correct and again allowed to

make corrections. There is no limit on the number of times respondents can go through the

correction sequence.

          After the respondent indicates that the summary table of balances needs no correction, the

survey presents follow-up questions about the composition of the accounts. First, for accounts

other than saving/checking/MMMF, the respondents are shown the table with balances and asked




                                                  9
to enter the share of stock held in each account. The table updates and translates the share into

dollars of stock for each account.

       Finally, the respondent again sees the table with balances. The table presents a checkbox

for indicating whether or not each account is held at Vanguard. This table excludes account

categories not offered at Vanguard (e.g., life insurance). This step enables comparison of

responses with the administrative data.

       At the end of the wealth section, the survey displays a summary table of financial wealth

combined with two pie charts showing the stock share in the overall portfolio and the share of

wealth at Vanguard (see Figure A-A13 for an example). The survey prompts respondents to print

out this page, if desired. This summary was provided in the hope that this potentially useful

measurement for survey respondents would increase the likelihood of their continued

participation in the survey.

2.3.   Summary of VRI Wealth Measurements

       Table 2 summarizes the distribution of financial assets from the survey. The mean of total

financial assets (sum of accounts surveyed as described above) is over a million dollars. The

median is about $660,000. Other than checking accounts, IRAs are the most common asset class

and account for about one third of total assets. Employer-sponsored plans are by construction

held by almost all employer-sponsored plan respondents, but are also common among individual

Vanguard account holders. Similarly, mutual funds and brokerage accounts are significant non-

retirement assets in the population of Vanguard account holders.

       Ameriks et al. (2014) describes how we collected data on non-account-based assets

(housing, businesses, etc.). That paper also describes in greater detail the findings from the

account-by-account approach. Notably, respondents were perhaps surprisingly willing to provide




                                                 10
details on many accounts. The median respondent provided information on seven accounts. One

quarter provided information on 12 or more accounts. The respondents were also willing to refer

to records, with the strong majority referring to records for all accounts. Hence, it appears that

our approach gives us a comprehensive and accurate measure of assets. We provide evidence for

that contention in the next section.



                3. Comparing Administrative and Survey Measures of Assets

A key feature of the VRI is its combination of administrative account data and survey

measurements of assets. As discussed above, the administrative data are a powerful tool for

obtaining a sample frame for a wealth survey. Additionally, administrative data can supplement

survey data by providing alternative measures of wealth, potentially at very high frequency. The

administrative data also can be used to verify the survey measures. This section of the paper

investigates the joint measurement properties of the survey and account data both to evaluate the

quality of the VRI and to guide future use of administrative account data in surveys.

3.1.   Quantifying Response Errors

The VRI contains administrative data on the account holders’ total wealth and information about

its composition. The administrative data, though exact, are not perfect. The linking of accounts to

clients might not be perfect, especially for married clients. Additionally, the administrative data

are end-of-month, so intra-month transactions and changes in value can cause discrepancies

between survey and administrative data. Nevertheless, the administrative wealth data give an

unusually good reference point for evaluating the quality of the survey data and vice versa.

       The administrative data are, of course, limited to accounts at Vanguard. The survey was

designed to capture all assets. To facilitate comparison of survey and administrative data, at the




                                                 11
end of the account section of the survey the respondent is shown a table listing each account and

the survey report of its balance. Using the same format as shown in Figure A-A6 (used records),

the respondent is asked to check a box indicating whether or not the account is at Vanguard. In

this section, the survey measure of Vanguard wealth relies on these survey responses. Figure 1

shows the distribution of the survey reports of Vanguard assets relative to the administrative

data. For each decile of administrative assets, the figure shows a box and whiskers diagram of

the distribution of the survey report of Vanguard assets. The responses are tightly bunched along

the 45-degree line, though there are also substantial outliers. There is a slight over-reporting of

assets in the survey relative to the administrative data. The fraction over-reported declines as

assets increase.

        To shed some light on the difference between the administrative and survey measures,

Table 3 splits the sample by line of business and single status. The first line of each panel shows

the survey data, the second line the administrative, the third line the survey minus the

administrative data, and the last line the percent difference.5 For the employer-sponsored

sample, the median difference is $890, or 0.6%; for the individual client sample, the median

difference is $2,623, or 1.4%. Yet, for both samples, the interquartile ranges of the differences

are substantial.

        A long-standing concern in wealth measurement is that assets are under-reported—

because individuals forget about accounts and because they are reluctant to share account



5
  The administrative data are the weighted average of the end of month before the survey and
after the survey with the weight equal to the fraction of the month elapsed on the survey date.
Percentage difference is calculated in the following way. Let SW and AW denote the survey
wealth and the administrative wealth. Following Davis and Haltiwanger’s (1992) formulation
from the gross flow literature, we define the percentage difference as 2                /
      . The main advantage of this formula is that it can be applied even when either SW or AW is
0.


                                                 12
amounts (see Juster, Smith and Stafford (1999)). The VRI, with its account-by-account approach,

builds on the insights of Juster and the designers of the HRS and SCF by presenting the

respondents with a detailed list of asset types, so that they do not neglect to report certain items.

Remarkably, the VRI data show no evidence of such under-reporting on average, so this

approach appears to be effective.

       A potential reason for survey over-reports is that some accounts might not be linked to

the survey respondent in the administrative data. Since the administrative records are at the

account-holder level, they will not include a spouse’s account if it is registered solely under the

spouse’s name. To address this issue, we conduct the same comparison only for singles, that is,

respondents who report in the survey that they are not married or partnered. The results are

reported in Table 3, Panels C and D. For singles, the tendency to over-report is essentially gone.

For the singles in the individual account holder sample, median deviation is almost zero (-0.03%)

and the interquartile range of the deviation is -2.9% to 2.2%. The difference is most acute for the

individual client sample because employer-sponsored respondents are less likely to have a

family-level relationship with Vanguard. In particular, note that the large upper tail of difference

in the individual sample is dramatically reduced for singles relative to the overall sample in

Panel B.6

3.2    Corrections and Wealth Measurement

       In this section, we examine how the VRI’s correction mechanism works to enhance the

accuracy of the account data. The survey instrument not only captures the final responses, but

also saves the initial answers. Therefore, for respondents who modified their answers after seeing

6
  We are also able to examine whether checking records matters for accuracy of survey
responses. Interestingly, checking records shrinks the deviation of administrative and survey
reports, but being logged on to the Vanguard website during the survey does not play a
significant role in this result. See Ameriks et al. (2014).


                                                  13
the summary tables, we can check whether or not their answers got closer to the administrative

data. Figure 2 summarizes the paths respondents took through the wealth section given that they

have multiple opportunities to correct their account inventories and balances:

       Path 1. No corrections. About two thirds of the sample (62.49%) completed the wealth
       section without making any corrections.
       Path 2. Inventory corrected before balance entered; balance not corrected. About 15% of
       respondents corrected their inventory (the first checkpoint in step 3 described in Section
       2.2), but did not correct balances.
       Path 3. Only balance corrected. About 11% of respondents corrected their balances (the
       second checkpoint in step 5) without either previously correcting their inventory or going
       back to correct after entering balances.
       Path 4. Inventory corrected, then balance corrected. About 5% of respondents corrected
       their inventory, entered their balances and then corrected their balances, but did not go
       back to revise inventory subsequent to entering balances.
       Path 5. Non-sequential corrections. About 6% of respondents made complex corrections.

Specifically, these respondents typically went back to the start of the wealth section to correct the

inventory of their accounts after having entered balances. Hence, about one third used the

correction mechanism in some way.

       In Table 4, we again show the percentage difference between the survey and the

administrative Vanguard wealth, but for the initial and the final survey answers separately.

Respondents are grouped according to the correcting paths they took. Again, the comparisons are

done only for singles.

       When respondents did not make any corrections, their initial responses were already very

close to the administrative information. The interquartile range is -3.3% to 2.6% for those who

made no corrections; for those who corrected account inventory only, it is very similar, -3.5% to

2.5%. For respondents who corrected their balances, their initial responses seem to be noisier.

Though the median percentage difference is close to that of those who do not correct balances,

the pre-correction interquartile range for those who correct balances is much larger. After the



                                                 14
corrections, however, the width of the interquartile range shrinks dramatically toward that with

no corrections. Indeed, the corrected range is a bit smaller than for those who made no

corrections at all. Therefore, the correction mechanism did prove to be effective.



   4. Representing Wealthholders versus Representing Households: VRI, HRS, and SCF

This paper studies households with non-negligible financial wealth approaching or in retirement.

The previous sections document that the VRI provides accurate and comprehensive data on this

group. This section addresses two interrelated questions. First, why is the VRI needed? The

answer is that leading surveys aimed at measuring wealth contain remarkably few respondents in

the relevant age range with significant levels of wealth. Second, is the VRI—having achieved the

aim of representing such wealthholders in significant numbers—unrepresentative of the

population apart from having targeted individuals with non-negligible wealth? We answer these

questions through a detailed comparison of the VRI with the HRS and SCF.

4.1.   Comparing VRI, HRS, and SCF Design. Table 1 summarizes and compares the overall

features of the VRI, HRS, and SCF. The VRI is composed of Vanguard clients at least 55 years

old with non-negligible assets. The HRS is a representative sample of those at least 50 years old

and their spouses. The SCF aims to be representative of wealth across all age groups. Because

high-wealth individuals are hard to survey, its frame includes a list sample of high-income

households. The VRI oversamples singles and, as discussed above, screens for Web-survey

eligibility and stratifies the samples by Vanguard line of business. The HRS and SCF do not

impose these screens, but we use relevant variables on the HRS and SCF to construct subsets that

match VRI sampling criteria.




                                                15
       The last panel of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the three surveys for observations

that meet the VRI age-eligibility (age 55 years or older). For HRS, we use the age of the

financial respondent. The VRI is comparable in size to the HRS in this age range—about 9,000

households in the VRI and about 11,500 in the HRS. The SCF has less than a third the number of

respondents in this age range compared to the VRI.

       The VRI sample is much more affluent than the HRS or SCF samples. Of course, by

design the VRI targets wealth holders while the HRS and SCF are representative, that is, they

include the older Americans with very low assets, who are about half the population. The next

set of results explores these differences and shows the extent to which they derive from VRI

sampling restrictions.

4.2.   Comparing VRI, HRS, and SCF Respondents. Table 5 shows the distribution by wealth

and age of raw household counts in the VRI age-eligible range of 55 years and older for the VRI,

HRS, and SCF.7 It reminds us how little financial wealth the lower half of older households has.

The total number of observations in the VRI and HRS are comparable, but their distributions of

wealth are very different. Ninety percent of the VRI respondents have financial wealth of more

than $100,000, and one third of them have more than a million dollars. In contrast, the HRS

distribution has a very fat left tail. One third of the HRS sample has a negligible amount of

financial wealth (less than $10,000) and only about a third has more than $100,000.

       The SCF, which is age-representative overall, has less than a third of the number of

observations in the age-eligible range compared to the VRI and HRS. With the list sample of

high-income households, the SCF has disproportionately high-wealth respondents. Even so,



7
 The wealth measure used in the comparisons is total net financial wealth. Values of houses and
mortgages are excluded. See Appendix B for the definition of the total financial wealth for each
survey and how we impose similar sampling screens in the VRI, HRS, and SCF.


                                                16
given that the SCF is not aiming at the population near or after retirement, for most of the

wealth-age bins with non-negligible wealth, the number of households in the SCF is much

smaller than in the VRI.

       The age distributions are also quite different across surveys. The VRI, by construction,

has a similar number of observations for age bins 55-64 and 65-74, and about half the size for

age 75+. The HRS has relatively more observations in the oldest age bin, while the SCF has

about half in the youngest.

       These tabulations illustrate vividly how the VRI is targeted for studying the financial

decisions of those approaching or in retirement with non-trivial financial wealth. Given the stark

differences in the VRI wealth distribution relative to the population, we need to understand the

main determinants of these differences. In particular, does the relative affluence of the VRI

sample derive mainly from our sampling screens or, even taking into account these screens, is a

sample based on Vanguard clients very different from the U.S. population? In the following, we

try to disentangle these effects by examining the effect of VRI eligible screens in the HRS and

SCF. The screen requires Internet eligibility and that households have at least $10,000 in a non-

transactional financial account.

       These screens are restrictive in the HRS and SCF samples in this age group. Table 6

shows how the screens affect the number of eligible households by age. For the HRS and SCF,

the first columns of counts impose just age-eligibility. The second columns impose “VRI

eligibility” (Internet eligibility and the $10,000 minimum balance in non-transactional financial

accounts). The third column imposes “401(k) subset” (at least $10,000 in a DC pension account).

Note that these screens are imposed ipso facto in the VRI for both employer-sponsored and




                                                17
individual client groups.8 For the HRS and SCF, the screen yields relatively small subsets of

age-eligible respondents. For the HRS, only about a third satisfy VRI eligibility. In the SCF, a

relatively larger fraction of households satisfy these conditions owing to oversampling of high-

income households. The size of the 401(k) subset group is much smaller in both the HRS and the

SCF. In VRI, the age distribution is flat by design. (Everywhere, there are few of the oldest

groups represented in the employer-sponsored samples because most retirees roll over their

401(k) to an IRA and therefore are represented in the individual client sample.) In the HRS and

SCF, the screen has more of a bite for older groups. See Appendix C for implications for wealth

by age.

          In Table 7, we show that the effects of the VRI screens are similar in the HRS and SCF in

terms of weighted sample.9 Imposing Internet eligibility alone reduces the weighted sample by

about half in both HRS and SCF. The asset cut-off has a similar effect. Because these two

conditions are highly correlated, there is an only incremental additional effect when taken

together. Within the VRI-eligible samples in both the HRS and the SCF, only half of the

weighted sample has at least $10,000 in DC pension accounts.

          A key question is, after imposing comparable sampling screens, how similar are the

characteristics of VRI compared to those of the subsamples of the HRS and SCF? The answer is

that they are not so different under VRI-equivalent sampling screens. Table 8 shows the wealth



8
  The two screens in VRI are constructed to be mutually exclusive to avoid inviting respondents
twice. Therefore, the second and third columns of VRI counts sum to the first column.
9
  Up to now, we have focused on raw counts of observations in order to give a concrete sense of
the size of the samples across the surveys. Since the SCF oversamples high-income individuals,
these households are assigned smaller sampling weights. Similarly, the HRS oversamples blacks
and Hispanics (in order to make statistically significant inferences by groups) and residents of
Florida (because of the cost saving in reaching older respondents there). In the following
analysis, all the comparisons are made after weighting observations from the HRS and SCF with
the corresponding sampling weights.


                                                 18
distributions from the VRI, HRS and SCF. From this point forward, HRS and SCF tabulations

use sampling weights. With only age eligibility, median values from the HRS and SCF are an

order of magnitude smaller than the corresponding numbers from the VRI. When we impose the

VRI eligibility screen, the gaps are dramatically reduced, though there are still important

differences. The remaining gap is smaller if the HRS and SCF subsamples are compared with the

employer-sponsored sample in the VRI. The 90th percentile from the VRI-eligible subsample of

the SCF is actually larger than the one from the VRI employer-sponsored group. Recall that for

the employer-sponsored group the potential self-selection issue is mitigated, since the availability

of Vanguard funds in their retirement plan results from their employers’ decision making. To

more closely mimic the asset cut-off imposed on the employer-sponsored group in the VRI, we

also made tabulations on the HRS and SCF subgroup composed of households with at least

$10,000 in their 401(k) or similar pension accounts. The results are reported in the third row of

the HRS and SCF panels. On average, the 401(k) subset of the HRS is wealthier than the overall

HRS VRI-eligible sample, while the 401(k) subset in the SCF is less wealthy. The means of the

401(k) subsets in the SCF and HRS are closer to those of the VRI employer-sponsored sample,

though the VRI is less right-skewed. Nonetheless, it is reassuring that there is broad similarity

between the 401(k) subsets of the SCF and HRS and the VRI employer sample.

       Appendix C provides a more detailed comparison across the surveys. It compares across

dimensions including income and demographics. Compared to the total population of the HRS

and SCF in the same age range, the VRI sample has much more wealth, a much higher education

level, better health, and a greater likelihood of being coupled. Most of these differences,

however, can be explained by the effect of the sampling screens we imposed in the VRI panel.

What is special about the VRI sample is that it is selected for non-trivial asset holding and use of




                                                 19
the Internet. Once these criteria are imposed, the VRI looks quite similar to the upper half of the

wealth distribution in the HRS and SCF. There is a bit of residual higher education, better health,

and high wealth-to-income ratio in the VRI compared to the relevant HRS and SCF populations.

Yet the principal differences between the VRI and the general populations do not appear to be

attributable to selection to Vanguard participation per se. For the employer-sponsored sample,

the differences in the characteristics essentially disappear once VRI-eligible criteria are imposed

on the HRS and SCF.

4.3.   Stock Share

The extent of stock ownership looms large in discussions of how individuals will manage under

defined-contribution retirement plans. The VRI wealth survey asks for stock share on an

account-by-account basis. Table 9 compares the stock share of the VRI with those of the HRS

and SCF. Panel A reports stock shares while Panel B reports stock amount. Again, we see the

importance of having a relevant sample. Compared to the VRI, if we impose only age eligibility,

the HRS and SCF have much lower stock shares across almost all of the distribution. Compared

to the median share of 55% in VRI, the median share is 0% in the HRS and close to 0% in the

SCF. Conditioning, however, on the VRI sample screens, the median shares in HRS and SCF are

still lower, but much closer to those of VRI. The left tail in the HRS still shows less stock

ownership, but SCF and VRI are similar across the distribution.10 The picture is similar with

regard to the amounts of stock in panel B of Table 9. Hence, as with the level of wealth, the

Vanguard respondents are less unrepresentative once the screen is imposed. But again, note that

the VRI has a much larger sample of stock holders, so any analysis of portfolios should be much

more precise.

10
  Note that the HRS 2012 stock shares in 401(k) or similar accounts are not yet cleaned and
imputed, so they are excluded (numerator and denominator) from these HRS stock shares.


                                                 20
              5. Wealth and Retirement: Lessons from Data on Wealthholders

We have established that the VRI approach leads to substantially larger samples of older

households with relevant levels of wealth for many important decisions surrounding retirement

and well-being in older age. Having dense observations across the relevant ranges is particularly

important if the relationships between wealth and other behaviors are non-linear. Poterba, Venti

and Wise (2011) show that for the majority of households surveyed in the HRS, the lack of

demand for additional annuity income simply comes from having very low annuitizable wealth.

Similarly, there is a substantial literature on how wealth and shocks to wealth affect retirement

(e.g., Sevak (2002), Bosworth and Burtless (2010), Goda, Shoven and Slavo (2012), McFall

(2011), and Coronado and Dynan (2012), among others). Again, for the majority of households

that approach retirement with little financial wealth, how levels or changes in wealth affect

decision-making is a very different question than for those who have significant savings for

retirement.

       In this section, we demonstrate that for the relationship between expected retirement date

and wealth, having data that are dense in the VRI wealth ranges yields substantially clearer

inferences than is possible with existing datasets. In particular, we investigate the relationship

between current accumulated financial wealth and how long individuals plan to keep working.

       The VRI is designed as a panel, though this paper analyzes the first survey. To study the

wealth/retirement relationship, we use the relationship between retirement expectations and

wealth in the cross-section.11 Thus, we build on the tradition of using expectations rather than



11
  The VRI holds the promise to examine reaction to events as the panel builds over time. We do,
however, have a panel aspect even with the cross-section of wealth from the survey from the
administrative data. We have done some exploratory work using the administrative data panel to
examine the effect of the financial crisis on VRI respondents. Note that the VRI was collected in
2013. By then, the stock market had recovered from the 2008/9 decline. By consulting the


                                                 21
realizations as the outcome variable. See McGarry (2004), Chan and Stevens (2004), and

Szinovacz, Davey, and Martin (2014). The use of subjective probability variables relies on

substantial experience showing the validity of these measures in the HRS and other surveys. See

Dominitz and Manski (1997) and Hurd and McGarry (2002).

5.1.   Specification

In this section we present an exploratory analysis that is designed to reveal how data such as the

VRI can shed light on variables that determine retirement decision-making. The estimates should

not be taken as a structural relationship because of the obvious joint determination of retirement

and saving.

       To measure current financial wealth in a way that is meaningful for thinking about

expected retirement, we construct normalized financial wealth Wi R as

                                                              65 agei 
                                 Wi R  (0.06 Wi  1.03                  ) / Yi

where Wi is annuitizable financial wealth, Yi is current income, and agei is the current age of the

main earner of the household.12 Normalized wealth is a rough-and-ready measure of how much

current wealth could replace current income assuming no additional saving. See Brown (2001)

for a similar measure, but converting flows to a stock. The calculation assumes a 0.06

annuitization rate and a 3 percent real rate of return. The use of a fixed rate of return and a

uniform annuity rate is a simple way to put current wealth of future retirees into common units.

administrative data, we find that most VRI respondents invested passively over the financial
crisis. That is, their stock share moved by roughly the amount consistent with little rebalancing.
As a consequence of this prudent investment strategy and the recovery of the market, there is, in
fact, little lasting effect of the crisis on VRI respondents’ wealth overall.
12
   Annuitizable financial wealth is the sum of retirement and non-retirement financial assets. To
put these on the same tax basis, we use another rough-and-ready approximation. Specifically, we
presume a 25 percent average tax rate on withdrawals from qualified plans. Note that we do not
have good data separating Roth and non-Roth treatment, so all qualified plans are combined in
this calculation. The main findings are robust with respect to the assumed tax rate.


                                                  22
We compound returns until age 65 rather than the expected retirement date to avoid putting

expected years of work on both sides of the equation. We estimate the relationship

                                 H i  1 (Wi R )Wi R   2Yi R  Zi   i                        (1)

where H i is the difference between the expected age of retirement and current age, Wi R is

normalized financial wealth, Yi R is expected DB pension plus Social Security divided by current

income, and Zi is a vector of covariates (age, dummies for education and health, and marital

status).13 The coefficient 1 (Wi R ) is a potentially non-linear function of normalized wealth.

5.2.   Variables and Sample for Wealth-Retirement Analysis

We focus on estimates of this relationship in the VRI and HRS. We also show the same analysis

using the SCF data, but due to the small number of observations in the relevant age group and

lack of some variables used—health of respondents and expected Social Security income—the

results are not entirely consistent with the specification used for the VRI and HRS and the

estimated relationship is much less precise. In the VRI, expected retirement is measured using

the response to a question, “At what age do you expect to completely retire?”14 Both VRI and

HRS have questions about current and expected pension and Social Security income. For singles,

Yi R is simply the sum of expected pensions and Social Security divided by current income. For

couples, it is this sum across the couple.15




13
   We assume that DB pension is taxed at the same 25 percent average rate as distributions from
qualified plans. To account for the partial non-taxability of Social Security benefits, we apply a
15 percent average tax rate to them. The main findings are again robust with respect to different
tax rates assumed.
14
   In HRS, the expected retirement age is the result of a complex sequence starting with whether
an individual plans to retire and at what age or date.
15
   If one member of the couple is retired, we use the current retirement income for that person
plus the expectations for the non-retired person.


                                                    23
        For simplicity, we limit the sample to households with just one main earner who has not

yet retired and is aged 65 or younger. For singles, anyone not retired and is aged 65 or younger is

in the sample. For single worker couples, the household is included if the worker is aged 65 or

younger. These include single-worker households or dual-worker households in which one is

now retired. For both these households and singles, the retirement decision is for a single worker.

The assets and income used in the analysis reflect any retirement income or assets of the already-

retired spouse. For dual-worker households, the joint retirement is more complex. We only

include households that appear to have only one primary earner, and we base the retirement

decision on that household member.16 There are 2,026 households in the VRI sample and 1,053

in the HRS sample. See Appendix D for details.

5.3.1   Estimates: Entire Sample

Figure 3 compares the distribution of normalized wealth across the VRI and HRS. The curves

shown are kernel densities where the solid lines are for the VRI while the dashed lines are for the

HRS. Panel A shows the entire sample analyzed in this section, while Panel B examines the

employer-sponsored subsets. Panel A shows the stark difference in the wealth distribution

between the two surveys documented in Section 4. Recall that normalized wealth is roughly the

extent to which current wealth could replace current income at retirement if all assets were

devoted to retirement income. In the VRI, observations are dense and fairly uniformly spread in

the range from 0 to 0.5, and observations with normalized wealth between 0.5 and 1 are not rare.

A non-negligible fraction of households have normalized financial wealth larger than 1. In



16
  To determine the primary earner, we use expected Social Security income and defined benefit
pensions as a proxy for who has larger lifetime earnings. If one of the members has expected
Social Security and DB pension at least four times larger than the other earner, he or she is
classified as the main earner and the household is included in the sample. Otherwise, the
household is dropped from this analysis.


                                                24
contrast, in the HRS the vast majority of the households have a replacement rate lower than 0.5.

A trivial fraction of observations has a replacement rate close to or higher than 1. This

observation confirms the point made by Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2011): relatively few

households in the broad population have significant levels of potentially annuitizable wealth.

       Now consider the relationship between this measure of current assets and plans for

continued work. To capture the non-linear relationship between retirement horizon and wealth

holdings without imposing a restrictive functional form, we estimate LOESS regressions.17

Figure 4 shows the results for the VRI and HRS. Again, Panel A shows the entire sample

analyzed in this section. Panel B examines the employer-sponsored subsets.18 In Figure 4, “x”

denotes HRS (orange/dashed) and “o” denotes VRI (blue/solid). The LOESS curve is shown as a

line with the shaded area indicating the 95% confidence interval. The y-axis of Figure 4 is

measured in expected remaining years of work (mean zero because it is a residual). In the VRI

for the entire sample in Figure 4A, we see the clear negative relationship between normalized

wealth and retirement horizon up to the full replacement rate around 1. Moving from zero

annuitizable wealth to annuitizable wealth that could replace current income corresponds to a

reduction in expected years of work by about 1.7 years. After that level, the estimated

relationship flattens out. (For very high levels of annuitizable wealth, the bulk of wealth likely

will not be used for routine consumption in retirement.) Over the entire range, the estimates are

quite precise. In the HRS, the estimated relationship is very different. It shows a negative

relationship up to the replacement rate 0.3, a slightly positive correlation in the range of 0.3 to

17
   LOESS is a bivariate procedure. To deal with the covariates, we first project the retirement
horizon on the variables in equation (1) excluding normalized wealth. The LOESS estimate is the
regression of this residual on normalized wealth. For the HRS sample, both stages used sampling
weights.
18
   The ranges of the horizontal and vertical axes are truncated to exclude outliers. Appendix D,
Figure A-D1, shows the data in Figure 4A for the entire sample including outliers.


                                                  25
0.4, and then becomes flat after that. The change in years worked is about the same as in the

VRI, but it occurs at much lower levels of annuitizable wealth. Given the low density of data in

this range, the flattening of the LOESS line for higher levels of wealth occurs by construction.

The HRS data simply cannot capture how the relationship changes over this range because there

are so few observations.

       Having ample data over the relevant ranges of wealth clearly affects the precision of the

estimates. The VRI confidence interval is narrower due to the larger number of observations. The

HRS confidence interval gets wider after the replacement rate of 0.25, as the number of

observations gets smaller very quickly for individuals with annuitizable wealth sufficient to

replace even a quarter of their income prior to retirement.

5.3.2. Estimates: Employer-Sponsored Sample

One concern about the VRI design is that the behavior of Vanguard clients might be very

different from that of the general population. We can address this issue by considering whether

or not the behavior of the VRI employer-sponsored sample differs from that of the individual

client sample. Because the employer-sponsored clients come to Vanguard owing mainly to their

employers’ choices, they are much less self-selected than the individual account holders. This

prior is borne out by the Section 4 results, which show that the characteristics of the VRI

employer-sponsored sample are quite similar to subsets of the HRS and SCF with DC pension

accounts. Figure 3B confirms that after imposing similar screens, the distribution of normalized

wealth looks much more similar across the VRI and HRS.

       In Figure 4B, we show the relationship between wealth and retirement plans for the

employer-sponsored samples of the VRI and HRS. The general inference drawn by comparing

the VRI and HRS for the entire sample also holds for this subset, though the HRS curve is




                                                26
somewhat closer to the VRI curve. The HRS relationship in Panel B has a steep decline for lower

levels of wealth, but then goes essentially flat as in Panel A. Likewise, the change in retirement

plans shown in Panel B for the VRI is larger than in the HRS over the relevant range, e.g., 0.25

to 0.75, and the HRS LOESS line is below the VRI confidence interval in this range. Hence,

although the HRS estimates are quite imprecise for the 401(k) subset in Panel B owing to the

paucity of data, the basic message of the entire VRI sample holds in the employer-sponsored

samples. Therefore, the key results derived from the VRI appear to be driven by having dense

data over relevant wealth ranges and not by self-selection by individuals into a relationship with

Vanguard.

         In Appendix D, we estimate the version where we include       in normalized wealth

instead of treating it as a control. Since HRS households have significant pension and Social

Security wealth, the support of retirement resources is different—but less so—from the VRI than

for financial resources alone. Nonetheless, a similar picture emerges in the analysis that includes

     because of the difference in financial wealth.

5.3.3. Estimates: SCF

Figure 5 reports the result from the SCF for the entire sample (Panel A) and the 401(k) subset

(Panel B). Due to a small number of households in the relevant age interval, we have only 233

observations satisfying all the criteria to be included in the analysis.19 The SCF does not have

expected Social Security benefit information, so the estimates are not entirely parallel with those

for the VRI and HRS, which is why we do not plot the VRI in Figure 5. The small sample size

makes the estimates extremely imprecise. The LOESS curve moves substantially, but not

statistically significantly. The SCF was not specifically designed to study retirement saving, so it

19
   We use only one replicate from each household to avoid difficulties in computing confidence
intervals in the non-linear setting of this application.


                                                 27
is not a criticism of that dataset that it has little power to address the relationship between wealth

and expected retirement. Nonetheless, our finding points to the importance of collecting data that

are relevant for the question.

5.4.    Would a Stock Market Crash Significantly Impact Retirement Plans?

In the future, as workers increasingly rely on DC pension plans, they will need to have sufficient

DC wealth in order to sustain retirement consumption. If history is precedent, many will invest

significantly in equities during their working years. As such, ever more households will find their

retirement finances to be vulnerable to equity-market crashes. How these crashes affect

retirement horizons is therefore of great interest. In this section we show that the VRI panel is far

better suited than is the HRS to understanding these effects.

        An important approach to estimating the relationship between wealth and the retirement

horizon is to examine how individuals react to stock market crashes. In their HRS-based work on

this topic, Goda, Shoven and Slavov (2012) estimate the difference in the retirement horizon

associated with the reduction in wealth associated with a 40% drop in the stock market to be

essentially zero, even when they condition on stock ownership. In Figure 6, we use the LOESS

estimates presented in Figure 4 to make a parallel calculation. Specifically, we take a

representative stockholder to have mean normalized wealth of 0.51 and mean stock share of

55%. These are the means from the VRI sample used in the LOESS estimation. When we apply

the 40% drop in the stock market to this representative stockholder, the effect on wealth is

0.4    0.51   0.55    0.112. This 11 percent drop in the replacement rate of income is non-

negligible. Using data from the HRS, the LOESS estimates suggest a flat relationship between

wealth and the retirement horizon at the wealth level of the representative stockholder. Hence,

our calculation confirms the finding of Goda, Shoven, and Slavov that there is no clear effect of




                                                  28
stock market crashes on the retirement horizon in HRS data. The estimated relationship in HRS

data is much steeper at the wealth level of the typical HRS individual, but the effect is still

limited due to lower mean wealth and stock share.

       In the VRI, the relationship is quite different because it shows a strong correlation

between wealth and the retirement horizon at the wealth level of the representative stockholder.

Since a significant wealth change is combined with the steep slope of the wealth-retirement

horizon relationship estimated in the relevant wealth range, the implied change in the retirement

horizon corresponds to an additional 4 months of work. Also, the narrow confidence intervals in

this wealth range that we observed from the VRI curves in Figure 4 imply that the estimated

effect would be statistically significant. (Panel B of Figure 6 considers alternative scenarios

under the VRI estimate. With a higher stock share (70%) the increase in retirement horizon is

about 6 months. At a higher replacement rate (1.0), however, the effect is smaller due to the

flatter LOESS curve.) Hence, the representative stockholder is so poorly represented in the HRS

that estimates of effects of stock market crashes on expected retirement will be very misleading

using HRS data.

       As the analysis in this section makes clear, with the HRS and SCF it is hard to capture the

relationship between wealth and retirement behavior of those with high levels of annuitizable

wealth. The bottom line is that VRI respondents have far more potential in exploring the effect of

wealth on the retirement behavior of the population under an institutional and policy regime in

which DC plans are the dominant source of retirement income. Developing and estimating a full

structural model that can capture the impact of exogenous stock market shocks on labor market

behavior is one of the many tasks ahead of us in further developing the VRI.




                                                 29
                                          6. Conclusions

This paper has introduced a new approach and new dataset—the Vanguard Research Initiative—

for measuring the wealth of wealthholders. Based on a partnership between academic researchers

and the Vanguard Group, we have developed a new survey-administrative dataset. It provides a

large, high-quality sample of households that have substantial wealth for financing retirement

corresponding to the upper half of the wealth distribution of older Americans. Wealth

measurement is based on a comprehensive account-by-account approach that is designed to elicit

accurate information in the form that respondents think about it and have at their disposal. The

data infrastructure makes use of high-quality administrative data at all stages of the analysis—

establishing the sample frame, sending invitations, evaluating selective responses, evaluating

quality of survey responses, and—ultimately—providing a distinct dataset. By collecting survey

and administrative data in tandem, this project aims to demonstrate how large-scale surveys can

make increasing and effective use of administrative data for wealth measurement. Given the

challenges and costs of collecting surveys, these advances should inform measurement practice

going forward. Based on the approach presented in this paper, it may be possible to replace

expensive, infrequent, and error-ridden survey measures of wealth with administrative account

data.

        The research also informs practice for collecting wealth data within surveys. In particular,

the account-based approach to survey measurement of wealth yields measurements that are

unbiased relative to administrative measurements. In contrast, many surveys appear to

undercount assets. Additionally, the paper demonstrates that the correction mechanism

significantly reduces the variance of errors relative to the administrative account data.




                                                 30
        Administrative data are by definition free from reporting error, so tend to have much less

measurement error. Administrative data alone, however, might not provide enough information

for research. In many cases, they do not include a rich set of important demographic variables.

Sometimes they capture only a part of the household balance sheet (examples include the

administrative Vanguard wealth data used in VRI and TIAA-CREF data used in Ameriks and

Zeldes (2004)). Measurement error can also occur while processing data. Browning, Crossley

and Winter (2014) provide a valuable summary of these issues. Hence, to get a better picture of

households’ economic conditions, it is often necessary to link survey data to administrative data

so that we can address the shortcomings of both types of data. As a linked dataset with, on the

one hand, detailed survey measures of household finance and other economically important

characteristics and, on the other hand, monthly-frequency observations on balances and

compositions of their Vanguard assets, the VRI enables us not only to validate survey responses

with the administrative data, but also to conduct research that requires high-frequency data on

financial situations.

        The design of this VRI infrastructure is targeted at measuring the wealth of households

with sufficient financial assets so they face wealth allocation and accumulation decisions

concerning whether to work longer, whether to annuitize, whether to buy long-term care

insurance, how much to bequeath, and so on. In other papers that also leverage the VRI, we are

investigating some of these questions in detail. In this paper, we make several substantive

contributions beyond evaluating the quality of the VRI measurement. We show that the VRI is

dense in data on older Americans in the upper half of the wealth distribution compared to other

excellent surveys with wealth data, namely the HRS and SCF. We show that for one key

variable—how much longer they expect to work—the VRI indeed provides a very different




                                                31
picture from the HRS and SCF precisely because it has sufficient observations with households

with substantial financial wealth as they approach retirement.




                                                32
                                      REFERENCES
Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles (2007) “The Reaction of Consumer
       Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates: Evidence from Consumer Credit Data,” Journal of
       Political Economy 115, 986-1019.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2007) “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
       Review 97, 1533-1559.
Ameriks, John and Stephan P. Zeldes (2004) “How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with
       Age?” Unpublished manuscript.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher
       Tonetti (2014) “Vanguard Research Initiative: Survey 1 Documentation and
       Tabulations,” Vanguard Research Initiative Working Paper.
Bosworth, Barry P. and Gary Burtless (2010) “Recessions, Wealth Destruction, and the
       Timing of Retirement,” Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2010-22.
Brown, Jeffrey R. (2001) “Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize,”
       Journal of Public Economics 82, 29-62.
Browning, Martin, Thomas Crossley, and Joachim Winter (2014) “The Measurement of
       Household Consumption Expenditures,” IFS Working Paper, W14/07.
Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence (2014) “Wealth, Pensions, Debt, and Savings: Considerations
       for a Panel Survey,” Unpublished manuscript.
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (2004) “Do Changes in Pension Incentives Affect
       Retirement? A Longitudinal Study of Subjective Retirement Expectations,” Journal of
       Public Economics 88, 1307 – 1333.
Coile, Courtney, and Phillip B. Levine (2004) “Bulls, Bears and Retirement Behavior,”
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 59, 408-429.
Coronado, Julia L. and Maria Perozek (2003) “Wealth effects and the consumption of leisure:
       Retirement decisions during the stock market boom of the 1990s,” Federal Reserve Board
       Working Paper, 2003-20.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger (1992) “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
       and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 819-863.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski (1997) “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective
       Income Expectations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92, 855-867.
Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis
       (2014) “Harnessing Naturally Occurring Data to Measure the Response of Spending to
       Income,” Science 345, 212-215.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, Nahid Tabatabai (2010) “What the Stock Market
       Decline Means for the Financial Security and Retirement Choices of the Near-Retirement
       Population,” Journal of Economics Perspective 24, 161-182.
Goda, Gopi Shah, John B. Shoven, Sita Nataraj Slavov (2012) “Does stock market
       performance influence retirement intentions?” Journal of Human Resources 47, 1055-
       1081.




                                             33
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Klara Sabirianova Peter (2007) “Public Sector Pay and
       Corruption: Measuring Bribery from Micro Data” Journal of Public Economics 91, 963-
       991.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen (1993) “The Carnegie
       Conjecture: Some Empirical Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 413-435.
Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry (2002) “The Predictive Validity of Subjective
       Probabilities of Survival,” Economic Journal 112, 966 – 985.
Hurd, Michael, Monika Reti, and Susann Rohwedder (2009) “The Effect of Large Capital
       Gains or Losses on Retirement” in David A. Wise ed., Developments in the economics of
       aging, University of Chicago Press, 127-163.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley (2014) “Are Household Surveys Like Tax
       Forms? Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 345, 212-215.
Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote (2001) “Estimating the Effect of
       Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a
       Survey of Lottery Players,” American Economic Review 91, 778-794.
Joulfaian, David and Mark Wilhelm (1994) “Inheritance and Labor Supply,” Journal of
       Human Resources 29, 1205 – 1234.
Juster, F. Thomas and James P. Smith (1997) “Improving the Quality of Economic Data:
       Lessons from the HRS and AHEAD,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92,
       1268-1278.
Juster, F. Thomas, James P. Smith, and Frank Stafford (1999) “The Measurement and
       Structure of Household Wealth,” Labour Economics 6, 253-275.
Kapteyn, Arie and Jelmer Y. Ypma (2007) “Measurement Error and Misclassification: A
       Comparison of Survey and Administrative Data,” Journal of Labor Economics 25, 513-
       551.
Kennickell, Arthur B. (2000) “Wealth Measurement in the Survey of Consumer Finances:
       Methodology and Directions for Future Research,” Working paper, Board of Governors
       of the Federal Reserve System.
Kezdi, Gabor and Purvi Sevak (2004) “Economic Adjustment of Recent Retirees to Adverse
       Wealth Shocks,” MRRC Working Paper 2004-075.
Khitatrakun, Surachai (2004) “Wealth and the timing of retirement,” Unpublished manuscript,
       University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Krimmel, Jacob, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabelhaus, and Paul Smith (2013) “The Current
       State of U.S. Household Balance Sheets,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 95,
       337-359.
McFall, Brooke Helppie (2011) “Crash and Wait? The Impact of the Great Recession on the
       Retirement Plans of Older Americans,” American Economic Review Papers and
       Proceedings 101, 40-44.
McGarry, Kathleen (2004) “Health and Retirement: Do Changes in Health Affect Retirement
       Expectations?” Journal of Human Resources 39, 624-648.
Poterba, James M. (2014) “Retirement Security in an Aging Population,” American Economic
       Review 104, 1-30.


                                            34
Poterba, James M., Steven Venti, and David Wise (2011) “The Composition and Drawdown
       of Wealth in Retirement,” Journal of Economic Perspective 25, 95 – 118.
Sevak, Purvi (2002) “Wealth Shocks and Retirement Timing,” Working paper, Michigan
       Retirement Research Center.
Szinovacz, Maximiliane E., Adam Davey, and Lauren Martin (2014) “Did the Great
       Recession Influence Retirement Plans?” Research on Aging 36, 1-31.




                                         35
Table 1. Design of VRI, HRS, and SCF

                                                VRI                                  HRS                        SCF
Sampling
Population                Vanguard clients                                   U.S. Population         U.S. Population
Frequency                 Multiple surveys per year; monthly admin. data     Biennial                Triennial
Panel/cross-section       Panel                                              Panel                   Cross-section1
Main target               Age 55+ with non-negligible financial assets       Age 50+ and spouses     Representative of wealth
Oversampling              Singles                                            Blacks and Hispanics;   High-income list sample
                                                                             Residents of Florida
Additional screens        Internet eligible;
                          Employer-sponsored and individual client samples
Wealth measurement
Account-based approach    Comprehensive                                      401(k)/IRA2             Transactional and pension
                                                                                                     accounts
Administrative data          Yes                                              No                     No
Summary (age>55)
Households                   8,950                                            11,595                  2,624
Median Financial Wealth $663,100                                              $60,000                 $33,200
Median Income                $121,481                                         $30,400                 $42,610
Note: Table refers to most recent wave of each survey (VRI 2013, HRS 2012, and SCF 2013). Observations are restricted to
respondents aged 55 and older. The VRI and SCF survey only one member of couples. The age of the household is determined by the
age of respondent. The HRS surveys HRS respondents and their spouses. The age of the household is determined by the age of the
financial respondent as defined by the HRS.
1
  The SCF occasionally (1983-89, 2007-09) has a panel structure.
2
  HRS implemented account-based approach for retirement accounts in 2012.
Table 2. Survey Financial Assets: All respondents

                                                          Conditional on having positive amount
                                                                                 Percentiles
 Account type              Mean           N       Mean        10          25         50         75       90
 Total financial assets   1,189,358     8,948   1,189,358 122,000 296,673 656,962 1,266,651 2,254,000
 IRA                        359,181 7,303         440,184    29,000     83,931 234,033        556,527 1,021,000
 Employer sponsored         215,620 4,630         416,803    26,000     83,000 222,000        475,000   842,402
 Pension                      25,365 1,016        223,437    10,518     34,000 100,000        251,000   590,714
 Other retirement asset       13,237      602     196,801    10,000     26,136     80,466     213,000   450,000
 Checking                     16,888 8,637         17,500     1,000       2,200      5,500      15,000   40,000
 Saving                       23,020 6,162         33,436       500       2,100    10,000       32,000   84,382
 Money market                 28,308 4,076         62,158     1,200       5,367    22,177       69,303  151,023
 Mutual fund                231,577 3,942         525,777     8,500     30,000 114,000        309,000   690,000
 Certificate of deposit       16,576 1,634         90,794     4,000     11,000     34,450     100,000   230,803
 Brokerage                  181,872 4,184         389,042     6,400     27,100 110,000        347,000   854,000
 Directly held                22,634 1,801        112,477     2,000     10,000     30,000     100,000   235,664
 securities
 Annuity                      20,811 1,163         160,150     13,000   35,000   94,500     200,000    365,000
 Life insurance               21,053 2,696          69,891      5,000   10,000   26,000      70,000    150,000
 Educational related           3,022      613       44,119      3,400    8,300   20,000      48,000    100,000
 Other accounts                9,930      429      207,165      1,500   10,000   46,000     195,000    478,000
Note: Pension, annuity, and life insurance are current cash values.
Table 3. Total Vanguard Assets: Survey versus Administrative Data

A. Employer-Sponsored (N=2,243)
                                                       Percentiles
                   Mean            10         25         50          75         90
Survey            331,753          27,000     75,000    195,485      432,000    755,000
Administrative    299,540          29,519     69,668    181,375      400,707    656,832
Difference         32,213         -27,394     -4,093         890      12,999     95,978
% Difference       3.92%         -17.44%     -2.48%       0.63%       9.10%     47.83%

B. Individual client (N=6,705)
                                                        Percentiles
                    Mean            10        25        50           75         90
Survey              517,724        29,000    87,017    260,000      615,081    1,178,158
Administrative      380,277        25,345    67,382    193,682      472,732      900,747
Difference          137,447       -23,315    -1,637       2,623      91,950      380,262
% Difference        18.53%       -14.42%    -1.20%       1.44%      32.89%      100.32%

C. Employer-Sponsored, Singles (N=585)
                                                       Percentiles
                   Mean            10         25         50          75         90
Survey            240,488          22,000     49,000    125,000      300,000    574,000
Administrative    231,306          22,757     46,236    127,630      282,362    529,760
Difference          9,183         -24,297     -3,867         365       7,483     35,390
% Difference       2.05%         -22.06%     -3.04%       0.33%       6.21%     29.68%

D. Individual client, Singles (N=2,349)
                                                       Percentiles
                    Mean           10         25         50          75         90
Survey             317,004         21,000     57,000    165,400      420,000    790,000
Administrative     305,997         22,501     58,759    160,638      406,609    744,563
Difference           11,008       -32,803     -4,180         -19       3,902     39,677
% Difference        -0.64%       -22.23%     -2.91%      -0.03%       2.18%     24.34%
Table 4. Comparison of Total Vanguard Wealth: Different Correction Paths (Singles only)

                                               Percent Difference

                                    25      median    75
Correction paths     N   Measure percentile        percentile
None                1927  Final       -3.3    -0.0       2.6
Accounts only        426 Initial      -3.5     0.1       2.5
                          Final       -3.5     0.1       2.5
Balances only        308 Initial     -12.2    -0.0      13.6
                          Final       -2.6    -0.0       2.7
Accounts and
                                           -5.3      -0.1       12.1
balances              121    Initial
(restarted)                   Final        -1.1       0.2           2.1
Accounts and
                                          -18.1      -0.1           2.7
balances              153    Initial
(other paths)                 Final        -1.4       0.1           2.7
Table 5. Comparing VRI to Age-Eligible HRS and SCF Households (unweighted counts): Age and Financial Wealth

                                                                 Financial Wealth
   Age                         <$0     $0-10K        $10K-100K $100K-500K            $500K-1M $1M-2.5M            >$2.5M           All
             VRI                48           36             292            1,147             871           762         181      3,337
  55-64      HRS             1,459          586             933              897             287           160          41      4,363
             SCF               228          170             196              254             102           119         212      1,281
             VRI                16           19             258            1,117             985        1,066          377      3,838
  65-74      HRS               746          487             727              817             290           162          35      3,264
             SCF                93          114             118              155              68            91         178        817
             VRI                 2            4              95              549             461           472         192      1,775
   > 74      HRS               800          712           1,030              927             284           172          43      3,968
             SCF                60           93             115              107              31            30          90        526
             VRI                66           59             645            2,813           2,317        2,300          750      8,950
  Total      HRS             3,005        1,785           2,690            2,641             861           494         119     11,595
             SCF               381          377             429              516             201           240         480      2,624
Note: Numbers are raw counts (unweighted) of households. Note that only age-eligible households are included in the table. For SCF,
only one replicate is included. For HRS, only those households surveyed in both the 2010 and 2012 waves are included. Age of HRS
households based on financial respondent. Financial wealth is the sum of financial assets (both retirement and non-retirement assets)
minus non-mortgage debt.
Table 6. Comparing Age-eligible VRI, HRS, and SCF Households (unweighted counts): VRI Sampling Screens

                          VRI                                    HRS                                     SCF
                                                                              VRI                                    VRI
                                                                            Eligible                               Eligible
                     Employer- Individual   Age     VRI                     401(k)           Age     VRI           401(k)
 Age         All     Sponsored   client   Eligible Eligible                  subset        Eligible Eligible        subset
 All        8,950        2,244 6,706       11,595    3,684                    1,553          2,624    1,275            665
 55-59      1,549          810    739       2,364      976                      628            668      397            280
 60-64      1,788          823    965       1,999      756                      411            613      350            205
 65-69      1,931          419 1,512        1,282      535                      214            462      257            112
 70-74      1,907          157 1,750        1,982      638                      178            355      161             51
 75-100     1,775           35 1,740        3,968      779                      122            526      110             17
Note: Table shows total age-eligible number of households in total and after imposing the VRI-equivalent screen. VRI-eligible screen imposes Internet
eligibility plus having at least $10,000 in any non-transactional financial accounts. The 401(k) subset imposes $10,000 wealth cut-off on DC type pensions. See
text for details. See also the note to Table 5.




Table 7. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Fraction of weighted observations

Screens                                HRS       SCF
Age-eligible                          100%      100%
Internet eligibility                   56%       58%
$10,000 asset cut-off                  58%       45%
Internet eligible and $10,000 cut-off 41%        35%
401(k) subset                          19%       18%
Note: Table shows the fraction of the sample in HRS and SCF (measured by the fraction of weighted observations) remaining after
imposing VRI sampling screens. See text and note to Table 6 for descriptions of screens.
Table 8. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Wealth distribution

                                                              Percentiles
                                      Mean      10      25      50        75        90
         All                        1,206,594 115,337 292,000 663,100 1,286,000 2,291,235
 VRI     Employer-sponsored           847,349 65,050 185,600 496,350 1,029,700 1,856,005
         Individual client          1,326,807 140,100 330,636 715,790 1,383,209 2,421,840
         Age eligible                  293,596      -900  500 60,000    300,000     745,000
HRS      VRI eligible                  578,069 34,000 98,036 272,000    660,000   1,247,800
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset   623,954 46,300 130,000 342,700   733,000   1,364,000
         Age eligible                  404,668    -6,300  320 33,200    220,550     794,700
 SCF     VRI eligible                  970,294 28,860 96,350 262,100    792,400   2,109,000
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset   871,897 18,000 76,870 219,500    674,000   1,953,500
Note:   HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table 9. Stock Ownership

A. Share: VRI, HRS, and SCF (Percent)
                                                                           Percentiles
         Sample Screen                  10               25              50              75                90               N
         All                            14.96            35.12           54.76           74.71             91.14            8905
VRI      Employer-sponsored             8.42             28.88           50.00           72.04             90.00            2233
         Individual client              18.55            37.37           56.06           75.33             91.52            6672
         Age eligible                   0                0                0              40.32             81.48            11595
HRS      VRI eligible                   0                0               29.20           70.75             90.54            3684
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset 0                   0               20.93           67.86             89.05            1553
         Age eligible                   0                0                0.70           43.39             71.24            2624
SCF      VRI eligible                   2.77             19.94           42.34           61.85             84.74            1275
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset 6.98                21.51           40.66           61.04             83.33            665
Note: See text and note to Table 4 for sample screens.   Respondents with less than $1000 in financial assets are coded as having a
zero stock share.

B. Amount: VRI, HRS, and SCF (Dollars)
                                                                           Percentiles
         Sample Screen                 10                25               50              75               90               N
         All                           30,000            113,800          326,162         712,200          1,397,710        8905
VRI      Employer-sponsored            13,500             65,428          221,443         551,365          1,047,212        2233
         Individual client             41,415            138,220          365,174         765,400          1,477,515        6672
         Age eligible                       0                  0                0          45,000            270,000        11595
HRS      VRI eligible                       0                  0           30,000         200,000            520,000        3684
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset        0                  0           15,000         150,000            453,700        1553
         Age eligible                       0                  0                0          78,000            360,000        2624
SCF
         VRI eligible                   3,000             22,750          105,000         357,000          1,227,600        1275
         VRI eligible, 401(k) subset    4,500             21,000           86,000         306,500          1,168,500        665
Figure 1. Administrative versus Survey Financial Assets at Vanguard




Note: The figure compares Vanguard administrative assets with survey report of Vanguard
assets. See the text for how Vanguard assets are determined in survey. The chart shows box and
whiskers figures for each decile of administrative assets (diamond is the mean; middle line is
median; box is inter-quartile range [IQR]; outer lines upper and lower fences [1.5 times the IQR
from the box]; and circles denote outliers). Amounts on the horizontal axis are medians of each
decile ($1000). Log scale is used on both axes.
Figure 2. Correction Paths through Wealth Section.




Note: The figure shows the fraction of respondents taking various paths through the account-
based wealth section. Other includes those who started over and then took various paths to
complete.
Figure 3. Distribution of normalized financial wealth (kernel estimation)
A. VRI vs HRS




B. VRI employer-sponsored versus HRS 401(k) subset
Figure 4. Retirement horizon versus normalized financial wealth: LOESS
A. VRI vs HRS




Note: x denotes HRS (orange/dashed line) and o denotes VRI (blue/solid line).

B. VRI employer-sponsored versus HRS 401(k) subset




Note: x denotes HRS (orange/dashed line) and o denotes VRI (blue/solid line).
Figure 5. Retirement horizon versus normalized financial wealth: LOESS
A. SCF




B. SCF 401(k) subset
Figure 6. Implied Changes in Retirement Horizon: 40% Decline in Stock Market
A. Comparison of VRI and HRS Estimates




B. Alternative Scenarios using VRI Estimates




Note: Lines are LOESS estimates from Figure 4 (confidence intervals and observation not shown). The figure
shows the predicted change in the retirement horizon (years to retirement) resulting from a 40% decline in the stock
market. In panel A, the HRS-overall applies the mean HRS wealth and stock share to the HRS estimates. The HRS-
average stockholder applies the mean VRI wealth and stock share to the HRS estimates while the VRI-average
stockholder applies the same mean VRI wealth and stock share to the VRI estimates. In panel B, the VRI-average
stockholder is same as in panel A. The other two treatments show high stock exposure and high-wealth households.
See text for details.
                                  The Wealth of Wealthholders

                                          December 2014

                           Appendix A. Account Sequence Example

Section 2.2 of the main text explained the structure of the wealth section of the survey in detail.

In this appendix, we show actual screen shots from the wealth section for a hypothetical

respondent who has two IRAs, one 401(k) pension, one checking account and one mutual fund

account.

       The respondent starts the wealth section by entering all the types of accounts she has

(Figure A-A1). She answers how many accounts she has for each type using a drop-down menu

(Figure A-A2) and then gives each of the accounts a nickname (Figure A-A3). The survey

shows the summary of responses so far (Figure A-A4) and asks whether all the information

given is correct. If the respondent clicks no, then she can either add/delete the account type or

add/delete accounts within each type.

       After this first check point, the survey then loops over the accounts and asks the balance

of each (Figure A-A5 is one example). After the loop, the survey displays a summary table of

account balances as well as a total (Figure A-A6). In this example, the respondent did not

provide a response to the balance question for the second IRA account (“Roth IRA”), so she sees

“No response provided” for Reported Value under that account. Let us say that the respondent

clicks “No” to “Is this correct?” under the summary table. Then the respondent is asked whether

she wants to add/delete accounts or correct balances (Figure A-A7). In this example, the

respondent chooses to correct balances, indicates that she wants to correct the balance for “Roth

IRA” (Figure A-A8), and then corrects the balance for that account (Figure A-A9). During the

corrections, the previously provided answers are shown above the question (in this case “Not
answered”). The respondent comes back to the summary screen again, indicates whether she

referred to records to provide information on each account, and then confirms that all the

responses are correct (Figure A-A10).

       The survey then asks two follow-up questions for each account: stock share (Figure A-

A11) and whether that account is held at Vanguard (Figure A-A12). Note that the survey does

not ask these questions about the checking account that this respondent reported since it is a

transactional account not offered at Vanguard. Based on these responses, the survey calculates

the share of wealth held at Vanguard and the stock share of the total portfolio, and it shows these

as charts along with the summary table of balances (Figure A-A13). The respondent can print

this summary page as a record.
Figure A-A1. Types of Accounts
Figure A-A2. Number of Accounts




Figure A-A3. Nickname Accounts
Figure A-A4. Account Verification
Figure A-A5. Account Balance




Figure A-A6. Balance Verification




Figure A-A7. Indicate What Type of Correction(s)




Figure A-A8. Indicate What Needs to Be Corrected
Figure A-A9. Correction of Previous Response(s)




Figure A-A10. Revised Balance Summary




Figure A-A11. Account-by-account Stock Share
Figure A-A12. Which Accounts at Vanguard
Figure A-A13. Summary Table and Charts
                                 The Wealth of Wealthholders

                                         December 2014

                              Appendix B. Definition of concepts

       This appendix defines concepts used for the VRI and how we measure them in the HRS

and SCF.

       Total financial wealth. In the VRI, total financial wealth is the sum of all financial

account balances (the items listed in Table 2) plus miscellaneous financial items (in non-account,

cleanup questions) minus non-mortgage debt. For the SCF, financial wealth is total financial

assets (FIN in the public version of data) minus non-mortgage debt (sum of CCBAL, INSTALL

and ODEBT in the public version of data). For the HRS, financial wealth is the sum of total

financial wealth (atof in RAND version), IRA wealth, and employer-sponsored plan and pension

account balances. For the HRS 2012, we constructed these variables using RAND definitions.

(We are grateful to Margaret Lay for sharing her construction of these variables.)

       Web-survey eligibility. For the VRI, respondents are Web-survey eligible if the client is

registered for Web access with Vanguard, if the registration has a valid email address, if the

client logged in to the Vanguard Website at least once in the last six months, and if the client was

not been recently included in another survey by Vanguard, and if the client had not requested

exclusion from contacts for surveys. We need to simulate this set of screens in the HRS and SCF

in order to select comparable respondents. We designate HRS respondents as Web-survey

eligible if they use the Internet regularly. In the SCF, respondents are designated Web-survey

eligible if they use the Internet to obtain information about borrowing/investing.
       Asset cut-off. In the HRS, we impose a $10,000 cut-off on total financial assets net of

checking, saving and money market balances. In the SCF, we impose a $10,000 cut-off on the

sum of IRA, mutual funds and account type pensions.
                                 The Wealth of Wealthholders

                                         December 2014

                   Appendix C. Detailed Comparisons: VRI, HRS and SCF

This appendix compares the VRI with the most recent waves of the HRS (2012) and SCF (2013)

in more detail. It compares surveys along dimensions including wealth, income and

demographics. For each dimension, we also provide comparisons conditional on age groups to

control for the effect of different age compositions across surveys.

       Recall that the age distribution differs across the samples. Table A-C1 compares median

value of wealth by age group to see whether the difference in the overall wealth distribution is

caused by differences in age. Even after imposing the similar sampling screens, the VRI sample

has a higher median wealth for almost all the age groups. Again, the gap is much smaller when

the HRS and SCF samples are compared with the employer-sponsored sample of the VRI. For

the HRS, the gap shrinks further if we condition on respondents with at least $10,000 in 401(k)s

or similar pension accounts. (Statistics for the age group 65+ under employer-sponsored

conditions or 401(k) subset conditions are not very informative due to the small number of

observations.)

       Income. Tables A-C2 and A-C3 compare household annual income across samples.

Compared to the overall population of the HRS and SCF, the VRI sample is not only wealthier,

but also has higher income. The difference in income is, however, much smaller than the

difference in wealth. If we impose the VRI screens, except for the oldest age group, income

levels from the SCF are actually higher than the VRI; those from the HRS are quite comparable

to those from the VRI. As a result, the wealth-to-income ratio is much higher for the VRI

sample, as shown in Tables A-C4 and A-C5. This suggests that the high level of wealth of in the
VRI sample is not just due to the high level of lifetime income. They likely also save more,

though other differences (e.g., inherited wealth) might be relevant.

       Demographics. Table A-C6 compares education, health and marital status across

samples. Tables A-C7, A-C8 and A-C9 compare the distributions of each of these variables by

age bins. The VRI sample has a very high education level. Approximately 70% of the sample

has a college degree with over half of those having an advanced degree. The education level is

higher for the individual client sample. In contrast, only about 30% of that sample has a college

degree in the HRS and the SCF. If we impose the VRI-equivalent screen, however, this gap

almost disappears when compared to the employer-sponsored sample in the VRI. The college

degree rates from the SCF and HRS are, under VRI-eligible conditions, similar to the VRI rate.

For the HRS, the gap is further reduced for the 401(k) subset. Compared to the individual client

sample, the HRS and SCF rates are still lower, though the gap is reduced considerably under the

VRI-eligibility condition.

       The VRI respondents are much healthier than the overall population with more than 70%

reporting that their health is either excellent or very good. The corresponding percentage in the

total HRS is about 40%. The SCF uses a different four-point scale, without the “very good”

category. The fraction of respondents with excellent health is much higher in the VRI (31%)

than in the SCF (18%). The gap is much smaller, though does not fully disappear, after imposing

the VRI sampling screens on the HRS and the SCF.

       The fraction of coupled households (defined as either married or partnered) in the VRI is

67%, which is roughly what was targeted by oversampling administrative singles. Even after

this oversampling of singles, the fraction of coupled households is larger than that in the overall

sample of the HRS and the SCF. Without imposing the VRI screens, the corresponding
percentages are about 51% in the HRS and 53% in the SCF. After imposing the VRI sampling

criteria, coupled rates from the HRS and the SCF overshoot the VRI levels for most of the age

groups owing to the VRI’s oversampling of singles.

       Table A-C10 compares retirement rates. Because the incidence of retirement changes so

much with age, it makes sense to compare by age groups. Overall, once the VRI screens are

imposed, the retirement rates are quite similar across the SCF and VRI. HRS respondents retire

somewhat earlier relative to both the SCF and the VRI.
Table A-C1. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Median wealth by age
                       VRI                              HRS                                     SCF
                 Employer- Individual        Age        VRI      VRI eligible,     Age        VRI    VRI eligible,
 Age    Total    sponsored client          Eligible   Eligible   401(k) subset   Eligible   Eligible 401(k) subset
 All    663,100     496,350 715,790         60,000    272,000      342,700        33,200    262,100    219,500
 55-59 518,289      428,280 607,900         55,000    226,400      283,000        21,940    208,700    197,070
 60-64 601,556      521,245 669,000         58,600    276,000      364,000        36,580    236,100    225,100
 65-69 715,627      574,250 750,750         83,000    350,000      435,000        57,000    299,400    463,500
 70-74 746,000      671,000 755,550         64,000    310,000      434,000        52,000    410,700    348,000
 75-100 726,604     605,300 729,950         50,000    284,000      334,500        27,000    275,500    143,000
Note: HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C2. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Income distribution
                                                                                 Percentiles
                                            Mean          10            25             50        75          90
                      All                  121,481      27,004        50,000         82,017    125,000     191,616
 VRI         Employer-sponsored            122,800      42,370        65,000       100,000     146,000     218,201
               Individual client           121,040      24,000        45,000         76,655    119,133     180,000
                 Age eligible               65,856       8,476        15,384         30,400     70,300     145,604
HRS              VRI eligible              110,274      17,532        31,600         63,000    123,240     230,000
          VRI eligible, 401(k) subset      134,119      25,927        48,001         87,030    153,010     262,000
                 Age eligible               90,848      13,189        22,320         42,601     85,221     160,296
 SCF             VRI eligible              177,786      36,219        54,785         91,308    160,296     295,229
          VRI eligible, 401(k) subset      197,214      43,625        66,959       101,453     173,484     320,592
Note:   HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.


Table A-C3. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Median income by age
                    VRI                               HRS                                        SCF
               Employer- Individual       Age       VRI          VRI eligible,        Age     VRI     VRI eligible,
 Age   Total   sponsored client         Eligible Eligible        401(k) subset      Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset
 55-64 92,100    100,000 84,943          50,500     84,003          97,000           57,785 94,351       96,380
 65-74 79,704    100,698 75,130          29,756     46,659          62,051           45,654 91,308      115,657
 75-   71,755      73,343 71,703         18,660     30,432          38,437           28,407 66,553       92,322
Note: HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C4. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Wealth to income ratio
                                                                                Percentiles
                                                      Mean       10       25        50         75       90
                                  All                 42.97     1.95     4.28      8.37       15.15    24.13
 VRI (SCF measure)      Employer-sponsored            57.63     0.96     2.25      4.93        8.87    14.31
                           Individual client          38.05     2.74     5.31      9.77       17.17    26.30
                             Age eligible             44.89    -0.04     0.04      1.46        5.95    16.39
       HRS                   VRI eligible             95.97     0.59     1.50      3.80       10.39    24.49
                     VRI eligible, 401(k) subset      25.30     0.64     1.54      3.35        8.04    17.38
                             Age eligible              3.13    -0.21     0.02      0.76        3.34     7.94
       SCF                   VRI eligible              5.70     0.42     1.20      3.01        6.51    13.00
                     VRI eligible, 401(k) subset       4.02     0.26     1.01      2.21        4.90     8.24
Note: HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.


Table A-C5. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Median wealth to income ratio by age
                   VRI                                HRS                                        SCF
              Employer- Individual      Age         VRI       VRI eligible,       Age     VRI     VRI eligible,
 Age   Total sponsored client         Eligible Eligible       401(k) subset     Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset
 55-64 5.90     3.79        7.13        1.01        2.70          2.88           0.53     2.24        2.01
 65-74 9.53     5.16        10.1        1.71        5.89          5.88           1.01     4.38        3.27
 75-   11.36    9.36       11.11        2.55        9.08          9.85           0.92     4.87        1.41
Note: HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C6. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Education, Health, and Marital Status.
                                       VRI                               HRS                                                           SCF
                                                                             VRI eligible,                                                    VRI eligible,
                                    Employer- Individual    Age       VRI        401(k)                                Age         VRI          401(k)
                           Total    Sponsored client      Eligible Eligible       subset                              Eligible    Eligible       subset
 Education College grad. 32.18%       33.69% 31.67%       14.25% 22.62%          23.26%                               16.26%      27.43%        25.87%
            Post grad.     38.45%     26.24% 42.53%       14.64% 26.36%          30.54%                               14.32%      28.39%        28.55%
 Health     Poor            0.84%      0.53% 0.94%          7.60% 2.25%           1.71%                               10.32%       2.50%         2.42%
            Fair            4.77%      3.48% 5.20%        19.10% 11.10%           9.01%                               26.19%      15.67%        17.02%
            Good           21.77%     22.33% 21.58%       31.81% 29.39%          30.29%                               45.34%      55.46%        53.51%
            Very good      41.84%     42.25% 41.71%       31.43% 41.30%          42.27%
            Excellent      30.78%     31.42% 30.57%       10.06% 15.95%          16.71%                                18.14% 26.37%             27.05%
 Marital    Coupled        67.21%     73.88% 64.97%       52.46% 69.89%          77.82%                                53.18% 71.04%             74.97%
 Status     Single         32.79%     26.12% 35.03%       47.54% 30.11%          22.72%                                46.82% 28.96%             25.03%
Note: HRS and SCF education is based on years of schooling (college grad is exactly 16 years and post-grad is more than 16 years). VRI education is based on
degree attainment. SCF health has a four-point scale, while VRI and HRS health have five-point scales. HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.



Table A-C7. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Fraction with College Degree by Age
                     VRI                              HRS                           SCF
              Employer-              Individual   Age     VRI     VRI eligible,                    Age        VRI     VRI eligible,
 Age   Total  sponsored              client     Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset                  Eligible    Eligible 401(k) subset
 55-64 68.38% 57.61%                 78.69%     32.12% 48.92%       50.30%                       40.83%      61.96%     60.04%
 65-74 73.08% 66.83%                 74.18%     26.67% 46.78%       55.18%                       39.48%      66.64%     68.12%
 75-   69.52% 54.27%                 69.82%     21.28% 46.03%       64.19%                       20.85%      52.82%     29.06%
Note: Education is based on attainment. HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C8. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Fraction with Very Good or Excellent Health by Age
                     VRI                              HRS                                  SCF
                   Employer- Individual    Age       VRI       VRI eligible,     Age       VRI      VRI eligible,
 Age     Total     sponsored client      Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset       Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset
 55-64 75.61% 73.43%           77.70%    43.82% 57.82%           59.73%         19.81% 25.92%          24.77%
 65-74 75.35% 74.30%           75.54%    43.69% 58.74%           57.26%         23.67% 32.43%          38.77%
 75-     61.13% 74.29%         60.87%    34.85% 51.38%           56.25%         10.96% 8.91%            0.28%
Note: SCF does not have ‘Very Good’ category, so the fraction captures respondents with Excellent health only. HRS and SCF
tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C9. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Fraction Married or Partnered by Age
                     VRI                              HRS                                 SCF
                Employer- Individual       Age      VRI    VRI eligible,                           Age        VRI         VRI eligible,
 Age   Total    sponsored client         Eligible Eligible 401(k) subset                         Eligible    Eligible     401(k) subset
 55-64 66.05% 73.72%        58.69%       58.88% 72.05%       77.28%                              58.45%      71.78%         73.27%
 65-74 68.65% 74.82%        67.57%       56.60% 69.95%       79.06%                              56.26%      72.70%         78.88%
 75-   66.26% 65.72%        66.26%       36.46% 60.74%       80.57%                              40.23%      60.82%         97.12%
Note: HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling weights.
Table A-C10. Effect of Imposing VRI Sampling Screens: Retirement Rate by Age
                           VRI                                            HRS                                              SCF
                       Employer-       Individual        Age           VRI          VRI eligible,          Age         VRI     VRI eligible,
 Age         Total     sponsored       Client          Eligible       Eligible      401(k) subset         Eligible    Eligible 401(k) subset
 All        55.80%       17.78%        68.52%           63.99%         53.23%         36.70%              56.56%      33.92%     16.87%
 55-59       9.43%        4.57%        14.75%           24.42%         19.61%         13.84%              19.88%       7.65%      5.34%
 60-64      26.68%       12.39%        38.86%           50.25%         42.05%         34.10%              38.62%      24.56%     15.90%
 65-69      62.14%       34.13%        69.91%           76.50%         73.16%         66.15%              59.72%      44.39%     34.15%
 70-74      81.23%       57.96%        83.31%           87.18%         85.16%         80.70%              77.06%      67.07%     49.44%
 75-100     91.38%       74.29%        91.72%           91.57%         92.95%         90.84%              92.16%      87.37%     69.44%
Note: HRS retirement rate includes respondents with partial retirement. For SCF retirement rate variable ‘OCCAT1’ in the public version of data is used.
Households are defined to be retired if ‘OCCAT1=3’, which also includes disabled, age +65 and not working, etc. HRS and SCF tabulations use sampling
weights.
                                  The Wealth of Wealthholders

                                         December 2014

                      Appendix D. Estimating Retirement/Wealth Relationship

HRS sample. Table A-D1 shows how many observations we lose in the HRS by imposing each

additional condition on samples used. As we have seen from Table 5, the majority of the HRS

samples are older than 65. Among those households in which the main breadwinner satisfies the

age condition, some are retired while some have dual main breadwinners. In addition, for many

households that are not retired, responses for the expected retirement age are missing. 1 All of

these conditions account for the small sample size used in the HRS.

LOESS curve and scatter plots including outliers. In Figure A-D1, we show the estimated

relationship between retirement plan and wealth from the VRI (Panel A) and the HRS (Panel B)

for the full range.

Estimation with future DB pension and Social Security income included in the normalized

wealth. In the LOESS estimation in Section 5, expected DB pension and Social Security income

are included as a control (𝑌𝑖𝑅 ). Here, we estimate another version of the model where we define

the normalized wealth as the sum of the replacement rate from the annuitizable financial wealth

and that from the expected annuity income (𝑌𝑖𝑅 ). Figure A-D2 shows the distribution of newly

defined normalized wealth and Figure A-D3 shows the new LOESS estimates. For both figures,

Panel A is for the entire sample used in Section 5. Panel B is for the employer-sponsored

subsets.




1
 Some breadwinners who are not retired report that they are not currently working, leading to
missing responses for expected retirement age. In addition, questions about retirement age are
asked only when the respondents said that they plan to retire or stop working.
       Figure A-D2A shows that the VRI sample still has higher replacement rates, though the

gap is less stark than in Figure 3A. The VRI has many observations in the range between 1 and

2, while for the HRS, most of the observations have normalized wealth smaller than 1. The

LOESS estimate (Figure A-D3A) shows basically the same relationship as the baseline model

(Figure 4A). With the VRI sample, we can estimate a negative and statistically significant

relationship for a wider range (between 0 and 2), while the HRS sample shows a steeper slope up

to about 0.5 but then becomes flat and statistically insignificant. With the employer-sponsored

subset, the distributions of normalized wealth are pretty similar across the VRI and HRS (Figure

A-D2B). Figure A-D3B shows that conditioning on this subset does not affect the estimated

relationship between wealth and retirement plan for the VRI, while for the HRS, the estimates

get very noisy due to the small number of observations.
Table A-D1. HRS Sample Size for Retirement Horizon Analysis: Effect of Each Condition

Condition                                   Number of observations
(1) None                                    11,595
(2) Main breadwinner age ≤ 65               5,206
(3) (2) + Main breadwinner not retired,
No dual breadwinner                         2,442
(4) (3) + Have expected retirement age      1,053
Figure A-D1. Retirement horizon versus normalized financial wealth: LOESS
(full range of data)
A. VRI




B. HRS
Figure A-D2. Distribution of normalized financial wealth (including future DB pension and SS
income)
A. VRI vs HRS




B. VRI employer-sponsored versus HRS 401(k) subset
Figure A-D3. Retirement horizon versus normalized financial wealth: LOESS
(Normalized wealth including future DB pension and SS income)
A. VRI vs HRS




Note: x denotes HRS (orange) and o denotes VRI (blue).
B. VRI employer-sponsored versus HRS 401(k) subset




Note: x denotes HRS (orange) and o denotes VRI (blue).
