                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

     OPTIMAL CONTRACTING, CORPORATE FINANCE, AND VALUATION WITH
                    INALIENABLE HUMAN CAPITAL

                                        Patrick Bolton
                                         Neng Wang
                                        Jinqiang Yang

                                     Working Paper 20979
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20979

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge MA 02138
                           February 2015, Revised March 2019


This paper was previously circulated under the title, “A Theory of Liquidity and Risk
Management Based on the Inalienability of Risky Human Capital.” We thank Bruno Biais
(Editor), Associate Editor, and two anonymous referees for very thoughtful and detailed
comments. We also thank Hengjie Ai, Marco Bassetto, Philip Bond, Michael Brennan, Henry
Cao, Vera Chau, Wei Cui, Peter DeMarzo, Darrell Duffie, Lars Peter Hansen, Oliver Hart,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Guy Laroque, David Matsa, Jianjun Miao, Adriano Rampini, Richard
Roll, Yuliy Sannikov, Tom Sargent, Raghu Sundaram, Suresh Sundaresan, Ren´e Stulz, Mark
Westerfield, Jeff Zwiebel, and seminar participants at the American Finance Association
meetings (Boston), Boston University, Caltech, Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University, Duke University, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, Georgia State University, Harvard University, McGill University, Michigan State
University, National University of Singapore, New York University Stern School of Business,
Northeastern University, Ohio State University, Princeton University, Sargent SRG Group,
Singapore Management University, Summer Institute of Finance Conference (2014), Shanghai
Advanced Institute of Finance, Shanghai University of Finance & Economics, Stanford Business
School, Tsinghua University, University of British Columbia, University of Calgary, University
College London, University of Hong Kong, University of Oxford, University of Rochester,
University of South Carolina, University of Texas Dallas, University of Toronto, University of
Washington, Washington University, St. Louis, the Wharton School, Zhejiang University, and the
workshops hosted by the China Young Finance Scholars Society for helpful comments. Jinqiang
Yang acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(#71522008, #71472117, #71772112), Innovative Research Team of Shanghai University of
Finance and Economics (#2016110241), and Fok Ying-Tong Education Foundation of China
(#151086). First draft: 2012. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Contracting, Corporate Finance, and Valuation with Inalienable Human Capital
Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20979
February 2015, Revised March 2019
JEL No. G3,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

A risk-averse entrepreneur with access to a profitable venture needs to raise funds from investors.
She cannot indefinitely commit her human capital to the venture, which limits the firm’s debt
capacity, distorts investment and compensation, and constrains the entrepreneur’s risk-sharing.
This puts dynamic liquidity and state-contingent risk allocation at the center of corporate
financial management. The firm balances mean-variance investment efficiency and the
preservation of financial slack. We show that in general the entrepreneur’s net worth is
overexposed to idiosyncratic risk and underexposed to systematic risk. These distortions are
greater the closer the firm is to exhausting its debt capacity.

Patrick Bolton                                   Jinqiang Yang
Columbia Business School                         Shanghai University of Finance
804 Uris Hall                                    and Economics
New York, NY 10027                               Guoding Rd. 777
and NBER                                         Shanghai, 200433
pb2208@columbia.edu                              China
                                                 yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
Consider a risk-averse entrepreneur who has access to a profitable venture with an initial capital
stock K0 . This entrepreneur needs to raise start-up funds and on occasion additional working
capital from investors. In a first-best Modigliani-Miller environment, the entrepreneur would be
able to diversify away her idiosyncratic risk, fully pledge the market value of her venture, and
raise funds from investors against a promised competitive risk-adjusted return. However, if the
entrepreneur is essential to the venture and cannot irrevocably dedicate her human capital to the
firm, the promised return may not be credible. We show that this inalienability of the entrepreneur’s
human capital, or what is also commonly referred to as key-man risk, has critical implications not
only for the firm’s financing capacity, investment, and compensation, but also for its liquidity and
risk management policy. The larger is a firm’s liquidity or the larger is its borrowing capacity, the
greater is its ability to retain talent by making credible compensation promises. In addition, by
managing the firm’s exposures to idiosyncratic and aggregate risk, the firm can reduce both the
cost of retaining talent and the cost of financing.
   In sum, our paper offers a new theory of corporate liquidity and risk management based on the
inalienability of risky human capital. Even when there are no capital market frictions, corporations
add value by optimally managing risk and liquidity because doing so allows them to reduce the
cost of key-man risk to investors. This rationale for corporate risk and liquidity management is
particularly relevant for technology firms where key-man risk is acute.
   The main building blocks of our model are as follows. The entrepreneur has constant relative
risk-averse preferences and seeks to smooth consumption. The firm’s operations are exposed to
both idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. The firm’s capital is illiquid and is exposed to stochastic
depreciation. It can be accumulated through investments that are subject to adjustment costs.
The entrepreneur faces risk with respect to both the firm’s performance and her outside options.
To retain the entrepreneur, the firm optimally compensates her by smoothing her consumption and
limiting her risk exposure. To be able to do so, however, the firm must manage its liquidity and
risk allocation. The firm’s optimized balance sheet is composed of illiquid capital, K, and cash or
marketable securities, S, on the asset side, and equity and a line of credit (when S is negative),
with a limit that depends on the entrepreneur’s outside option, on the liability side.
   The solution to this problem has the following key elements. The entrepreneur manages the
firm’s risk by choosing optimal loadings on the idiosyncratic and market risk factors. The firm’s
liquidity is augmented through retained earnings from operations and through returns from its
portfolio of marketable securities, including its hedging and insurance positions. The scaled state
variable is the firm’s liquidity-to-capital ratio s = S/K. When liquidity is abundant (s is large), the
firm is essentially unconstrained and can choose its policies to maximize its market value (or equiv-
alently the entrepreneur’s net worth). The firm’s investment policy then approaches the Hayashi
(1982) risk-adjusted first-best benchmark, and its consumption and asset allocations approach the
generalized Merton (1971) consumption and mean-variance portfolio rules. In particular, the en-
trepreneur is completely insulated from idiosyncratic risk.
   In contrast, when the firm exhausts its credit limit, its single objective is to ensure that the


                                                  2
entrepreneur gets at least as much as her outside option, which is achieved by optimally preserving
liquidity s and eliminating the volatility of s at the endogenously determined debt limit s. As one
would expect, preserving liquidity requires cutting investment and consumption, engaging in asset
sales, and lowering the systematic risk exposure of the entrepreneur’s net worth. More surprisingly,
preserving financial slack also involves retaining some exposure to idiosyncratic risk. That is,
relative to the first-best, the entrepreneur’s net worth is overexposed to idiosyncratic risk and
underexposed to systematic risk, as this helps reduce (or even eliminate) the volatility of s.
   In short, the risk management problem of the firm boils down to a compromise between achieving
mean-variance efficiency for the entrepreneur’s net worth and preserving the firm’s financial slack.
The latter is the dominant consideration when liquidity s is low.
   The first model to explore the corporate finance consequences of inalienable human capital is
Hart and Moore (1994). They consider an optimal financial contract between an entrepreneur and
and outside investors to finance a single project with a finite horizon and no cash-flow uncertainty.
Both the entrepreneur and investors are assumed to have linear utility functions. They argue that
the inalienability of the entrepreneur’s human capital implies that debt is an optimal financial
contract.
   We generalize the Hart and Moore (1994) model in several important directions. Our first
generalization is to consider an infinitely lived firm, with ongoing investment subject to adjustment
costs, and an entrepreneur with a strictly concave utility function. While the firm’s financing
constraint is always binding in Hart and Moore (1994), in our model the financing constraint is
generically nonbinding; because it is optimal to smooth investment and consumption, the firm does
not want to run through its stock of liquidity in one go. This naturally gives rise to a theory of
liquidity management even when there is no uncertainty. We describe this special case in Section
VII. Our second generalization is to introduce both idiosyncratic and aggregate risk, which leads to
a theory of corporate risk management that links classical intertemporal asset pricing and portfolio
choice theory with corporate liquidity demand. Investors set the market price of risk, which the
entrepreneur takes as given in determining the firm’s optimal risk exposures and how they should
vary with the firm’s stock of liquidity. By generalizing the Hart and Moore (1994) model to
include ongoing investment, consumption smoothing, uncertainty, and risk aversion for both the
entrepreneur and investors, we are able to show that inalienability of human capital gives rise not
only to a theory of debt capacity, but also a dynamic theory of liquidity and risk management that
is fundamentally connected to the entrepreneur’s optimal compensation.
   The objective of corporate risk management in our analysis is not achieving an optimal risk-
return profile for investors, they can do that on their own, but rather offering optimal risk-return
profiles to risk-averse, underdiversified key employees (the entrepreneur in our setting) with inalien-
able human capital constraint. In our setup the firm is, in effect, both the employer and the asset
manager for its key employees. This perspective on corporate risk management is consistent with
Duchin, Gilbert, Harford, and Hrdlicka (2017), who find that nonfinancial firms invest 40% of their
liquid savings in risky financial assets. They find that the less constrained firms invest more in


                                                  3
the market portfolio, which is consistent with our predictions. In addition, when firms are severely
financially constrained, we show that they cut compensation, reduce corporate investment, engage
in asset sales, and reduce hedging positions, with the primary objective of surviving by honoring
liabilities and retaining key employees. These latter predictions are in line with the findings of
Donangelo (2014), Rampini, Sufi, and Viswanathan (2014), and Brown and Matsa (2016).
   The objective of corporate liquidity management in our model is not avoiding costly exter-
nal financing, but rather compensation smoothing, which requires maintaining liquidity buffers in
low productivity states. This motive generally outweighs the countervailing investment financing
motive of Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993), which prescribes building liquidity buffers in high
productivity states, where investment opportunities are good. If the firm finds itself in the low
productivity state, we show that it is optimal for the entrepreneur to take a pay cut, consistent
with the evidence on executive compensation and corporate cash holdings (e.g., Ganor (2013)). It
is possible for the firm to impose a pay cut because in a low productivity state the entrepreneur’s
outside options are also worth less. It is also optimal to sell insurance in a low productivity state
to generate valuable liquidity. The optimality of selling insurance when productivity is low is not
driven by risk-shifting incentives as in Jensen and Meckling (1976), but rather by the firm’s need
to replenish liquidity. Asset sales in response to a negative productivity shock (also optimal in our
setting) are commonly emphasized (Campello, Giambona, Graham, and Harvey, 2011). But our
analysis further explains why it is also optimal to sell insurance and cut pay in response to low
productivity shocks.
    Our theory is particularly relevant for human-capital intensive, high-tech firms. These firms
often hold substantial cash and employee stock-option pools. We explain why these pools may be
necessary to make future compensation promises credible and thereby retain highly valued employ-
ees. When stock options vest and are exercised, companies generally engage in stock repurchases
to avoid excessive stock dilution. But such repurchase programs require funding, which partly
explains why these companies hold such large liquidity buffers.
   We show that the firm’s optimal liquidity and risk management problem can also be reformu-
lated as a dual optimal-contracting problem between a well-diversified risk-averse investor and an
entrepreneur with inalienable human capital. In the contracting formulation, the state variables
are the certainty-equivalent wealth W that the investor promises to the entrepreneur and the firm’s
capital stock K. Analogous to our primal formulation, the ratio w = W/K is the scaled state
variable that describes how constrained the firm is.
   As Table I summarizes, this dual contracting problem is equivalent to the entrepreneur’s liq-
uidity and risk management problem: s = −p(w), where p(w) is the investor’s scaled value in the
contracting problem, and w = m(s), where m(s) is the entrepreneur’s scaled certainty-equivalent
wealth in the liquidity and risk management problem. A key observation here is that the credit
constraint s ≥ s is the outcome of an optimal financial contracting problem under the entrepreneur
inalienability constraint for w ≥ w.
   Ai and Li (2015) consider a closely related contracting problem. They characterize optimal CEO


                                                 4
                                              Table I
          Equivalence: Primal Optimization and Dual Contracting Problems



                                                Primal           Dual
                                              Optimization    Contracting
                            State Variable            s             w
                            Value Function           m(s)         p(w)



compensation and corporate investment under limited commitment, but they do not consider the
implementation of the contract through corporate liquidity and risk management policies. Their
formulation differs from ours in two other important respects. First, they assume that investors are
risk-neutral, so that they cannot make a meaningful distinction between idiosyncratic and aggregate
risk. Second, their limited commitment assumption does not take the form of a constraint on
the inalienability of human capital. In their setup the entrepreneur is assumed to abscond with
the firm’s capital, and when she does so she can only continue operating under autarky. In our
setup, in contrast, the entrepreneur is free to leave and therefore can offer her human capital
to another firm under an optimal contract. Ai and Li’s (2015) limited commitment assumption
leads to substantially different predictions. First, autarky is such a severe punishment (because
the entrepreneur is then fully exposed to the firm’s operating risk) that the limited commitment
constraint barely binds and may not result in any distortions in investment and consumption.
Even with a relatively low risk aversion coefficient for an entrepreneur the first-best outcome is
attainable. Second, for low risk aversion, the dynamics of the entrepreneur’s consumption are
such that consumption is constant as long as the limited commitment constraint does not bind
and adjusts up only when the constraint is binding. In our model, in contrast, the inalienability
of human capital constraint distorts consumption, investment, and risk exposures even for high
coefficients of risk aversion for the entrepreneur. Moreover, these policies respond smoothly to
changes in the firm’s liquidity. We provide a detailed discussion of the difference between the
autarky and the recontracting assumptions in Section V.F.
   Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) develop a limited-commitment-based theory of risk
management that focuses on the tradeoff between exploiting current versus future investment op-
portunities. If the firm invests today, it may exhaust its debt capacity and thereby forgo future
investment opportunities. If instead the firm forgoes investment and hoards its cash, it is in a
position to be able to exploit potentially more profitable investment opportunities in the future.
The difference between our theory and theirs is mainly due to our assumptions of risk aversion for
the entrepreneur and investors, our modeling of limited commitment in the form of risky inalienable
human capital, and our assumption of physical capital illiquidity via q theory of investment. We
focus on a different aspect of corporate liquidity and risk management, namely, the management


                                                 5
of risky human capital and key-man risk. In particular, we emphasize the benefits of risk manage-
ment to help smooth the consumption of the firm’s stakeholders (entrepreneur, managers, and key
employees).
       Berk, Stanton and Zechner (2010) analyze a model in which the firm trades off the tax benefits of
debt and the cost of under insuring risk-averse employees. Building on Merton’s intertemporal port-
folio choice framework, Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012) study a risk-averse entrepreneur’s optimal
consumption-savings, portfolio choice, and capital accumulation decisions when facing uninsurable
capital and productivity risks. Unlike Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012), our model features opti-
mal liquidity and risk management policies that arise endogenously from an underlying financial
contracting problem.
       Our theory has elements in common with the literature on contracting under limited commit-
ment following Harris and Holmström (1982). Harris and Holmström (1982) analyze a model of
optimal insurance for a risk-averse worker who is unable to commit to a long-term contract. Lustig,
Syverson, and Nieuwerburgh (2011) build on Harris and Holmström (1982) by incorporating or-
ganizational capital. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) consider the asset pricing implications of
limited commitment and organizational capital risk.
       In terms of methodology, our paper builds on previous studies of the dynamic contracting
in continuous time including Holmström and Milgrom (1987), Schaettler and Sung (1993), and
Sannikov (2008), among others. Our model is closely related to the dynamic corporate security
design literature in the vein of DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet
(2007), and DeMarzo and Fishman (2007b).1 As in DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti,
Rochet, and Villeneuve (2010), and DeMarzo, Fishman, He, and Wang (2012), our continuous-
time formulation allows us to provide sharper closed-form solutions for consumption, investment,
liquidity, and risk management policies, up to an ordinary differential equation (ODE) for investors’
scaled value p(w). These papers also focus on the implementation of the optimal contracting
solution via corporate liquidity (cash and credit line) and (inside and outside) equity. Two key
differences are 1) risk aversion and 2) systematic and idiosyncratic risk, which together lead to a
theory of the firm’s off-balance-sheet (zero-NPV) futures and insurance positions in addition to the
“marketable securities” entry on corporate balance sheets. A third difference is that these papers
focus on dynamic moral hazard, while we focus on the inalienability of risky human capital. A
fourth difference is our generalization of the q-theory of investment to settings with inalienable
human capital.2
       Our theory is also related to the liquidity asset pricing theory of Holmström and Tirole (2001).
We significantly advance their agenda of developing an asset pricing/portfolio choice theory based
on corporate liquidity. They consider a three-period model with risk-neutral agents, where firms
   1
    See also Biais, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2010) and Piskorski and Tchistyi (2010), among others. Biais,
Mariotti, and Rochet (2013) and Sannikov (2013) provide recent surveys of this literature. For static security design
models, see Townsend (1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985), Innes (1990), and Holmström and Tirole (1997).
  2
    DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a), Biais, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2010), and DeMarzo, Fishman, He and
Wang (2012) incorporate investment into dynamic agency models.



                                                         6
are financially constrained and therefore have higher value when they hold more liquidity. Their
assumptions of risk-neutrality and no consumption smoothing limit the integration of asset pricing
and corporate finance theories.
       There is also an extensive macroeconomics literature on limited commitment.3 Green (1987),
Thomas and Worrall (1990), Marcet and Marimon (1992), Kehoe and Levine (1993), and Kocher-
lakota (1996) are important early contributions on optimal contracting under limited commitment.
Alvarez and Jermann (2000) extend welfare theorems to economies with limited commitment. Our
entrepreneur’s optimization problem is related to the agent’s dynamic optimization problem in Al-
varez and Jermann (2000) and Chien and Lustig (2010) by allowing for recontracting after default.
While their focus is on optimal consumption allocation, we focus on consumption, liquidity, and
risk allocation, as well as on corporate investment.
       Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004), Quadrini (2004), Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), and
Lorenzoni and Walentin (2007) characterize financing and investment decisions under limited com-
mitment or asymmetric information. Kehoe and Perri (2002) and Albuquerque (2003) analyze the
implications of limited commitment for international business cycles and foreign direct investment.
Miao and Zhang (2015) develop a duality-based solution method for limited commitment problems.
       Our analysis also contributes to the executive compensation literature (see Frydman and Jenter
(2010) and Edmans and Gabaix (2016) for recent surveys). Our model brings out an important
positive link between (1) executive compensation and (2) corporate liquidity and risk management,
and helps explain why companies typically cut compensation and investment, and reduce risk
exposures when liquidity is tight. DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and
Rochet (2007), and DeMarzo, Fishman, He, and Wang (2012) also provide financial implementation
with cash and/or a credit line and link to executive compensation.4
       Finally, our paper is related to the voluminous economics literature on human capital that
builds on Ben-Porath (1967) and Becker (1975).
       The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In Section I we introduce our model. In
Section II we present the first-best solution. In Section III we present the solution for our model
with inalienable human capital. In Section IV we present the optimal contracting problem that
is dual to the optimal liquidity and risk management problem of Section II. Section V provides
quantitative analysis. Section VI generalizes the baseline model of Section II to allow for persistent
productivity shocks. Section VII relates the deterministic formulation of our model to Hart and
Moore (1994). In Section VIII, we analyze the two-sided limited-commitment model. Section IX
concludes.
   3
   See Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004) Part V for a textbook treatment of limited commitment models.
   4
   See Stulz (1984, 1996), Smith and Stulz (1985), and Tufano (1996) for early work on the link between corporate
hedging and executive compensation.




                                                       7
                                              I. The Model
    We consider an intertemporal optimization problem faced by a risk-averse entrepreneur who
cannot irrevocably promise to operate the firm indefinitely under all circumstances. This inalien-
ability problem for the entrepreneur results in endogenous financial constraints that distort her
consumption, savings, investment, and exposures to systematic and idiosyncratic risks. To best
highlight the central economic mechanism arising from the inalienability of human capital, we
abstract from all other financial frictions from the model and assume that financial markets are
competitive and that all state-contingent claims can be traded frictionlessly.

A. Production Technology and Preferences
Production and Capital Accumulation. The firm’s capital stock K evolves according to a controlled
geometric Brownian motion (GBM) process,
                                                              p                        
                        dKt = (It − δK Kt )dt + σK Kt              1 − ρ2 dZh,t + ρdZm,t ,                       (1)

where I is the firm’s rate of gross investment, δK ≥ 0 is the expected rate of depreciation, and σK is
the volatility of the capital depreciation shock.5 Without loss of generality, we decompose risk into
two orthogonal components: an idiosyncratic shock represented by the standard Brownian motion
Zh and a systematic shock represented by the standard Brownian motion Zm .6 The parameter
ρ measures the correlation between the firm’s capital risk and systematic risk, so that the firm’s
systematic volatility is equal to ρσK and its idiosyncratic volatility is given by
                                                          p
                                               ν K = σK       1 − ρ2 .                                           (2)

The capital stock includes both physical capital and intangible capital (such as patents, know-how,
brand value, and organizational capital).
    As in Hart and Moore (1994), production requires combining the entrepreneur’s inalienable
human capital and the firm’s physical assets. If either the entrepreneur’s human capital or the
firm’s physical capital is missing, no output is produced and no value creation is possible. In other
words, value is created by matching the entrepreneur’s human capital and the firm’s physical capital
stock. The entrepreneur’s human capital is captured by the parameter A. Human capital is more
valuable when it is deployed on a larger capital stock Kt . More specifically, we assume that the
firm’s output produced by the match is given by AKt . This formulation captures the idea that the
value-added of the entrepreneur’s human capital is risky to the extent that the firm’s capital Kt is
risky. In Section VI we generalize our model to introduce shocks to productivity A. An important
   5
     Stochastic capital accumulation processes have been widely used in corporate finance, asset pricing, and macroe-
conomics. Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985), Jones and Manuelli (2005), Albuquerque and Wang (2008), and Brunner-
meier and Sannikov (2014) are examples in general equilibrium with agency and financial constraints.
   6
     The subscripts h and m for the two standard Brownian motions refer to idiosyncratic hedgeable risk and system-
atic market risk.



                                                          8
simplifying assumption throughout our analysis is that the entrepreneur’s human capital is always
best matched with the firm’s physical capital stock, so that there is no separation under the optimal
contract.7
       Investment involves an adjustment cost as in the standard q-theory of investment, so that the
firm’s free cash flow (net of capital costs but before consumption) is given by

                                            Yt = AKt − It − G(It , Kt ),                                              (3)

where the price of the investment good is normalized to one and G(I, K) is the standard adjustment
cost function. Note that Yt can take negative values, which simply means that additional financing
may be needed to close the gap between contemporaneous revenue, AKt , and total investment
costs.
    We further assume that the adjustment cost G(I, K) is homogeneous of degree one in I and K
(a common assumption in the q-theory of investment) and express G(I, K) as

                                                  G (I, K) = g(i)K,                                                   (4)

where i = I/K denotes the investment-capital ratio and g(i) is increasing and convex in i. As
Hayashi (1982) has shown, this homogeneity property implies that Tobin’s average and marginal
q are equal in the first-best benchmark.8 As we will show, however, under inalienability of human
capital an endogenous wedge between Tobin’s average and marginal q will emerge.9
Preferences. The infinitely lived entrepreneur has a standard concave utility function over positive
consumption flows {Ct ; t ≥ 0} as given by
                                                  Z    ∞                        
                                                             −ζ(v−t)
                                        Jt = Et             ζe           U (Cv )dv ,                                  (5)
                                                    t

where ζ > 0 is the entrepreneur’s subjective discount rate, Et [ · ] is the time-t conditional expecta-
tion, and U (C) takes the standard constant relative risk averse utility (CRRA) form

                                                                     C 1−γ
                                                   U (C) =                 ,                                          (6)
                                                                     1−γ

with γ > 0 denoting the coefficient of relative risk aversion. We normalize the flow payoff with ζ
in (5), so that the utility flow is given by ζU (C).10
   7
     Note that since there is no separation in equilibrium, we do not have to specify the firm’s second-best use of its
physical capital.
   8
     Lucas and Prescott (1971) analyze dynamic investment decisions with convex adjustment costs, though they
do not explicitly link their results to marginal or average q. Abel and Eberly (1994) extend Hayashi (1982) to a
stochastic environment and a more general specification of adjustment costs.
   9
     An endogenous wedge between Tobin’s average and marginal q also arises in cash-based models such as Bolton,
Chen, and Wang (2011) and optimal contracting models such as DeMarzo, Fishman, He, and Wang (2012).
  10
     This normalization is convenient in contracting models (see Sannikov (2008)). We can generalize these preferences
to allow for a coefficient of relative risk aversion that is different from the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution, as in Epstein and Zin (1989). Indeed, as Epstein-Zin preferences are homothetic, allowing for such


                                                                 9
B. Complete Financial Markets
    We assume that financial markets are perfectly competitive and complete. By using essentially
the same argument as in the Black-Merton-Scholes option pricing framework, we can dynamically
complete markets with three long-lived assets (Harrison and Kreps (1979) and Duffie and Huang
(1985)). Specifically, given that the firm’s production is subject to two shocks, Zh and Zm , finan-
cial markets are dynamically complete if the following three nonredundant financial assets can be
dynamically and frictionlessly traded:
    1) A risk-free asset that pays interest at a constant risk-free rate r.
    2) A hedging contract that is perfectly correlated with the idiosyncratic shock Zh . There is no
up-front cost to enter this hedging contract as the risk involved is purely idiosyncratic and thus
the counterparty earns no risk premium. The transaction at inception is therefore off the balance
sheet. The instantaneous payoff for each unit of the contract is νK dZh,t .
    3) A stock market portfolio. The incremental return dRm,t of this asset is

                                          dRm,t = µm dt + σm dZm,t ,                                             (7)

where µm and σm are constant drift and volatility parameters. As this risky asset is subject only
to the systematic shock, we refer to it as the market portfolio.
    Dynamic and frictionless trading with these three securities implies that the following unique
stochastic discount factor (SDF) exists (e.g., Duffie (2001)):

                                            dMt
                                                = −rdt − ηdZm,t ,                                                (8)
                                             Mt

where M0 = 1 and η is the Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio as given by

                                                        µm − r
                                                  η=           .                                                 (9)
                                                         σm

The SDF M follows a geometric Brownian motion (GBM) where the drift is equal to the negative
risk-free rate, as required under no-arbitrage. By definition the SDF is exposed only to the sys-
tematic shock Zm . Fully diversified investors demand a risk premium only for their exposures to
systematic shocks.
Dynamic Trading. Let {St ; t ≥ 0} denote the entrepreneur’s liquid wealth process. When St > 0,
the entrepreneur’s savings are positive and when St < 0, she is a borrower. The entrepreneur
continuously allocates St between the risk-free asset and the stock market portfolio Φm,t , whose
return is given by (7). Moreover, the entrepreneur chooses a pure idiosyncratic-risk hedging position
Φh,t . Her liquid wealth St thus evolves according to

                dSt = (rSt + Yt − Ct )dt + Φh,tνK dZh,t + Φm,t [(µm − r)dt + σm dZm,t ] .                       (10)
preferences in our model will not increase the dimensionality of the optimization problem. Details are available upon
request.



                                                         10
The first term in (10), rSt + Yt − Ct, is simply the sum of the interest income rSt and net operating
cash flows, Yt − Ct . The second term, Φh,tνK dZh,t , is the exposure to the idiosyncratic shock Zh ,
which earns no risk premium. The third term, Φm,t [(µm − r)dt + σm dZm,t ], is the excess payoff
from the market portfolio.
    In the absence of any risk exposure, rSt + Yt − Ct is simply the rate at which the entrepreneur
saves as in standard permanent-income models. However, in general, saving all liquid wealth S at
the risk-free rate is sub optimal. By dynamically engaging in risk-taking and risk management,
through the risk exposures Φh and Φm , the entrepreneur will do better.
    Next, we use dynamic programming to characterize the firm’s liquidity and risk management
policies.

C. Dynamic Programming
    Let J(K, S) denote the entrepreneur’s value function. The entrepreneur’s liquid wealth S
and illiquid productive capital K play different roles and accordingly both serve as natural state
variables. By the standard dynamic programming argument, the solution for J(K, S) in the interior
region is characterized by the following Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation:

 ζJ(K, S) =     max        ζU (C) + (rS + Φm (µm − r) + AK − I − G(I, K) − C)JS (K, S)
              C,I,Φh ,Φm
                                             2 K2
                                            σK
                       + (I − δK K)JK (K, S) +    JKK (K, S)
                                              2
                          2
                                                        (νK Φh )2 + (σm Φm )2
                       + νK Φh + ρσK σm Φm KJKS (K, S) +                       JSS (K, S) . (11)
                                                                   2

The first term on the right side of (11) represents the entrepreneur’s utility over consumption. The
second term is the product of the marginal value of liquidity, JS (K, S), and the savings rate for
S. The third term is the product of net investment, (I − δK K), and the marginal value of capital
JK (K, S)). The last three terms (involving JKK (K, S), JKS (K, S), and JSS (K, S)) correspond to
the quadratic-variation and co-variation effects of K and S.
    The entrepreneur chooses consumption C, investment I, idiosyncratic risk hedge Φh , and market
portfolio allocation Φm to maximize her lifetime utility. With a concave utility function U (C),
optimal consumption is determined by the first-order condition (FOC)

                                         ζU ′ (C) = JS (K, S) ,                                 (12)

which equates the marginal utility of consumption ζU ′ (C) with JS (K, S), the marginal value of
liquid wealth. The FOC for investment I,

                                 (1 + GI (I, K)) JS (K, S) = JK (K, S) ,                        (13)

is somewhat less obvious. It equates (1) the marginal cost of investing in illiquid capital, given
by the product of the marginal cost of investing (1 + GI ) and the marginal value of liquid savings

                                                   11
JS (K, S), with (2) the entrepreneur’s marginal value of investing in illiquid capital JK (K, S).
       The optimal stock market portfolio allocation Φm satisfies the FOC

                                           η JS (K, S)    ρσK KJKS (K, S)
                                Φm = −                  −                 .                                        (14)
                                          σm JSS (K, S)    σm JSS (K, S)

The first term in (14) is in the spirit of Merton’s mean-variance demand and the second term is the
hedging demand with respect to the firm’s systematic risk exposure. Similarly, the optimal hedge
against idiosyncratic risk Φh is given by the FOC

                                                       KJKS (K, S)
                                             Φh = −                .                                               (15)
                                                        JSS (K, S)

Note that the numerators in both (14) and (15) involve the cross partial, JKS (K, S).
       Equations (11) to (15) jointly characterize the interior solution of the firm’s optimization prob-
lem.
The Entrepreneur’s Certainty-Equivalent Wealth M (K, S). A key step in our derivation is to
establish that the entrepreneur’s value function J(K, S) takes the following form:11

                                                       (bM (K, S))1−γ
                                          J(K, S) =                   ,                                            (16)
                                                            1−γ

where M (K, S) is the entrepreneur’s certainty-equivalent wealth and b is the constant:12
                                                                        γ−1
                                                                               γ
                                       1 1             1−γ            η2
                                   b=ζ  −                          r+               .                              (17)
                                       γ ζ              γ             2γ

In words, M (K, S) is the dollar amount that the entrepreneur would demand to permanently give
up her productive human capital and retire as a Merton-style consumer under complete markets.
By linking the entrepreneur’s value function J(K, S) to her certainty-equivalent wealth, M (K, S)
we are able to transform the entrepreneur’s payoff from the value function, J(K, S), to the certainty-
equivalent wealth, M (K, S).
       This transformation is conceptually important, as it allows us to measure payoffs in dollars and
thus makes the economics of the entrepreneur’s problem more intuitive. In particular, it is possible
to determine the marginal value of liquidity, MS (K, S), only after making the transformation from
J(K, S) to M (K, S). As we will show, the economics of the entrepreneur’s problem and the solution
to the entrepreneur’s liquidity and risk management problem are closely linked to the marginal value
of liquidity MS (K, S).
Reduction to One Dimension. An additional simplifying step is to exploit the model’s homogeneity
  11
     Our conjecture is guided by the twin observations that 1) the value function for the standard Merton portfolio-
choice problem (without illiquid assets) inherits the CRRA form of the agent’s utility function U ( · ) and, 2) the
entrepreneur’s problem is homogeneous in K and S.
  12
     We infer the value of b from the solution of Merton’s (1971) closely related consumption and portfolio
                                                                                                     h  choice prob-
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                    1        η2
lem under complete markets. Note also that for the special case in which γ = 1, we have b = ζ exp   ζ
                                                                                                        r+    2
                                                                                                                  −ζ   .



                                                         12
property to reduce the entrepreneur’s problem to one dimension. Scaling the variables expressed
in dollar units by Kt , we use lower-case letters to denote the following variables: consumption
ct = Ct /Kt , investment it = It /Kt , liquidity st = St /Kt , idiosyncratic risk hedge φh,t = Φh,t/Kt ,
and market portfolio position φm,t = Φm,t /Kt . We also express the entrepreneur’s certainty-
equivalent wealth M (Kt , St ) as
                                            M (Kt , St ) = m(st ) · Kt .                                     (18)

Endogenous Risk Aversion γe . To interpret our solution, it is helpful to introduce the following
measure of endogenous relative risk aversion for the entrepreneur, denoted by γe :

                                      JSS                        m(s)m′′ (s)
                             γe ≡ −       × M (K, S) = γm′ (s) −             ,                               (19)
                                      JS                           m′ (s)

where the equality follows from the homogeneity property. What economic insights does γe capture
and why do we introduce γe ? First, inalienability of human capital results in a form of endoge-
nous market incompleteness. Therefore, the entrepreneur’s endogenous risk aversion is captured
by the curvature of her value function J(K, S) rather than by her utility function U ( · ). We can
characterize the entrepreneur’s coefficient of endogenous absolute risk aversion using the standard
definition via her value function: −JSS (K, S)/JS (K, S). But how do we link this absolute risk
aversion measure to a relative risk aversion measure? We need to multiply absolute risk aver-
sion, −JSS (K, S)/JS (K, S), by an appropriate measure of the entrepreneur’s wealth. While there
is no well-defined market measure of the entrepreneur’s total wealth under inalienability, the en-
trepreneur’s certainty-equivalent wealth M (K, S) is a natural proxy. This motivates our definition
of γe in (19).13 We will show that the inalienability of human capital causes the entrepreneur to
be underdiversified and hence is effect more risk-averse, so that γe (s) > γ.14 The second equality
in (19) confirms this result, as her certainty-equivalent wealth m(s) is concave in s with m′ (s) > 1,
which we establish below.
    Next, we characterize the evolution of s given the policy functions φh (s), φm (s), c(s), and i(s).
Dynamics of the Liquidity Ratio {st : t ≥ 0}. Given policies c(s), i(s), φh (s), and φm (s), we can
express the dynamics for the liquidity ratio st using Ito’s formula as

                        dst = d(St /Kt ) = µs (st )dt + σhs (st )dZh,t + σm
                                                                          s
                                                                            (st )dZm,t ,                     (20)

where the idiosyncratic volatility function for st , σhs ( · ), and the systematic volatility function for
       s ( · ), are respectively given by
s t , σm

                                        σhs (s) = (φh (s) − s) νK ,                                          (21)
                                        s
                                       σm (s)    = φm (s)σm − ρσK s ,                                        (22)
  13
     See Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012) for a similar definition in a different setting where markets are exogenously
incomplete.
  14
     We will establish that under the first-best, we have γe (s) = γ.




                                                        13
and the drift function for st , µs ( · ), is given by

  µs (st ) = y(st ) + φm (st )(µm − r) − c(st ) + (r + δK − i(st ))st − (νK σhs (st ) + ρσK σm
                                                                                             s
                                                                                               (st )) ,          (23)

where yt = Yt /Kt is the scaled free cash flow (before consumption):

                                       y(st ) = A − i(st ) − g(i(st )) .                                         (24)

       Below, we discuss the first-best solution in Section II and the inalienability solution in Section
III. A key difference between the two solutions is the determination of the endogenous debt capac-
ity, which corresponds to the left boundary conditions. Inalienability causes debt capacity to be
much lower than the first-best level, which in turn causes policy functions to be nonlinear, as we
demonstrate in Section III.


                                      II. First-Best Solution
       In this section we present the first-best closed-form solution and provide a brief discussion
of the key economic insights. Appendix A provides the proof. Under the first-best, markets are
(dynamically) complete and the entrepreneur’s certainty-equivalent wealth coincides with the mark-
to-market valuation of her net worth. Moreover, the entrepreneur’s consumption and production
decisions can be separated.15
Investment, Tobin’s q, CAPM β, and Gordon Growth Formula. The market value of the firm’s
capital stock is QFt B = q F B Kt , where q F B is the endogenously determined Tobin average q. The
FOC for investment implies
                                               q F B = 1 + g ′ (iF B ) ,                                         (25)

which equates Tobin’s q to the marginal cost of investing, 1+g ′ (i). Adjustment costs create a wedge
between the value of installed capital and newly purchased capital, so that q F B 6= 1 in general.
       Under the first-best, financing policies are irrelevant. Therefore, consider a firm whose only
asset is its capital stock. Then this firm’s value is QFt B . Tobin’s average q, q F B , also satisfies the
following present value formula

                                                           A − i − g(i)
                                          q F B = max                    ,                                       (26)
                                                    i     rK − (i − δK )

where rK is the expected rate of return for the firm whose only asset is its capital stock:

                                   rK = r + ρησK = r + β F B × (µm − r) .                                        (27)
  15
     The first-best case can be solved either via dynamic programming as we do here or via the Arrow-Debreu complete
markets/Cox-Huang martingale approach. The intuition that consumption and production decisions are independent
is more transparent via the latter formulation. For brevity, we omit this formulation in this paper. See Duffie (2001)
for a textbook treatment.




                                                          14
Because of the SDF given in (8) and our model’s homogeneity property, the CAPM holds in our
model for the firm whose only asset is its capital stock, and β F B in (27) is the CAPM β for this
firm:
                                                           ρσK
                                                  βF B =       .                                               (28)
                                                            σm
    Equation (26) is the Gordon growth formula with an endogenously determined growth rate.
The numerator is the scaled free cash flow y = A − i − g(i) and the denominator is given by the
difference between the cost of capital rK and the free cash flow’s expected growth rate (iF B − δK ).
Equation (26) shows that the production side of our model generalizes Hayashi (1982) to situations
in which a firm faces both idiosyncratic and systematic risk, and where systematic risk commands
a risk premium.
    We can equivalently write formula (26) as follows:

                                                          A − i − g(i)
                                          q F B = max                  ,                                       (29)
                                                    i     r − (i − δ)

where δ is the risk-adjusted depreciation rate

                                                δ = δK + ρησK .                                                (30)

Note that (29) is the Gordon growth formula under the risk-neutral measure.16
    Having characterized investment and the value of capital, we next turn to consumption and
dynamic risk management. This part of our model is a generalized version of Merton (1969).
Consumption, Hedging, and Portfolio Choices. Because markets are dynamically complete, the
entrepreneur’s total wealth, MtF B , is equal to the sum of wealth St and the market value of capital
QFt B :
                            MtF B = St + QFt B = (st + q F B )Kt = mF B (st )Kt .                              (31)

    Scaled consumption is proportional to scaled net worth,
                                                                       
                                     cF B (s) = χmF B (s) = χ s + q F B ,                                      (32)

where χ is Merton’s marginal propensity to consume (MPC) and is given by
                                                              
                                           η2    −1         η2
                                      χ=r+    +γ      ζ −r−      .                                             (33)
                                           2γ               2γ

Because markets are complete and Modigliani-Miller conditions hold, the entrepreneur’s endogenous
relative risk aversion, defined in equation (19), is equal to γ.
  16
     By that we mean that δ is the capital depreciation rate under the risk-neutral measure: The gap δ − δK is equal
to the risk premium ρησK for capital shocks. The two Gordon growth formulae (26) and (29) are equivalent: the
CAPM implied by no arbitrage and the unique SDF given in (8) connect the two formulae under the physical and
the risk-neutral measures.




                                                        15
   The FOC for φhF B (st ) then yields

                                               φFh B (s) = −q F B .                              (34)

The entrepreneur completely neutralizes her idiosyncratic risk exposure (due to her long position
in the business venture) by going short and setting φFh B (s) = −q F B , leaving her net worth M F B
with zero net exposure to idiosyncratic risk Zh .
   Similarly, the FOC for φFmB (st ) yields

                                                    η
                                    φFmB (s) =         mF B (s) − β F B q F B .                  (35)
                                                   γσm

The first term in (35) achieves the target mean-variance aggregate risk exposure for her net worth
M F B and the second term, −β F B q F B , fully offsets the entrepreneur’s exposure to the aggregate
shock through the firm’s operations.
Total Wealth and Debt Capacity. Total wealth, Mt , evolves according to the following GBM process
                                                                      
                                                          η2       η
                              dMtF B   =   MtF B     r−χ+      dt + dZm,t .                      (36)
                                                          γ        γ

The entrepreneur’s net worth has zero net exposure to the idiosyncratic shock Zh,t under the first-
best. The debt capacity under the first-best is q F B per unit of capital, so that s ≥ −q F B and
m(s) ≥ m(−q F B ) = 0. Because the entrepreneur has access to a credit line up to q F B per unit of
capital at the risk-free rate r, she can achieve first-best consumption smoothing and investment,
attaining the maximal value of capital at q F B Kt and the maximal net worth mF B (s) given in (31).
   We next turn to the inalienability solution.


                        III. Inalienable Human Capital Solution
   In this section, we simplify the policy functions, derive the ODE for m(s), and characterize the
debt capacity under inalienable human capital.

A. Optimal Policy Functions and the ODE for m(s)
   Substituting the value function given by (16) into optimality conditions (12) to (15) and using
(18), we obtain the following policy functions in terms of the liquidity ratio s.
Consumption Ct and Corporate Investment It . The consumption policy is given by

                                            c(s) = χm′ (s)−1/γ m(s) ,                            (37)
             1    γ−1
where χ = ζ γ b    γ    is the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) under the first-best and is given
by (33). Under inalienability, consumption is nonlinear and depends on both the entrepreneur’s
certainty equivalent wealth, m(s), and the marginal value of wealth, m′ (s). Note that the en-


                                                         16
trepreneur’s consumption is increasing in liquidity s. This can be seen by differentiating c(s) with
respect to s and noting that m(s) is concave in s:
                                                                                     
                        ′            ′     1− γ1    1             −       1+ γ1
                       c (s) = χ m (s)             − m′′ (s)m′ (s)                  m(s) > 0.            (38)
                                                    γ

In Section V.D, we illustrate how the inalienability of human capital constraint can generate very
large MPCs for the entrepreneur when the entrepreneur is close to exhausting her borrowing ca-
pacity.
   Similarly, investment i(s) is given by

                                                              m(s)
                                          1 + g ′ (i(s)) =           − s,                                (39)
                                                              m′ (s)

which also depends on m(s) and m′ (s). As one may expect, i(s) is increasing in s. To see this,
differentiating i(s) with respect to s yields

                                                      1 m(s)m′′ (s)
                                         i′ (s) = −                 > 0.                                 (40)
                                                      θ m′ (s)2

The positive investment-liquidity sensitivity again follows from the concavity of m(s).
Idiosyncratic Risk Hedge Φh,t and Market Portfolio Allocation Φm,t . Simplifying (14) and (15) gives
the following optimal idiosyncratic risk hedge φh (s),
                                                                        
                                                           γ m(s)
                                         φh (s) = −                −s        .                           (41)
                                                            γe (s)

As we show in Section V, φh (s) < 0 for all s. Because the entrepreneur is exposed to idiosyncratic
risk through the firm’s operations, she optimally reduces this exposure by taking a short position
in the hedging asset. However, under inalienability, the hedging demand φh (s) does not completely
eliminate the entrepreneur’s exposure to idiosyncratic risk. Indeed, note that since γe (s) > γ under
inalienability, (41) implies that incomplete idiosyncratic risk hedging is optimal.
   The optimal market portfolio allocation φm (s) is given by
                                                               
                        η m(s) ρσK                 γ m(s)               µm − r m(s)
              φm (s) =           −                         −s       =      2
                                                                                      − β F B φh (s) ,   (42)
                       σm γe (s)   σm               γe (s)               σm    γe (s)

where β F B is the CAPM beta for the market value of capital under the first-best as given in (28),
and γe ( · ) is the entrepreneur’s effective risk aversion as given by (19). The first term in (42) is
the mean-variance demand for the market portfolio, which differs from the standard Merton model
in two ways: 1) risk aversion γ is replaced by the effective risk aversion γe (s) and 2) net worth is
replaced by certainty-equivalent wealth m(s).
   The second term in (42) gives the hedging demand with respect to systematic risk Zm . This
systematic risk hedging demand term is proportional to the idiosyncratic risk hedging demand,


                                                         17
φh (s), where the proportionality coefficient is β F B .
       The optimal market portfolio allocation φm (s) balances achieving mean-variance efficiency for
the entrepreneur’s certainty-equivalent wealth, as reflected in the first term in (42), and maximizing
the firm’s financing capacity, as reflected in the second term in (42). Overall, maximizing financing
capacity amounts to both increasing the idiosyncratic risk exposure, |φh (s)|, and reducing the
systematic risk exposure, |φm (s)|, away from the first-best as s moves closer to s.
ODE for m(s). Substituting the policy functions for c(s), i(s), φh (s), and φm (s) and the value
function (16) into the HJB equation (11) and using the homogeneity property, we obtain the
following ODE for m(s):

              m(s) h         γ−1    i
    0 =              γχm′ (s) γ − ζ + [rs + A − i(s) − g(i(s))] m′ (s) + (i(s) − δ)(m(s) − sm′ (s))
              1−γ
                 2            
                 γσK             m(s)2 m′′ (s) η 2 m′ (s)m(s)
              +        − ρησK                  +              .                                   (43)
                   2             γe (s) m′ (s)      2γe (s)

B. Inalienable Human Capital and Endogenous Debt Capacity
       The entrepreneur has the option to walk away at any time from her current firm of size Kt ,
thereby leaving behind all her liabilities. Her next-best alternative is to manage a firm of size
αKt , where α ∈ (0, 1) is a constant. That is, under this alternative, her talent creates less value,
as α < 1. Therefore, as long as the entrepreneur’s liabilities are not too large, the entrepreneur
prefers to stay with the firm.17
       The inalienability of her human capital gives rise to an endogenous debt capacity, denoted by
S t , that satisfies
                                            J(Kt , S t ) = J(αKt , 0).                                        (44)

That is, S t equates the value to the entrepreneur of remaining with the firm, J(Kt , S t ), and the
value to the entrepreneur of the outside option J(αKt , 0) associated with managing a smaller firm
of size αKt and no liabilities. Given that it is never efficient for the entrepreneur to quit on the
equilibrium path, J(K, S) must satisfy the condition

                                            J(Kt , St ) ≥ J(Kt , S t ) .                                      (45)

We can equivalently express the inalienability constraint given by (44) and (45) as              18



                                               St ≥ S t = S(Kt ) ,                                            (46)

where S(Kt ) defines the endogenous credit capacity as a function of the capital stock Kt . When
St < 0, the entrepreneur draws on a line of credit and services her debt at the risk-free rate r up to
  17
     In practice entrepreneurs can sometimes partially commit themselves and lower their outside options by signing
noncompete clauses. This possibility can be captured in our model by lowering the parameter α, which relaxes the
entrepreneur’s inalienability of human capital constraints.
  18
      See Appendix A.B for technical details.



                                                        18
S(Kt ). Note that debt is risk-free because (46) ensures that the entrepreneur does not walk away
from the firm in an attempt to evade her debt obligations.
      Substituting the value function J(K, S) given in (44) and simplifying the value-matching con-
dition given in (44), we further obtain the following condition for m(s) at s = s:

                                                    m(s) = αm(0) .                                              (47)

Note that when α = 0, the entrepreneur has no outside option, so that m(s) = 0, which corresponds
to the first-best case. By optimally setting s = −q F B , we attain the first-best outcome where the
entrepreneur can potentially pledge the entire market value of capital, q F B , which is equal to
Tobin’s average q under the first-best. At the other extreme, when α = 1, the entrepreneur’s
outside option is as good as her current employment. In that case, no long-term contract can
retain the entrepreneur, so the model has no solution. Therefore, for the inalienability of human
capital problem to have an interesting and nondegenerate solution, it is necessary to require that
0 < α < 1. For these values of α, (47) implies that m(s) > 0.19
      We simplify the credit constraint given in (46) by expressing it in terms of scaled liquidity s:

                                                          st ≥ s .                                              (48)

As in the household buffer-stock savings literature (e.g., Deaton (1991)), the risk-averse entrepreneur
manages her liquid holdings s with the objective of smoothing her consumption. Setting st = s
for all t is too costly and suboptimal in terms of consumption smoothing. Although the credit
constraint (48) rarely binds, it has to be satisfied with probability one. Only then can we ensure
that the entrepreneur always stays with the firm.
      Given that {st : t ≥ 0} is a diffusion process and hence is continuous, to satisfy the inalienability
constraint (48), it is necessary that both the idiosyncratic and the systematic volatility at s be equal
to zero:
                                             σhs (s) = 0 and σm
                                                              s
                                                                (s) = 0 .                                       (49)

Otherwise, the probability of crossing a candidate debt limit of s to its left is strictly positive,
which violates the credit constraint (48). By substituting φh (s) given by (41) and φm (s) given by
(42) into the volatility functions (21) and (22), we can equivalently express (49) as

                                                        m(s)
                                                               = 0.                                             (50)
                                                        γe (s)

In other words, at the endogenously determined s, either the entrepreneur’s scaled certainty-
equivalent wealth is zero, m(s) = 0, or the entrepreneur is effectively infinitely risk-averse, γe (s) =
∞.20 With inalienable human capital, we have m(s) > 0, so the volatility boundary conditions
 19
      Otherwise m(0) = m(s) = 0, which does not make economic sense.
 20
      We verify that the drift µs (s) given in (23) is nonnegative at s, so that s is weakly increasing at s.




                                                            19
(50) can be satisfied only if γe (s) = ∞, which is equivalent to

                                                 m′′ (s) = −∞ .                                               (51)

That is, the inalienability condition (47) implies that the curvature of m(s) approaches infinity
when the entrepreneur runs out of liquidity at the endogenous boundary s = s. Preserving her
long-term relationship with the firm at s is then so valuable that the entrepreneur does not want
to take the chance that s crosses s, which implies that the entrepreneur is infinitely risk-averse to
the volatility in s.
       Finally, when the entrepreneur is infinitely wealthy, she has no reason to quit and hence

                                       lim m(s) = mF B (s) = s + q F B .                                      (52)
                                      s→∞

That is, the boundary condition at the right end of s under inalienability is the first-best solution.
Summary. We summarize the solution under inalienability in the theorem below.

THEOREM 1: When 0 < α < 1, the solution to the inalienability problem is such that m(s) solves
ODE (43) subject to the FOCs (37) for consumption c(s), (39) for investment i(s), (41) for the
idiosyncratic risk hedge φh (s), and (42) for the market portfolio allocation φm (s), as well as the
conditions (47) and (51) at the endogenous left boundary s and (52) when s → ∞.


                            IV. Equivalent Optimal Contract
       We consider next the long-term contracting problem between an infinitely lived, fully diversi-
fied, risk-averse investor (the principal) and an infinitely lived, financially constrained risk-averse
entrepreneur (the agent). The output process Yt is publicly observable and verifiable. In addition,
the entrepreneur cannot privately save.21 The contract specifies an investment process {It ; t ≥ 0}
and a compensation {Ct ; t ≥ 0} process, both of which depend on the entire history of idiosyncratic
and aggregate shocks {Zh,t , Zm,t ; t ≥ 0}.
       Because the risk-averse investor is fully diversified and markets are complete, the investor choos-
es investment {It ; t ≥ 0} and compensation {Ct ; t ≥ 0} to maximize the risk-adjusted discounted
value of free cash flows:
                                                        Z       ∞                 
                                F (K0 , V0 ) = max E0                Mt (Yt − Ct )dt ,                        (53)
                                               C, I          0

where K0 is the initial capital stock and V0 is the entrepreneur’s initial utility. Given that the
investor is fully diversified, we use the same SDF, (M, which is given in (8)), to evaluate the
present value of cash flows (Yt − Ct ). Note that it is possible that Yt < Ct . The contracting
problem is subject to the entrepreneur’s inalienability constraint at all future dates t ≥ 0 and the
  21
    This is a standard assumption in the dynamic moral hazard literature (Ch. 10 in Bolton and Dewatripont (2005)).
Di Tella and Sannikov (2016) develop a contracting model with hidden savings for asset management.



                                                        20
participation constraint at time 0. We denote by V (Kt ) the entrepreneur’s endogenous outside
utility payoff, so that the inalienability constraint at time t is given by

                                                 Vt ≥ V (Kt ) ,   t ≥ 0,                              (54)

where Vt is the entrepreneur’s promised utility specified under the contract.

A. Recursive Formulation
   We transform the optimal contracting problem into a recursive form in three steps: 1) we define
the entrepreneur’s promised utility V and the principal’s value F (K, V ) in recursive form, 2) we map
promised utility V into promised certainty-equivalent wealth W , and 3) we simplify the contracting
problem into a one-dimensional problem. While step 1) is standard in the recursive contracting
literature, step 2) is less common but is essential as it allows us to connect the contracting problem
to the liquidity and risk management problem analyzed before. Derivations for results in this
section are provided in Appendix B.
The Investor’s Value Function F (Kt , Vt ). Using the Martingale Representation Theorem, we show
that the expected change of the entrepreneur’s promised utility satisfies

                                             Et [ζU (Ct )dt + dVt ] = ζVt dt ,                        (55)

where ζU (Ct )dt is the utility of current compensation and dVt is the change in promised utility.
The realized change of the entrepreneur’s promised utility, dV , implied by (55) can be written as
the sum of 1) the expected change Et [dVt ] (the drift term), 2) a martingale term driven by the
idiosyncratic shock, Zh , and 3) a martingale term driven by the systematic shock, Zm :

                           dVt = ζ(Vt − U (Ct ))dt + zh,t Vt dZh,t + zm,t Vt dZm,t ,                  (56)

where {zh,t ; t ≥ 0} and {zm,t ; t ≥ 0} respectively control the idiosyncratic and systematic volatilities
of the entrepreneur’s promised utility V .
   We can then write the investor’s value function F (Kt , Vt ) in terms of 1) the entrepreneur’s
promised utility Vt , and 2) the venture’s capital stock Kt . The contracting problem specifies
investment It , compensation Ct , idiosyncratic risk exposure zh,t , and systematic risk exposure zm,t
to maximize the investor’s risk-adjusted present discounted value of free cash flows. The following
HJB equation for the investor’s value F (K, V ) holds:

         rF (K, V ) =      max          (Y − C) + (I − δK)FK + [ζ(V − U (C)) − zm ηV ]FV
                        C, I, zh , zm
                                             2 K 2F
                                            σK     KK  (z 2 + zm
                                                               2 )V 2 F
                                                                       VV
                                        +             + h                 + (zh νK + zm ρσK )KV FV K .(57)
                                                2               2

From Promised Utility Vt To Promised Certainty-Equivalent Wealth Wt . To link the optimal con-
tract to the optimal liquidity and risk management policies derived in the preceding section, we

                                                            21
need to express the entrepreneur’s promised utility in dollars (units of consumption) rather than in
utils. Let W denote the promised (certainty-equivalent) wealth, the amount that the entrepreneur
would demand to permanently give up her productive human capital, walk away from the long-term
contracting relationship, and retire as a Merton-style consumer under complete markets.
       We show that Wt can be linked to the promised utility, Vt , via Vt = V (Wt ), where

                                                 V (Wt ) = U (bWt ) ,                                             (58)

U ( · ) is given in (6), and b is given in (17). Differentiating (58), we obtain V ′ (Wt ) = bU ′ (bWt ) and
V ′′ (Wt ) = b2 U ′′ (bWt ). In addition, the following stochastic differential equation for Wt holds:

                                                                                     2 + z 2 )V 2 V ′′ (W )
                                                                                   (zh,t
                1                                                                          m,t t         t
  dWt =             [ζ(V  t − U (C t ))dt +  zh,t V t dZ h,t + zm,t V t dZ m,t ] −                 3
                                                                                                            dt
            V (Wt )
              ′                                                                          2(V (Wt ))
                                                                                             ′
            "                                                            #
                                           2          2      2 ′′
              ζ(U (bWt ) − U (Ct )) (xh,t + xm,t )Kt V (Wt )
          =                           −                                    dt + xh,t Kt dZh,t + xm,t Kt dZm,t ,   (59)
                    V ′ (Wt )                      2V ′ (Wt )

where
                                          zm,t V (Wt )                    zh,t V (Wt )
                                 xm,t =                  and     xh,t =                .                          (60)
                                          Kt V ′ (Wt )                    Kt V ′ (Wt )
       Note that xh,t and xm,t are the idiosyncratic and systematic volatilities of Wt (scaled by con-
temporaneous Kt ). As will become clear, xm,t and xh,t are closely tied to the firm’s optimal risk
management policies φh,t and φm,t analyzed earlier.
Reduction to One Dimension. We can reduce the contracting problem to one dimension, with the
scaled wealth wt = Wt /Kt as the unique state variable, by rewriting the investor’s value F (Kt , Vt )
as follows:
                           F (Kt , Vt ) ≡ F (Kt , U (bWt )) = P (Kt , Wt ) = p(wt ) · Kt .                        (61)

It is then sufficient to solve for p(w) and characterize the scaled consumption, investment, idiosyn-
cratic risk hedge, and stock market allocation rules as functions of w.
The Principal’s Endogenous Risk Aversion γp . It is again helpful to introduce a measure of en-
dogenous risk aversion for the principal. Let γp denote the principal’s risk aversion under the
contract:
                                   Wt PW W (Kt , Wt )   wt p′′ (wt )
                            γp,t ≡                    =              > 0.                  (62)
                                    PW (Kt , Wt )        p′ (wt )
The identity gives the definition of γp , and the equality follows from the homogeneity property.22
As w is a liability for the investor, we have p′ (w) < 0. This is why, unlike in the standard definition
of risk aversion, there is no minus sign in (62).
       Under the first-best, the investor’s value is linear in w, so that p′′ (w) = 0 and the principal’s
effective risk aversion γpF B (w) is zero for all w. Under inalienability, we can show that the investor’s
endogenous risk aversion γp (w) > 0 since p(w) is decreasing and concave.
  22
     Here, the subscript p refers to the principal, while the subscript e in γe refers to the entrepreneur’s endogenous
effective risk aversion in the liquidity and risk management problem analyzed earlier.


                                                          22
B. Optimal Policy Functions
Consumption Ct and Corporate Investment It . Substituting (61) into (B5) and (B6), we obtain
the following consumption and investment functions. Optimal consumption is Ct = c(wt )Kt , where
c(w) is given by
                                                              1/γ
                                              c(w) = χ −p′ (w)     w,                               (63)

and again χ is the MPC under the first-best in (33). Under inalienability, consumption depends
on both w and the investor’s marginal value of liquidity p′ (w). Similarly, optimal investment is
It = i(wt )Kt , where i(w) is given by the FOC

                                           1 + g ′ (i(w)) = p(w) − wp′ (w) .                        (64)

The left side of (64) is the marginal cost of investing and the right side of (64) is the marginal value
of capital PK (K, W ) = p(w) − wp′ (w).
Idiosyncratic Risk Exposure xh (w) and Systematic Risk Exposure xm (w). Substituting the princi-
pal’s endogenous coefficient of risk aversion γp (w) in (62) into the optimal risk exposures in (B7)
and (B8) and simplifying, we obtain the following simple and economically transparent expressions
for xh (wt ) and xm (wt ). First, the idiosyncratic risk exposure is

                                                             γp (w)
                                              xh (w) =                νK w .                        (65)
                                                           γp (w) + γ

This equation is reminiscent of the classic co-insurance formula, which involves the ratio between the
principal’s endogenous risk aversion, γp (w), and the sum of the two parties’ risk-aversion coefficients.
      Second, the systematic risk exposure is

                                                        ηw               γp (w)
                                   xm (w) =                    + ρσK w            ,                 (66)
                                                    γp (w) + γ         γp (w) + γ

where the first term is the mean-variance demand and the second term corresponds to the systematic
risk hedging demand.
    Under the first-best, we have xFh B (w) = 0 and xFmB (w) = η w/γ, since γpF B (w) = 0. The
result xFh B (w) = 0 means that the entrepreneur’s promised net worth Wt has no net exposure to
idiosyncratic risk Zh,t. The result xFmB (w) = η w/γ is the contracting version for the standard
mean-variance demand for the entrepreneur’s net worth W .
      In contrast, under inalienability, optimal co-insurance involves the agent taking on some id-
iosyncratic risk as well as reducing her market risk exposure from the first-best level,23 as can be
seen in the expressions for xh (w) in (65) and xm (w) in (66).
 23                                       γp (w)
      Note that the coinsurance weight   γp (w)+γ
                                                    appears in (65) and (66).




                                                             23
C. Dynamics of Scaled Promised Wealth w
   Applying Ito’s formula to wt = Wt /Kt , we obtain the following dynamics for w:

                      dwt = d (Wt /Kt ) = µw (wt )dt + σhw (wt )dZh,t + σm
                                                                         w
                                                                           (wt )dZm,t ,           (67)

where the idiosyncratic and systematic volatilities for w, σhw ( · ) and σm
                                                                          w ( · ), are given by


                                                    γw
                                   σhw (w) = −νK            < 0,                                  (68)
                                                γp (w) + γ
                                                     
                                   w         η              γw
                                  σm (w) =     − ρσK               .                              (69)
                                             γ          γp (w) + γ

Note that both σhw (w) and σm
                            w (w) are proportional to w/(γ (w) + γ). Finally, the drift function
                                                          p
µw ( · ) of wt is given by
                                  
             ζ              c(w)                   γ(x2h (w) + x2m (w))
 µw (w) =             w+             −w(i(w)−δK )+                      −(νK σhw (w)+ρσK σm
                                                                                          w
                                                                                            (w)) . (70)
            1−γ            ζp′ (w)                          2w

D. ODE for p(w)
   Substituting F (K, V ) = p(w) · K into the HJB equation (57), solving for p(w), and substituting
for the policy functions c(w), i(w), xh (w), and xm (w), we obtain the following ODE for the investor’s
value p(w):

                                         χγ         1/γ
          rp(w) = A − i(w) − g(i(w)) +       −p′ (w)     w + (i(w) − δ)(p(w) − wp′ (w))
                                       1−γ
                                    2            2 ′′
                      ζ              γσK            w p (w)      η 2 wp′ (w)
                  +      wp′ (w) +        − ρησK              −               ,                   (71)
                    1−γ                2           γp (w) + γ    2 γp (w) + γ

where i(w) is given by (64) and γp (w) is given by (62). Again, this ODE for p(w) characterizes the
interior solution for both the first-best and the inalienability cases. The only difference between
the two problems is reflected in the inalienability constraint, which we turn to next.

E. Inalienability Constraint
   The entrepreneur’s outside option at any time is to manage a new firm with effective size
αKt but with no legacy liabilities. Other than the size of the capital stock K, the new firm’s
production technology is identical to that of the firm she has just abandoned. Let Ve ( · ) and W
                                                                                                f( · )
be the entrepreneur’s utility and the corresponding certainty-equivalent wealth in this new firm, and
suppose as before that investors in the new firm make zero net profits under competitive markets.
Then from (61) we obtain the following condition:

                                F (αKt , Ve (αKt )) = P (αKt , W
                                                               f (αKt )) = 0 .                    (72)



                                                     24
When the entrepreneur is indifferent between leaving her employer or not, we have

                                                    f (αKt ) ,
                                          W (Kt ) = W                                              (73)

where W (Kt ) is the lowest possible value for the entrepreneur’s promised wealth such that her
inalienability constraint is satisfied. Equation (73) is equivalent to

                                       f (αKt )/Kt = αW
                    w t ≡ W (Kt )/Kt = W              f (αKt )/(αKt ) = αw
                                                                         et ,                      (74)

where the last equality follows from the assumption that the new firm’s capital is a constant fraction
α of the original firm’s contemporaneous capital stock. The homogeneity property and the condition
                                    e = 0. Thus, substituting w t = αw
given in (72) together imply that p(w)                               et into p(w
                                                                               et ) = 0, we obtain
the following simple expression for the inalienability constraint (where 0 < α < 1):

                                             p(w/α) = 0 .                                          (75)

Note that inalienability implies that the entrepreneur’s minimum wealth must be strictly positive,
w > 0. For the first-best case, however, w = 0.
   In both the first-best and the inalienability cases, the volatility functions σhw (w) and σm
                                                                                              w (w) are

equal to zero at w to ensure that w never crosses w to the left (w ≥ w):

                                    σhw (w) = 0 and σm
                                                     w
                                                       (w) = 0 .                                   (76)

Equations (68) and (69) imply that the boundary conditions given in (76) are equivalent to

                                                γw
                                                       = 0.                                        (77)
                                            γp (w) + γ

Equation (77) holds when either w = 0 (in the first-best case) or γp (w) = ∞ (in the case of
inalienability), which is equivalent to
                                            p′′ (w) = −∞ .                                         (78)

That is, inalienability causes the principal to be infinitely risk-averse with respect to w at w! Even
though the principal is well diversified, he is endogenously infinitely risk-averse at w with respect to
his investment with the entrepreneur. As w approaches w, p(w) is strictly positive and reaches its
maximum value (recall that p(w) = −s > 0). Preserving his long-term relationship and investment
with the entrepreneur at w is then so valuable that the investor does not want to take the chance
that w crosses w, which implies that the principal is infinitely risk-averse to the volatility in w.
   As for the primal liquidity and risk management problem, our contracting analysis reveals that
the boundary conditions under inalienability are fundamentally different from those in the case of
the first-best: under inalienability γp (w) = ∞, while under the first-best γp (w) = 0 for all w. The
first-best solution confirms the conventional wisdom for hedging, which calls for the complete elim-



                                                  25
ination of idiosyncratic risk exposures for the risk-averse entrepreneur. This conventional wisdom
applies only to a complete-markets, Arrow-Debreu world. Under inalienability, this conventional
wisdom no longer holds.
   We summarize the contracting solution under inalienability in the theorem below.

THEOREM 2: When 0 < α < 1, the optimal contract under inalienability is such that p(w) solves
ODE (71) subject to the FOCs (63) for c(w), (64) for i(w), (65) for idiosyncratic risk exposure
xh (w), and (66) for systematic risk exposure xm (w), as well as the boundary conditions (75) and
(78), and the drift function µw (w) being non-negative at w, so that w is weakly increasing at w
with probability one.

   Finally, to complete the characterization of the optimal contracting solution, we set the en-
trepreneur’s initial reservation utility V0∗ such that F (K0 , V0∗ ) = 0 to be consistent with the general
assumption that capital markets are competitive.

F. Equivalence
   By equivalence, we mean that the resource allocations {Ct , It ; t ≥ 0} under the two problem
formulations are identical for any path {Zh , Zm }. We demonstrate this equivalence in Appendix
(B.B) by verifying that the following holds:

                                      s = −p(w) and w = m(s) ,                                       (79)

The preceding equation implies that −p ◦ m(s) = s. In other words, the state variable s in the
primal liquidity and risk management problem is shown to be equal to −p(w), the negative of
the value function in the dual contracting problem. Correspondingly, the scaled wealth function
m(s) in the primal problem is equal to w, the scaled promised wealth, the state variable in the
contracting problem.
   Table II provides a detailed side-by-side comparison of the two problem formulations along all
three relevant dimensions of the model: (1) the state variable, (2) the policy rules, and (3) the
value functions for both the inalienability and first-best cases. Panels A, B, and C offer a side-by-
side mapping for the state variable, value function, and policy rules under the two formulations.
The differences between the inalienability and first-best cases are driven entirely by the conditions
pinning down the firm’s borrowing capacity, as we highlight in Panels D and E.
   Panel D describes the conditions for the borrowing capacity in the inalienability case (0 <
α < 1). The entrepreneur’s inalienability of human capital implies that m(s) = αm(0) in (47)
and p(w/α) = 0 in (75) have to be satisfied at the respective free boundaries s and w in the two
formulations. Given these inalienability constraints, the volatility conditions can be satisfied only
if the curvatures of the value functions, m(s) and p(w), approach −∞ at the left boundaries. We
also verify that the drift conditions at the left boundaries hold.
   Panel E summarizes the first-best case, where α = 0. The investor’s value is given by the
difference between the market value of capital, q F B , and the promised wealth to the entrepreneur,

                                                   26
                                                 Table II
                  Comparison of Primal and Dual Optimization Problems



                                                       Primal                        Dual
                                                     Optimization                 Contracting


           A. State Variable                                  s                          w
                Drift                               µs (s) given in (23)       µw (w) given in (70)
                Idiosyncratic Volatility           σhs (s) given in (21)       σhw (w) given in (68)
                                                     s                          w
                Systematic Volatility              σm  (s) given in (22)       σm  (w) given in (69)
                Admissible Range                           s≥s                        w≥w



           B. Value Function                             m(s)                         p(w)
                Interior Region                     ODE given in (43)           ODE given in (71)
                Right Limit                      lims→∞ m(s) = s + q F B     limw→∞ p(w) = q F B − w



           C. Policy Rules
                Compensation                          c(s) given in (37)          c(w) given in (63)
                Corporate Investment                  i(s) given in (39)          i(w) given in (64)
                Idiosyncratic Risk Hedge              φh (s) given in (41)       xh (w) given in (65)
                Systematic Risk Exposure             φm (s) given in (42)        xm (w) given in (66)



           D. Inalienability Case: 0 < α < 1
                Inalienability Constraint                 m(s) = αm(0)             p(w/α) = 0
                                                           ′′
                 Curvature Condition                     m (s) = −∞                  p′′ (w) = −∞



           E. First-Best Case: α = 0
                 Borrowing Limit                         s = −q F B                        w=0




wt : pF B (wt ) = q F B − wt . Equivalently, wt = mF B (st ) = st + q F B . The first-best policy rules such
as consumption and investment under the two formulations are consistent. For consumption, we
have cF B (wt ) = χwt = χmF B (st ) = cF B (st ). For investment, both formulations yield the same
constant investment-capital ratio, iF B . The optimal idiosyncratic risk exposure xFh B (w) = 0 shuts
down the idiosyncratic risk exposure of Wt , which is equivalent to setting the idiosyncratic risk
hedge φFh B (s) = −q F B in the primal formulation, thus eliminating idiosyncratic risk for Mt . The
optimal systematic risk exposure xFmB (w) = η w/γ yields the aggregate volatility of η/γ for Wt ,
which is consistent with the fact that φFmB (s) given in (35) implies an aggregate volatility of η/γ
for Mt . Last but not least, the borrowing limits in the two formulations are also consistent, in



                                                    27
that wF B = 0 if and only if sF B = −q F B : the condition that the lower boundary for w is zero is
equivalent to the property that at any time t the entrepreneur can borrow up to the entire market
value of capital q F B Kt .


                                       V. Quantitative Analysis
       In this section, we present our main qualitative and quantitative results. For simplicity, we
choose the widely used quadratic adjustment cost function, g(i) = θi2 /2, for which we have explicit
formulae for Tobin’s q and optimal i under the first-best:24
                                                                  r
                                                                                     A − (r + δ)
                       q   FB          FB
                                = 1 + θi    and iFB
                                                      =r+δ−           (r + δ)2 − 2               .   (80)
                                                                                          θ
       Our model is parsimonious with 11 parameters. We set the entrepreneur’s coefficient of relative
risk aversion to γ = 2, the equity risk premium (µm − r) to 6%, and the annual volatility of the
market portfolio return to σm = 20%, implying a Sharpe ratio of η = (µm − r)/σm = 30%. We
set the annual risk-free rate to r = 5% and the entrepreneur’s discount rate to ζ = r = 5%. These
parameter values are standard in the asset pricing literature.
       For the production-side parameters, we take the estimates in Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2009)
and set annual productivity A to 20% and annual volatility of capital shocks to σK = 20%. We set
the correlation between the market portfolio return and the firm’s depreciation shock to ρ = 0.2,
which implies that the idiosyncratic volatility of the depreciation shock is νK = 19.6%. We fit the
first-best values of q F B and iF B to the sample averages by setting the adjustment cost parameter
to θ = 2 and the (expected) annual capital depreciation rate to δK = 11%, both of which are in
line with estimates in Hall (2004) and Riddick and Whited (2009). These parameters imply that
q F B = 1.264, iF B = 0.132, and β F B = 0.2. Finally, we set the inalienability parameter to α = 0.8.
The parameter values for our baseline calculation are summarized in Table III.

A. Firm Value and Endogenous Debt Capacity
       We begin by linking the value functions of the two optimization problems, p(w) and m(s).
Liquidity Ratio s and Certainty-Equivalent Wealth m(s). Panels A and C of Figure 1 plot m(s) and
the marginal value of liquidity m′ (s), respectively. Under the first-best, the entrepreneur’s scaled
net worth is given simply by the sum of her financial wealth s and the market value of the capital
stock: mF B (s) = s + q F B = s + 1.264. Note that mF B (s) ≥ 0 implies s ≥ −q F B , and hence the
debt limit under the first-best is sF B = −q F B .
       As one would expect, m(s) < mF B (s) = q F B + s due to inalienability. Moreover, m(s) is
increasing and concave. The higher liquidity s, the less constrained is the entrepreneur, and thus
m′ (s) decreases. In the limit, as s → ∞, m(s) approaches mF B (s) = q F B + s and m′ (s) → 1. The
equilibrium credit limit under inalienability is s = −0.208, which means that the entrepreneur’s
  24
       The necessary convergence condition is (r + δ)2 − 2 A−(r+δ)
                                                              θ
                                                                   ≥ 0.



                                                          28
                                                    Table III
                                             Parameter Values

This table summarizes the parameter values for our baseline analysis in Section V. Whenever
applicable, parameter values are annualized.



                        Parameter                                          Symbol     Value
                        Risk-free rate                                       r          5%
                        The entrepreneur’s discount rate                     ζ          5%
                        Correlation                                          ρ         20%
                        Excess market portfolio return                     µm − r       6%
                        Volatility of market portfolio                      σm         20%
                        The entrepreneur’s relative risk aversion            γ           2
                        Capital depreciation rate                           δK         11%
                        Volatility of capital depreciation shock            σK         20%
                        Quadratic adjustment cost parameter                  θ           2
                        Productivity parameter                               A         20%
                        Inalienability parameter                             α         80%




maximal borrowing capacity is 20.8% of the contemporaneous capital stock K, which is as little as
one-sixth of the first-best debt capacity. The corresponding scaled certainty-equivalent wealth is
m(−0.208) = 0.959. When the endogenous financial constraint binds at s = −0.208, the marginal
certainty-equivalent value of liquidity m′ (s) is at its highest and is equal to m′ (−0.208) = 1.394.
Figure 1 illustrates clearly that the first-best case and the inalienability case are fundamentally
different.25
Promised Wealth w and Investors’ Value p(w). Panels B and D of Figure 1 plot p (w) and p′ (w),
respectively. Under the first-best, compensation to the entrepreneur is simply a one-to-one transfer
from investors: pF B (w) = q F B − w = 1.264 − w. With inalienable human capital, p(w) < q F B − w,
and p(w) is decreasing and concave. As w increases, the entrepreneur is less constrained. In the
limit, as w → ∞, p(w) approaches q F B − w and p′ (w) → −1. The entrepreneur’s inability to
fully commit not to walk away ex post imposes a lower bound on w, w. For our parameter values,
w = 0.959. Note that w = 0.959 = m(s) = m(−0.208). This result is no coincidence – it is implied
by our equivalence result between the two optimization problems. The entrepreneur receives at
least 95.9% in promised certainty-equivalent wealth for every unit of capital stock, which is strictly
greater than α = 0.8 since the capital stock generates strictly positive net present value under the
  25
     The first-best case is degenerate because the entrepreneur’s indifference condition m(−q F B ) = 0 implies zero
volatility of s at s = −q F B . But this is not true for the inalienability case. Besides the indifference condition
m(s) = αm(0), we also need to provide incentives for the entrepreneur to choose zero volatility for s at the credit
limit s, which requires that the entrepreneur be endogenously infinitely risk-averse at s, γe (s) = ∞, meaning that
m′′ (s) = −∞.


                                                        29
       Panel A. Scaled certainty-equivalent wealth: m(s)                        Panel B. Investor′ s scaled value: p(w)
       2.5                                                           q F Booo
                                                                            o
                                                                            o
                                                                            o
                                                                            o
                                                                            o
                                                                            o




                                                                        1
         2
                                                                      0.5
       1.5

        1                                                               0

                                                                                  w=0. 9 6 →
       0.5                             ← s=- 0. 2 1                  -0.5

        0oo
          o
          o  o
             o
             o
             o




                                                                       -1
        −q F B -1            -0.5          0      0.5       1               0        0.5       1       1.5       2        2.5
                                       s                                                           w

                 Panel C. Marginal value of liquidity: m′ (s)                     Panel D. Marginal value: p′ (w)
       1.4                                                           -0.7


       1.3
                                                                     -0.8

       1.2

                                                                     -0.9
       1.1              s=- 0. 2 1 →                                              w=0. 9 6 →

        1                                                              -1
        −q F B -1            -0.5          0      0.5       1               0        0.5       1       1.5       2        2.5
                                       s                                                           w



Figure 1. Certainty-equivalent wealth m(s) and investor’s value p(w). The dotted lines
depict the first-best results: m(s) = q F B +s and m′ (s) = 1 for s ≥ −q F B = −1.264, p(w) = q F B −w
and p′ (w) = −1 for w ≥ w F B = 0. The solid lines depict the inalienability case: m(s) is increasing
and concave, where s ≥ s = −0.21, and p(w) is decreasing and concave, where w ≥ w = 0.96. The
debt limit s is determined by m(s) = αm(0) and m′′ (s) = −∞, and w is determined by p(w/α) = 0
and p′′ (w) = −∞.


entrepreneur’s control.
   Panels A and B of Figure 1 illustrate that (s, m(s)) is the “mirror image” of (−p(w), w). To be
precise, rotating Panel B counterclockwise 90o (i.e., turning the original x-axis for w into the new
y-axis m(s)) and adding a minus sign to the horizontal x-axis (i.e., setting −p(w) = s) yields Panel
A. Panel C shows that the entrepreneur’s marginal value of liquidity m′ (s) is greater than one,
which means that the liquid asset is valued more than its face value by the financially constrained
entrepreneur. Panel D illustrates the same idea viewed from the investor’s perspective: the marginal
cost of compensating the entrepreneur for the investor is less than one, −1 < p′ (w) < 0, because
compensating the entrepreneur relaxes the investor’s financial constraint, which is value-enhancing.
Despite being fully diversified, the investor behaves in an underdiversified manner due to the
entrepreneur’s inalienability constraint. This is reflected in the concavity of the investor’s value
function p(w).




                                                                30
B. Idiosyncratic Risk Management

          Panel A. Idiosyncratic risk hedge: φ h (s)                  Panel B. Idiosyncratic risk exposure: xh (w)
          0
                                     o ← φ h (s) = s
                                                                      0.2
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o


                                                                                              o ← x (w) = ǫ
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o



                                                                                                   h        Kw


        -0.5

                                                                      0.1
         -1           s=- 0. 2 1 →
                                                                                 w=0. 9 6 →
                                                                        0
        -1.5
          −q F B -1       -0.5               0   0.5    1                    0     0.5            1       1.5   2   2.5
                                         s                                                            w

         Panel C. Idiosyncratic volatility of s: σhs (s)           Panel D. Idiosyncratic volatility of w: σhw (w)

                                          s
                                     o ← σ (s) = 0
                                                                                                    w
                                                                                                    h (w) = 0
          0o
           o
           o
           o   o
               o
               o
               o


                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o
                                     o


                                                                        0                     o ← σ
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o
                                                                                              o




                                          h




        -0.2                                                          -0.2

                      s=- 0. 2 1 →                                               w=0. 9 6 →

        -0.4                                                          -0.4

          −q F B -1       -0.5               0   0.5    1                    0     0.5            1       1.5   2   2.5
                                         s                                                            w



Figure 2. Idiosyncratic risk management policies, φh (s) and xh (w), and idiosyncratic
volatilities for s and w, σhs (s) and σhw (w). The dotted lines depict the first-best results: φFh B (s) =
−q F B = −1.264 and xFh B (w) = 0. The solid lines depict the inalienability case: the entrepreneur
hedges less than under the first-best, |φh (s)| < |φFh B (s)| = q F B , and her idiosyncratic risk exposure
is thus positive, xh (w) > 0.

   Panels A and B of Figure 2 plot the idiosyncratic risk hedging demand φh (s) and xh (w) in the
two formulations. Note that φh (s) and xh (w) control respectively for the idiosyncratic volatilities
of total liquid wealth S and certainty-equivalent wealth W , as seen in (10) and (59). In Panels
C and D of Figure 2, we plot the idiosyncratic volatilities of scaled liquidity s, σhs (s), and scaled
wealth w, σhw (w), which are directly linked to the risk management policies φh (s) and xh (w). A key
observation here is that the volatility of S is different from the volatility of scaled liquidity, s = S/K.
Equation (21), which states σhs (st ) = (φh (st ) − st ) νK , makes clear that σhs (st ) is affected both by
the hedging position φh (st )νK , which drives changes in S, and by −st νK , through the idiosyncratic
risk exposure of K, which influences compensation through the inalienability constraint. Proceeding
in the same way for the contracting formulation, we obtain the following expression linking xh (w)
and σhw (w):
                                                                    γ
                                                 σhw (wt ) = −            xh (wt ) .                                      (81)
                                                                 γp (wt )
   Consider now the first-best solution given by the dotted lines in Figure 2. Panel A shows that

                                                                 31
the first-best idiosyncratic risk hedging demand is constant: φh (st ) = −q F B = −1.264. Panel
B confirms this first-best result, as xFh B (wt ) = 0 for all wt , which establishes the classic first-best
result that optimal hedging for a risk-averse entrepreneur involves zero net exposure to idiosyncratic
shocks. Stated equivalently, the first-best idiosyncratic risk hedging policy completely insulates the
entrepreneur’s net worth MtF B = St + q F B Kt from the idiosyncratic shock Zh , as one can see from
the dynamics of M given in (36).
       Panels C and D reveal a less obvious but important insight for the first-best case, namely,
that complete idiosyncratic risk hedging of net worth implies neither zero volatility for s nor zero
volatility for w in general. Rather only when the entrepreneur has fully exhausted her debt capacity,
that is, st = −q F B (equivalently wt = 0), are the volatility of scaled s and the volatility of w equal
to zero: σhs (st ) = σhw (wt ) = 0. When st > −q F B (or wt > 0), the first-best solution is such that
|σhs (st )| and |σhw (wt )| strictly increase with st = St /Kt and wt = Wt /Kt respectively, because of
the effect of the idiosyncratic shock Zh on the firm’s capital stock.
       Consider next the inalienability case. Panels A and B clearly reveal that the hedging policy
under inalienability is different from that under the first-best. Because the endogenous debt limit
|s| = 0.208 (w = 0.959) under inalienability is much tighter than the first-best limit, |sF B | =
q F B = 1.264 (w F B = 0), the entrepreneur is severely constrained in her ability to hedge away the
idiosyncratic risk exposure of her certainty-equivalent wealth M .
       A key optimality condition is that the entrepreneur has to honor her liabilities with probability
one, which requires that σhs (s) = 0 and σhw (w) = 0. This equilibrium condition of zero volatility
together with the inalienability conditions m(s) = αm(0) and p(w/α) = 0 imply endogenous infinite
risk aversion at s and w, meaning that γe (s) = ∞ and γp (w) = ∞ as shown in Figure 3.26
       Zero idiosyncratic volatility for s at s (or equivalently, for w at w) is achieved by setting
the hedging position to φh (s) = s (or equivalently, xh (w) = νK w). These expressions capture
the following general insight about hedging key-man risk. Suppose that the entrepreneur’s scaled
liquidity is at its limit, st = s, and consider the consequences of a positive idiosyncratic shock dZh,t .
Among other effects, such a shock increases the outside value of the entrepreneur’s human capital
and in turn the entrepreneur’s incentives to leave the firm.27 How can the entrepreneur hedge
against this risk and continue honoring her outstanding debt liabilities? By setting φh (s) = s
                                                                 √
to the credit limit s, as we explain next. Let Zh,t+∆ = Zh,t + ∆ denote the outcome of a
positive shock over a small time increment ∆. We can calculate the resulting liquidity ratio st+∆
as follows:28                                            √                 √
                                   St+∆   St + φh,t Kt νK ∆   st + φh,t νK ∆
                          st+∆   ≡      ≈           √       =            √   ,                                     (82)
                                   Kt+∆    (1 + νK ∆)Kt        (1 + νK ∆)
  26
     This result can be seen from Panels B and D in Figure 1, where the slopes of m′ (s) and p′ (w) approach −∞ at
s and w. Mathematically, this follows from the definition of γe given in (19), σhs (s) given in (21), and m(s) = 0.207.
                                                      ′′
                                                         (w)
Similar mathematical reasoning applies for γp = wp  p′ (w)
                                                             in (62).
  27
     A negative shock has the opposite effect on the entrepreneur’s human capital and relaxes the inalienability
constraint. We therefore focus on the positive shock.                                                                 √
  28
     The (diffusion) risk term for any stochastic process locally dominates its drift effect as the former is of order ∆
and the latter is of order ∆. We can thus drop the drift term in the limit for this calculation.



                                                          32
         Panel A. Risk aversion for the entrepreneur: γe (s) Panel B. Risk aversion for the investor: γp (w)
               5                                                3




               4                                                2



               3
                                                                1



               2
                                                                0
                   FB
              −q        -1   -0.5       0   0.5      1              0   0.5     1       1.5     2      2.5
                                    s                                               w



Figure 3. Endogenous relative risk aversion for the entrepreneur and the investor,
γe (s) and γp (w). The dotted lines depict the first-best results: γeF B (s) = γ = 2 and γpF B (w) = 0.
The solid lines depict the inalienability case: both measures of risk aversion are larger than the
first-best values.

where the numerator uses (10) for dSt and the denominator uses (1) for dKt . To ensure that the
credit constraint is satisfied at t + ∆, we have to set st+∆ = st = s in (82), which means that
φh (s) = s < 0. Had the entrepreneur chosen a larger hedging position, say |φh (s)| > |s|, or in
the extreme scenario |φh (s)| = |φFh B | = q F B , we would have st+∆ < st = s < 0, which violates
the equilibrium condition s ≥ s. Following essentially the same argument for w = W/K, we can
verify that xh (w) = νK w > 0, which implies that the entrepreneur’s net worth W is overexposed
to idiosyncratic risk relative to the first-best.
      To summarize, the hedging positions at s and w are set so as to exactly offset the impact of the
idiosyncratic shock Zh on Kt in st = St /Kt and wt = Wt /Kt and thereby turn off the volatilities
of s at s and w at w. These hedging positions, however, significantly expose the entrepreneur’s net
worth W to idiosyncratic risk.
      Turning now to the right end of the support for s and w, we observe that as s → ∞ (w → ∞),
the inalienability constraint becomes irrelevant. As a result, the entrepreneur achieves perfect risk
sharing: lims→∞ φh (s) = φFh B = −q F B and limw→∞ xh (w) = xFh B = 0 .
      With inalienability, the idiosyncratic risk hedge |φh (s)| = |s| at the debt limit is much lower than
when the entrepreneur is unconstrained. More generally, when s moves away from the debt limit s,
|φh (s)| effectively becomes a “weighted average” of the first-best policy of maximizing net worth and
the zero-volatility policy for s at the debt limit, with an increasing weight put on the first-best policy
as s increases. Correspondingly, Panel B shows that as the entrepreneur’s promised scaled certainty-
equivalent wealth w increases, the entrepreneur becomes less exposed to idiosyncratic risk, that is,
xh (w) decreases with w and eventually approaches zero as w → ∞.29 To summarize, the “key-man”
 29
      There is a natural analogy here with the general principle in moral hazard theory that the agent’s compensation



                                                          33
risk management problem for the firm boils down to a compromise between maximization of the
entrepreneur’s net worth, which requires fully insuring against idiosyncratic risk, and maximization
of the firm’s financing capacity, which involves reducing the volatility of scaled liquidity and hence
exposing the entrepreneur to idiosyncratic risk. This compromise can be seen as a general principle
of idiosyncratic risk management for financially constrained firms that emerges from our analysis.30

C. Optimal Equity Market Exposure
    Panels A and B of Figure 4 plot the entrepreneur’s market portfolio allocation φm (s) and the
entrepreneur’s systematic risk exposure xm (w) in the two formulations. Recall that φm and xm
control respectively for the systematic volatilities of liquid wealth S and certainty-equivalent wealth
W , as seen in (10) and (59). Panels C and D of Figure 4 plot the systematic volatility of scaled
              s (s), and of scaled w, σ w (w).
liquidity s, σm                        m
    We again show that the policies φm (s) and xm (w), plotted in Panels A and B, are directly
linked to the corresponding volatilities, σm s (s) and σ w (w), plotted in Panels C and D. Equation
                                                        m
                    s                     F B
                                                                         s (s ) is affected both by the
(22), which states σm (st ) = φm (st ) − β st σm , makes clear that σm        t
market allocation term, φm (st )σm , and by −st β F B σm = −st ρσK , which comes from the systematic
risk exposure of K. Proceeding in the same way as for the contracting problem, we obtain the
                                         w (w):
following expression linking xm (w) and σm

                                          w
                                         σm (wt ) = xm (wt ) − ρσK wt .                                       (83)

Again, the key observation is that the systematic volatility of W , which is equal to xm (wt )Kt , is
                w (w ), the systematic volatility for w = W/K. Consider now the first-best solution
different from σm   t
given by the dotted lines in Figure 4. Panels A and B plot the classic Merton (1969) portfolio
allocation result, which is linear in s and w. Panels C and D reveal a less emphasized insight,
which is nonetheless important for our risk management analysis, namely, that the systematic
                                  s (s ) and σ w (w ), are also linear in s and w, respectively. Only
volatilities for scaled s and w, σm   t       m    t
when the entrepreneur has fully exhausted her debt capacity at st = −q F B (and wt = 0), do we
      s (s ) = σ w (w ) = 0.
have σm   t     m    t
    Consider next the case of inalienability. Panels A and B again reveal how different the risk
exposures are from the first-best. Recall that the debt limit under inalienability |s| = 0.21 (and
w = 0.96) is much tighter than the first-best debt limit, |sF B | = q F B = 1.264 (and wF B = 0). As a
result, the entrepreneur is endogenously more risk-averse, γe (s) > γ, as shown in Panel A of Figure
trades off incentive and risk-sharing considerations. Following Holmström (1979), this literature assumes that the
agent’s utility function is separable in effort and wealth (or consumption). In our framework, exerting effort is
analogous to staying with the firm. With this analogy, we note that our model does not assume the standard
separability as the severity of the agency problem depends on the distance of w to the debt limit w. We therefore
obtain a sharper result, namely, that the more severe is the agency problem, the less the agent is insured against
idiosyncratic risk. See Sannikov (2008) for a continuous-time version of the classical moral hazard problem.
   30
      Rampini, Sufi, and Viswanathan (2014) provide empirical evidence showing that more financially constrained
firms hedge less. However, our analysis implies that more constrained firms have less volatile s.



                                                        34
           Panel A. Market portfolio allocation: φ m (s)                          Panel B. Systematic risk exposure: xm (w)
                                                                                  0.4

           1.2
                                                                                  0.3

           0.8
                                                                                  0.2
           0.4
                                                                                  0.1
                                                                    FB
             0                                    o ← φ
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                        m (s) = −sβ
                                                  o
                                                  o




                                   s=- 0. 2 1 →                                                         o ← x
                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                        o o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                              m (w) = ρσ K w
                                                                                                          o




                                                                                            w= 0. 9 6 →
                 o
                 o
                 o
                 o
                 o
                 o
                 o
                 o




                         FB                                                         0
            −q                -1       -0.5               0   0.5        1              0    0.5        1       1.5     2       2.5
                                                      s                                                           w
                                                  s                                                                     w
            Panel C. Systematic volatility of s: σm (s)                           Panel D. Systematic volatility of w: σm (w)



           0.2                                                                    0.2


           0.1                                                                    0.1


                                                        s                                                       w
             0o
              o
              o
              o                                   o ← σ
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o     m (s) = 0                   0                     o ← σ
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o     m (w) = 0
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                  o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                          o




                                   s=- 0. 2 1 →                                             w= 0. 9 6 →
            −q F B -1                  -0.5               0   0.5        1              0     0.5             1       1.5   2   2.5
                                                      s                                                           w



Figure 4. Systematic risk exposures, φm (s) and xm (w), and systematic volatilities for s
and w, σm s (s) and σ w (w). The dotted lines depict the first-best results. The solid lines depict the
                       m
inalienability case: the entrepreneur’s systematic risk exposures are lower than under the first-best,
φm (s) < φFmB (s) and xm (w) < xFmB (w).


3, and m(s) is lower than the first-best level for all s. Equivalently, in the contracting problem
the principal is also endogenously more risk-averse, γp (w) > 0, as shown in Panel B of Figure 3,
and p(w) is lower than the first-best level for all w. It follows that the entrepreneur allocates less
of her net worth to the stock market for any s, and equivalently the principal exposes the agent
to less systematic risk for any w. At the debt limit, in particular, the endogenous risk aversion of
both the entrepreneur and the principal approach infinity, γe (s) = ∞ and γp (w) = ∞, so that the
                                                         s (s) = σ w (w) = 0.
systematic volatilities for both s and w approach zero: σm        m
       It is important to note that zero systematic volatilities are achieved by setting φm (s) = β F B s
and xm (w) = ρσK w, as can be seen from (22) and (83). Remarkably, while the mean-variance
term vanishes at the debt limit, the hedging term does not, because the entrepreneur still needs to
immunize herself from the systematic risk exposures of s and w that come from K.31
       At the other end of the support, as s → ∞ (or equivalently as w → ∞) and the inalienability
constraint becomes irrelevant, the entrepreneur achieves the first-best: lims→∞ φm (s) = φFmB (s) and
limw→∞ xm (w) = xFmB (w) = ηw/γ . In general, for any given s, |φm (s)| is a “weighted average” of
  31
    Note that the zero systematic volatility condition for s (or equivalently for w) turns out to be identical to the
zero idiosyncratic volatility condition for s (or equivalently for w).


                                                                             35
the first-best policy of maximizing net worth and the zero-volatility policy for s at the debt limit,
with an increasing weight being put on the first-best policy as s increases (the same is true for
xm (w) as w increases.)
   In sum, the risk management problem for the firm boils down to a compromise between achiev-
ing mean-variance efficiency for the entrepreneur’s net worth and maximizing the firm’s financing
capacity. To expand its financing capacity, the firm must reduce the volatility of s when s is low,
which involves scaling back |φh (s)| and |φm (s)|. Overall, this strategy amounts to both reducing
the systematic risk exposure and increasing the idiosyncratic risk exposure of the entrepreneur’s net
worth. This last result can be seen more directly from the risk exposures of the agent’s net worth
under the optimal contract. Indeed, the optimal contract requires that xm (w) < xFmB (w) = η w/γ
and xh (w) > xFh B (w) = 0, as can be seen from Panels B in Figures 2 and 4.

D. Investment and Compensation

                Panel A. Investment-capital ratio: i(s)                Panel B. Investment-capital ratio: i(w)
        0.15                                                   0.15

                                   ↑                                                     ↑
         0.1                 i F B =0. 1 3 2                    0.1                i F B =0. 1 3 2

        0.05                                                   0.05


           0                                                      0


        -0.05                                                  -0.05
          −q F B -1        -0.5         0      0.5    1                0     0.5         1           1.5   2   2.5
                                    s                                                         w

                      Panel C. Sensitivity: i′ (s)                          Panel D. Sensitivity: i′ (w)
           3                                                      3


           2                                                      2


           1                                                      1


           0                                                      0

          −q F B -1        -0.5         0      0.5    1                0     0.5         1           1.5   2   2.5
                                    s                                                         w



Figure 5. Investment-capital ratio and its sensitivity. The dotted lines depict the first-best
results: q F B = 1.264 and iF B = 0.132. The solid lines depict the inalienability case: the firm
always underinvests and i(s) increases with s (equivalently, i(w) increases with w.)

Investment and its Sensitivity to Liquidity. Figure 5 plots corporate investment and its sensitivity.
Panels A and C plot i(s) and i′ (s) for the primal problem, and Panels B and D plot i(w) and
i′ (w) for the contracting problem, respectively. The dotted lines describe the constant iF B = 0.132


                                                          36
under the first-best benchmark. Under inalienability, the investment-capital ratio is always lower
than iF B = 0.132, increasing from −0.043 to iF B = 0.132 as s increases from s = −0.208 towards
∞, or equivalently as w increases from w = 0.959 towards ∞, as can be seen in Panels A and
B, respectively. As the firm’s financial slack s (or equivalently w) increases, underinvestment
distortions are reduced. Note also that a sufficiently constrained firm optimally sells assets, it < 0,
so as to replenish valuable liquidity.
   Finally, we note that in our model there is a debt overhang effect even though debt is risk-free.
The reason is that debt reduces valuable financial slack and thus crowds out future investments.
              Panel A. Consumption-capital ratio: c(s)           Panel B. Consumption-capital ratio: c(w)
       0.16                                                   0.16


       0.12                                                   0.12


       0.08                                                   0.08


       0.04                                                   0.04


         0o
          o
          o
          o   o
              o
              o

                                                                0
              o




         −q F B -1        -0.5       0     0.5     1                 0   0.5    1       1.5    2      2.5
                                 s                                                  w

                     Panel C. The MPC: c′ (s)                            Panel D. The MPC: c′ (w)
        0.2                                                    0.2



       0.15                                                   0.15



        0.1                                                   0.1



       0.05                                                   0.05
         −q F B -1        -0.5       0     0.5     1                 0   0.5    1       1.5    2      2.5
                                 s                                                  w



Figure 6. Consumption-capital ratio and the MPC. The dotted lines depict the first-best
results: cF B (s) = χm(s) = χw = cF B (w). The solid lines depict the inalienability case: the
entrepreneur always underconsumes and c(s) is increasing and concave in s (equivalently, c(w) is
increasing and concave with w.)

Consumption and the Marginal Propensity to Consume (MPC). The entrepreneur’s FOC for con-
sumption is the standard condition: ζU ′ (C) = JS (K, S). Panels A and C of Figure 6 plot c(s)
and the MPC c′ (s). The dotted lines in Panels A and C describe Merton’s linear consumption rule
under the first-best: cF B (s) = χ(s + q F B ), where the constant MPC is χ = 6.13% and q F B = 1.264.
Under inalienability the entrepreneur underconsumes: ct is lower than cF B (s) in all circumstances.
But the higher is the financial slack s, the higher is the entrepreneur’s consumption. It is striking
that financially constrained entrepreneurs with s close to s = −0.208 have substantially larger
MPCs than suggested by Friedman’s permanent-income hypothesis. For example, when s = −0.2,

                                                         37
the MPC is c′ (−0.2) = 19.6%, which is much higher than the MPC of χ = 6.13% given by the
standard permanent-income hypothesis. This prediction is consistent with empirical evidence in
Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999).
   The dual contracting problem yields the same insights as the entrepreneur’s liquidity and risk
management problem. Panels B and D of Figure 6 show that c(w) is lower than the first-best
consumption rule due to the inalienability constraint, and c(w) is increasing and concave in w.

E. Comparative Statics with respect to α


        Panel A. Scaled certainty-equivalent wealth: m(s)                                  Panel B. Marginal value of liquidity: m′ (s)

          2
                                α = 0.8                                        1.4
         1                      α = 0.4                                        1.2
                                                   ← s =-0. 2 1
                                     ← s =-0. 69                                 1
          0 ooo   oo



        −q    FB
                           -1           -0.5          0            0.5          −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                  s
                       Panel C. Consumption-capital ratio: c(s)                             Panel D. Investment-capital ratio: i(s)
       0.12
                                                                               0.1
       0.08
                                                                              0.05
       0.04                                                                       0
                                                                              -0.05
         0 ooooo
              o




        −q F B             -1           -0.5          0            0.5          −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                  s
                       Panel E. Idiosyncratic risk hedge: φh (s)                      Panel F. Market portfolio allocation: φm (s)
          0                                                                      1
       -0.5
                                                                               0.5
         -1
                                                                                  0
       -1.5                                                                         ooo
                                                                                      oo
                                                                                      o




        −q F B             -1           -0.5          0            0.5          −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                  s
                                                                s (s)
                       Panel G. Idiosyncratic volatility of s: σh                                                                 s (s)
                                                                                            Panel H. Systematic volatility of s: σm
                                                                               0.2
          0 ooo   oo




                                                                               0.1
       -0.2
                                                                                  0o
                                                                                   oooo
                                                                                      o




       -0.4
        −q F B             -1           -0.5          0            0.5          −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                  s




Figure 7. Comparative statics with respect to α.             The lower the value of α, the less
inalienable the entrepreneur’s human capital, the higher the debt capacity |s|, the less the firm
underinvests and undercompensates the entrepreneur, the higher the idiosyncratic risk hedging
demand, and the higher the entrepreneur’s exposure to the stock market.


                                                                         38
       The value of α measures the degree of the inalienability of the entrepreneur’s human capital.
The higher is the value of α, the more inalienable is the entrepreneur’s human capital. Figure 7
compares our baseline solution (where α = 0.8) with the case in which α = 0.4. When α decreases
from 0.8 to 0.4, the debt capacity increases significantly from 21% to 69% of the capital stock, that
is, (s changes from −0.21 to −0.69. As a result, with less inalienable human capital (lower α), m(s)
increases, the marginal value of liquidity m′ (s) decreases, both the idiosyncratic and systematic risk
positions |φh (s)| and |φm (s)| increase, and both consumption and investment increase. Consistent
with these predictions, Jeffers (2018) finds that stronger labor-contract enforcement through tighter
noncompete clauses is associated with higher investment at human-capital-intensive firms.

F. Which Outside Option: Recontracting or Autarky?
       When limited commitment is due to the inalienability of human capital, it is natural to assume
that the entrepreneur’s outside option is employment at another firm, which involves recontract-
ing.32 At the new firm, the entrepreneur can combine her human capital with the new firm’s capital
stock under a new optimal contract. The point is that the mere decision to quit does not mean that
the entrepreneur has to hide and can no longer engage in any contracts. In contrast, when limited
commitment takes the form of absconsion, it is more natural to assume that the entrepreneur has
to continue in autarky.33 The absconsion/autarky perspective is more common in the literature.
       Why does it matter whether the outside option is autarky or recontracting? We address this
question below and show that even for reasonable coefficients of relative risk aversion, autarky
is such an unappealing and costly option for the entrepreneur that the first-best allocation can
be supported. That is, the autarky outside option loses its bite in generating plausible economic
predictions.
       Autarky means that the entrepreneur is shut out of capital markets and therefore has to divide
operating revenues AKt into consumption and investment (including adjustment costs), so that
AKt = Ct + It + Gt . As we show, autarky is a severe punishment even for an entrepreneur with
moderate risk aversion, as she is then fully exposed to the firm’s operating shocks and cannot
diversify them away. Ex ante limited commitment under these circumstances may not result in
much or any distortion in investment and consumption. We illustrate this key insight in Panels A
and B of Figure 8 by plotting m(s) and m′ (s) for both γ = 2 and γ = 5, when the outside option
is autarky.
       As risk aversion γ increases from 2 to 5, s changes from −0.756 to −q F B = −1.264. Panel B
further shows that when γ = 2, the marginal value of liquidity m′ (s) decreases from 1.544 to unity
as s increases from s = −0.756 to ∞. In contrast, when γ = 5, the marginal value of liquidity
  32
     Unless, of course, the entrepreneur is prevented from working by a noncompete clause, which we have ruled out.
However, in general noncompete clauses are of finite duration and hence in theory the employee still has options to
re-contract in the future.
  33
      Absconsion means “to hide away” or “to conceal” according to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. If the en-
trepreneur were openly seen to use the pilfered capital elsewhere, she would be at risk of legal recovery and enforcement
actions. To avoid these actions, she has to hide and therefore cannot engage in any new contracts.



                                                           39
                      Panel A. Autarky: m(s)                               Panel B. Autarky: m′ (s)
       2.5
                        γ=2
                                                               1.6
         2              γ=5


       1.5                                                     1.4


        1                                                      1.2

       0.5
                        ← s=- 0. 7 6                            1
         0o
          o
          o
          o  o
             o
             o
             o




        −q F B -1         -0.5           0      0.5   1              -1         -0.5        0     0.5      1
                                     s                                                  s

                    Panel C. Recontracting: m(s)                          Panel D. Recontracting: m′ (s)
       2.5
                                                               1.6
         2
                                                               1.4
       1.5

                                                               1.2
        1

       0.5                           ← s=- 0. 2 0               1
                     s =- 0. 2 1 →
         0                                                     0.8
        −q F B -1         -0.5           0      0.5   1              -1         -0.5        0     0.5      1
                                     s                                                  s



Figure 8. Recontracting versus autarky. Panels A and B plot the autarky case for γ = 2
and γ = 5. Panels C and D plot the recontracting case for γ = 2 and γ = 5. Under recontracting,
the solutions for γ = 2 and γ = 5 are similar. For example, s = −0.21 for γ = 2 and s = −0.20
for γ = 5. However, under autarky, when γ = 5, the solution features the first-best and hence
s = −q F B , but when γ = 2, s = −0.76.


equals unity (m′ (s) = 1) for all s (see the dashed line in Panel B), achieving the first-best. That
is, the first-best is attainable with γ = 5 under autarky because the punishment is so severe. The
limited commitment constraint never binds in equilibrium under autarky when γ = 5. This reduces
the empirical relevance of the limited commitment model with autarky.
   In contrast, under our recontracting formulation the first-best is far from attainable. The reason
is that the entrepreneur’s risk aversion has comparable quantitative effects on her value function
and her outside option value. Panels C and D of Figure 8 report m(s) and m′ (s) with γ = 2 and
γ = 5 for our recontracting formulation. We find that changes in risk aversion have almost no effect
on debt capacity: s barely changes, from −0.208 to −0.203, as we increase γ from 2 to 5. Finally,
observe that inalienability imposes a much tighter debt limit than under autarky. For example,
even when γ = 2, the debt capacity under recontracting is 0.208, which is less than one-third of
the debt capacity under autarky, 0.756.
Comparisons with Ai and Li (2015). The reformulation of our model with autarky as the outside
option is closely related to the contracting problem analyzed by Ai and Li (2015). They consider
a contracting problem between an infinitely lived risk-neutral principal and a risk-averse agent


                                                          40
with CRRA preferences who is subject to a limited commitment constraint with autarky as the
outside option. The contracting formulation of our model differs from Ai and Li (2015) in several
other respects. First, in our model both the principal and the entrepreneur are risk-averse and are
exposed to both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. Given that the principal is risk-neutral in Ai
and Li (2015), the distinction between aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks is not meaningful in their
setup.34 As we have shown, aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks have very different implications for
consumption, investment, portfolio choice, and risk management. Second, the state variable that we
choose to work with in our contracting problem is the entrepreneur’s promised certainty-equivalent
wealth, while in Ai and Li (2015) it is the agent’s promised utility. In other words, our units are
dollars while Ai and Li’s units are the agent’s utils. It is only by expressing the entrepreneur’s
compensation in dollars that we can interpret the entrepreneur’s future promised compensation
as a liquidity buffer and measure the extent to which the firm is financially constrained via the
investor’s marginal value of liquidity p′ (w).
       Third, the entrepreneur’s consumption in our problem is stochastic, while in Ai and Li (2015)
the agent’s consumption is deterministic for a given time interval (t, t+s) over which the constraints
do not bind. This result follows from the following optimality condition
                                     −γ                                             
                     −ζs       Ct+s           Mt+s             η2
                    e                       =      = exp − r +      s − η(Zm,t+s − Zm,t ) ,                     (84)
                                Ct             Mt              2

which states that the entrepreneur’s marginal rate of substitution (under full spanning) must equal
the investors’ SDF. Simplifying (84) yields
                                                          2                     
                                        −(ζ−r)s/γ        1 η s
                        Ct+s = Ct e                 exp        + η(Zm,t+s − Zm,t )   .                          (85)
                                                         γ  2

In Ai and Li (2015), consumption is deterministic, Ct+τ = Ct e−(ζ−r)τ /γ , as η = 0 in their model.35


                                VI. Persistent Productivity Shocks
       We further extend the model by introducing persistent productivity shocks. The firm faces
two conflicting forces in the presence of such shocks. First, as Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)
emphasize, the firm will want to have sufficient funding capacity to take maximal advantage of the
investment opportunities that become available when productivity is high. To do so, the firm may
want to take hedging positions that allow it to transfer funds from the low to the high productivity
state. Second, the firm also wants to smooth the entrepreneur’s compensation across productivity
states, allowing the entrepreneur to consume a higher share of earnings in the low than in the high
productivity state. To do so, the firm will need to ensure that it has sufficient liquidity and funding
                                                             2            
  34
       In our model the principal uses the SDF Mt = e−rt exp − η2 t − ηZm,t , while in Ai and Li (2015) the principal
uses Mt = e−rt . That is, the market price of risk is η > 0 in our model and η = 0 in their model.
  35
     With the additional assumption that ζ = r, consumption between t and t + τ is a submartingale in our model,
while it is constant in Ai and Li (2015).


                                                            41
capacity in the low productivity state. This may require taking hedging positions such that funds
are transferred from the high to the low productivity state.
       Which of these two forces dominates? We show that even for extreme parameter values for the
productivity shocks, the consumption/compensation smoothing effect dominates. One reason is
that, when productivity is high, the firm’s endogenous credit limit is also high, so that transferring
funds from the low to the high productivity state is less important. In contrast, the consumption
smoothing benefits of transferring funds from the high to the low productivity state are significant.
   We model persistent productivity shocks {At ; t ≥ 0} as a two-state Markov switching process,
                                                     
At ∈ AL , AH with 0 < AL < AH . We denote by λt ∈ λL , λH the transition intensity from one
state to the other, with λL denoting the intensity from state L to H, and λH the intensity from
state H to L. The counting process {Nt ; t ≥ 0} (starting with N0 = 0) keeps track of the number
of times the firm has switched productivity {As : s ≤ t} up to time t. It increases by one whenever
the state switches from either H to L or from L to H: dNt = Nt − Nt− = 1 if and only if At 6= At− ,
and dNt = 0 otherwise.
       In the presence of such shocks, the entrepreneur will want to purchase or sell insurance a-
gainst stochastic changes in productivity. We characterize the optimal insurance policy against
such shocks as well as how investment, compensation, risk management, and debt capacity vary
with productivity. For brevity, we only consider the case in which productivity shocks are purely
idiosyncratic.36
Productivity Insurance Contract. Consider the following insurance contract offered at current time
t−. Over the time interval dt = (t−, t), the entrepreneur pays the unit insurance premium ξt− dt to
the insurance counterparty in exchange for a unit payment at time t if and only if At 6= At− (i.e.,
dNt = 1). That is, the underlying event for this insurance contract is the change in productivity.
Under our assumptions of perfectly competitive financial markets and idiosyncratic productivity
shocks, the actuarially fair insurance premium is given by the intensity of the change in productivity
state: ξt− = λt− .
       Let Πt− denote the number of units of insurance purchased by the entrepreneur at time t−. We
refer to Πt− as the insurance demand. If Πt− < 0, the firm sells insurance and collects insurance
premia at the rate of λt− Πt− . Then St evolves as follows:

 dSt = (rSt + Yt − Ct + Φm,t (µm − r) − λt− Πt− ) dt + Φh,tνK dZh,t + Φm,t σm dZm,t + Πt− dNt . (86)

Note that the only differences between (86) and (10) are the insurance premium payment λt− Πt−
and the contingent liability coverage Πt− dNt .
       The solution for the firm’s value is a pair of state-contingent value functions J(K, S; AL ) ≡
J L (K, S) and J(K, S; AH ) ≡ J H (K, S), which solve two interlinked HJB equations, one for each
  36
    We have analyzed more general situations that incorporate systematic productivity shocks. Generalizing our
model to allow for a systematic risk premium requires an application of the standard change of measure technique by
choosing different transition intensities under the physical measure and the risk-neutral measure. See, for example,
Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2013). As one may expect, the generalized liquidity and risk management problem in this
section also has an equivalent optimal contracting formulation.


                                                        42
state.37 The HJB equation in state L is38
                                                                     2 K2
                                                                    σK
   ζJ L (K, S) =          max                               L
                                        ζU (C) + (I − δK K)JK +            L
                                                                          JKK
                      C,I,Φh ,Φm , ΠL                                 2
                                                                                                    
                                         + rS + Φm (µm − r) + AL K − I − G(I, K) − C − λL ΠL JSL
                                             2
                                                                     L     (νK Φh )2 + (σm Φm )2 L
                                         + νK  Φh + ρσK σm Φm KJKS       +                       JSS
                                                                                      2
                                         +λL [J H (K, S + ΠL ) − J L (K, S)] .                        (87)

Two important features differentiate (87) from the HJB equation (11). First, the drift term involv-
ing the marginal utility of liquidity JSL now includes the insurance payment −λL ΠL . Second, the
last term in (87) captures the adjustment of S by the amount ΠL and the corresponding change in
the value function following a productivity change from AL to AH .
       The inalienability constraint must hold at all t for both productivity states, so that

                                               St ≥ S(Kt ; At ) ,                                          (88)

or equivalently,
                                                  st ≥ s(At ) .                                            (89)

Naturally, the firm’s time-t credit limit |s(At )| depends on its productivity At . We use sH and sL
to denote s(At ) when At = AH and At = AL , respectively.
       The entrepreneur determines her optimal insurance demand ΠL in state L by differentiating
(87) with respect to ΠL and setting ΠL to satisfy the FOC,

                                         JSL (K, S) = JSH (K, S + ΠL ) ,                                   (90)

provided that the solution ΠL to the above FOC satisfies the (state-contingent) condition

                                                S + ΠL ≥ S H .                                             (91)

Otherwise, the entrepreneur sets the insurance demand so that ΠL = S H − S , in which case the
firm will be at its maximum debt level S H when productivity switches from AL to AH .39
Quantitative Analysis. We consider two sets of (annualized) parameter values. The first set is such
that AH = 0.25, AL = 0.14, and λL = λH = 0.2, with all other parameter values as in Table III.
The transition intensities (λH , λL ) = (0.2, 0.2) imply that the expected duration of each state is
five years. The second set of parameter values is identical to the first, except that AL = 0.05. That
is, productivity in the low state, AL , is much lower (0.05 instead of 0.14).
       Figure 9 plots the entrepreneur’s insurance demand π H (s) as the solid line and π L (s) as the
  37
     For contracting models involving jumps and/or regime switching, see Biais, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve
(2010), Piskorski and Tchistyi (2010), and DeMarzo, Fishman, He and Wang (2012), among others.
  38
     In Appendix C, we provide the coupled equivalent HJB equation for J(K, S; AH ) ≡ J H (K, S) in state H.
  39
     An equivalent set of conditions characterizing ΠH is presented in Appendix C.


                                                       43
                                                     Panel A. State-L productivity: AL = 0.14          Panle B. State-L productivity: AL = 0.05
                                                   0.4                                               0.4
           Insurance demand: π H (s) and π L (s)




                                                               πH
                                                               πL
                                                   0.2                                               0.2


                                                                 ← sH =- 0. 2 2                                     ← sH = - 0 . 2 0
                                                     0                                                 0



                                                   -0.2                                              -0.2
                                                                  ← sL =- 0. 1 8
                                                                                                                      ← sL =- 0. 1 3
                                                   -0.4                                              -0.4
                                                     -0.5               0                0.5           -0.5                0               0.5
                                                                        s                                                  s



Figure 9. Insurance demand under persistent productivity shocks: π H (s) and π L (s).
State H productivity is AH = 0.25 in both panels. In Panel A, state L productivity is AL = 0.14,
sH = −0.217, sL = −0.178, and π L (s) = sH − s when −0.178 < s < −0.129. In Panel B, state L
productivity is AL = 0.05, sH = −0.200, sL = −0.128, and π L (s) = sH − s when −0.128 < s <
0.023.

dashed line. Panel A plots the insurance demand in both states when productivity differences
are (AH − AL )/AH = (0.25 − 0.14)/0.25 = 44%, while Panel B plots the insurance demand when
productivity differences are very large, (AH − AL )/AH = (0.25 − 0.05)/0.25 = 80%. Remarkably,
under both sets of parameter values the firm optimally buys insurance in state H, π H (s) > 0, and
sells insurance in state L, π L (s) < 0. This result is not obvious a priori, for when productivity
differences are large, the benefit of transferring liquidity from state L to H and thereby taking better
advantage of investment opportunities when they arise could well be the dominant consideration
for the firm’s risk management. But this turns out not to be the case. Even when productivity
differences are as large as 80%, the dominant consideration is still to smooth the entrepreneur’s
consumption. Moreover, comparison of Panels A and B reveals that for the larger productivity
differences, the insurance demand is also larger, with π H (s) exceeding 0.2 everywhere in Panel B
but remaining below 0.2 in Panel A, and π L (s) attaining values lower than −0.25 in Panel B (when
s + π L ≥ sH is not binding), always remaining larger than −0.2 in Panel A.40
      Figure 10 shows that m(s), consumption c(s), investment i(s), and debt capacity |s| are higher
in state H than in state L, as one would expect. Similarly, the size of the idiosyncratic risk hedging
position as well as that of stock market exposures, |φh (s)| and |φm (s)|, are higher in state H than
in state L. However, a somewhat subtle result is that marginal value of liquidity schedules, m′ (s),
for state H and L cross.
 40
      These results are robust and hold for other more extreme parameter values, which for brevity we do not report.




                                                                                                44
         Panel A. Scaled certainty-equivalent wealth: m(s)                   Panel B. Marginal value of liquidity: m′ (s)


                       H                                               1.4
          2
                       L
                                                                       1.2
          1
                                                                        1

          -0.5                      0                      0.5          -0.5                     0                     0.5
                                    s                                                            s
               Panel C. Consumption-capital ratio: c(s)                      Panel D. Investment-capital ratio: i(s)
       0.12                                                            0.2

                                                                      0.1
       0.08
                                                                         0

       0.04                                                           -0.1
          -0.5                      0                      0.5          -0.5                     0                     0.5
                                    s                                                            s
               Panel E. Idiosyncratic risk hedge: φh (s)                 Panel F. Market portfolio allocation: φm (s)
          0

        -0.5                                                            1
                                                                       0.5
         -1
                                                                         0
        -1.5
          -0.5                      0                      0.5          -0.5                     0                     0.5
                                    s                                                            s
                                                        s (s)
               Panel G. Idiosyncratic volatility of s: σh                                                          s (s)
                                                                             Panel H. Systematic volatility of s: σm

          0
                                                                       0.2

        -0.2                                                          0.1

                                                                         0
        -0.4
          -0.5                      0                      0.5          -0.5                     0                     0.5
                                    s                                                            s




Figure 10. The case with persistent productivity shocks. Table III contains parameter val-
ues unless otherwise stated here: AH = 0.25, AL = 0.14, and λL = λH = 0.2. Under inalienability,
sH = −0.217, and sL = −0.178. Under the first-best, qH
                                                     F B = 1.357, q F B = 1.115, iF B = 0.179, and
                                                                   L              H
 F B
iL = 0.057.


    VII. Deterministic Formulation à la Hart and Moore (1994)
   Our contracting problem is also closely related to Hart and Moore’s (1994) contracting problem
under inalienability. Hart and Moore (1994) consider a special case with a single deterministic
project and linear preferences for both the investor and the entrepreneur. They emphasize the idea
that debt financing is optimal when the entrepreneur’s human capital is inalienable. Our more
general framework reveals that the optimality of debt financing is not a robust result. Instead,
the robust ideas are that inalienability gives rise to 1) an endogenous financing capacity and 2) an


                                                                 45
optimal corporate liquidity and risk management problem.
    To highlight the critical role of liquidity management, it is instructive to consider the special
case of our model in which there are no shocks, so that σK = 0 and η = 0, as in Hart and Moore
(1994). Although output and capital accumulation become deterministic, this special case of our
model is still more general than Hart and Moore (1994) in two respects: 1) the entrepreneur has a
strictly concave utility function and therefore a strict preference for smoothing consumption, and 2)
the firm’s operations are not fixed by a one-time lump-sum investment, but rather can be adjusted
over time through capital accumulation (or decumulation). That is, our model can be viewed as a
convex version of Hart and Moore (1994), as the additional controls in our deterministic formulation
are consumption and investment, both of which are convex and characterized by FOCs.
    With σK = 0 and η = 0, the liquidity ratio st evolves at the rate of

                          µs (st ) ≡ dst /dt = (r + δ − it )st + A − it − g(it ) − ct ,                        (92)

given a contract {ct , it ; t ≥ 0}. To ensure that the entrepreneur stays with the firm and the financing
capacity is maximized, µs (s) = 0 has to hold. The ODE given in (43) can be simplified to

      m(s) h        γ−1
                          i
 0=         γχm′ (s) γ − ζ + [rs + A − i(s) − g(i(s))] m′ (s) + (i(s) − δ)(m(s) − sm′ (s)) ,                   (93)
      1−γ

where χ = r + γ −1 (ζ − r) and lims→∞ m(s) = q F B + s.
    Under the first-best, with it = iF B and ct = cF B , the drift of s, µsF B (st ), is then
                                                                                      
          µsF B (st ) = r + δ − iF B       st + q F B − cF B = − iF B − δ + γ −1 (ζ − r) mF B (st ),           (94)

where the first equality uses (29) and the second uses (32) and (33). It immediately follows that
the first-best drift is negative, µsF B (st ) ≤ 0, if and only if the following condition holds:

                                              iF B ≥ δ − γ −1 (ζ − r) .                                        (95)

When does condition (95) hold? Under the auxiliary assumption that the entrepreneur’s discount
rate ζ equals the interest rate r, (95) holds if and only if the firm’s first-best net investment policy
is positive: iF B ≥ δ. In other words, condition (95) requires the firm to grow under the first-best
policy, which is the natural case to focus on. The alternative case is when (95) is not satisfied.
Then the firm’s size is decreasing over time even under the first-best policy. In this latter case,
the inalienability of human capital constraint is irrelevant and the first-best outcome (optimal
downsizing) is attained.41 We summarize this discussion in the proposition below.

PROPOSITION 1: When (95) is satisfied, the drift of s equals zero at the endogenous debt limit
  41
     For example, when productivity A = 0.18 (together with σK = 0 and η = 0), q F B = 1.17 and iF B = 0.0852.
Because δ = 11% and r = ζ = 5%, it is immediate to see that (95) is violated and hence µsF B (st ) > 0. That is, st
increases over time even under first-best and thus her limited commitment constraint never binds. Of course, the net
worth s + q F B is positive, which implies s ≥ s, where s = −q F B = −1.17 in this case.


                                                         46
s: µs (s) = 0 . When (95) is not satisfied, the first-best outcome is obtained.

         Panel A. Scaled certainty-equivalent wealth: m(s)               Panel B. Marginal value of liquidity: m′ (s)

          1.5                                                     1.04

           1
                                                                  1.02

          0.5
                                s =- 0. 25 →                        1
           0 oo
              o
              o
              o     o
                    o
                    o




          −q F B        -1          -0.5          0    0.5         −q F B     -1          -0.5        0            0.5
                                       s                                                    s
                             Panel C. Drift: µs (s)                        Panel D. Investment-capital ratio: i(s)
                                                                  0.14
           0 ooo
               o
               o    o
                    o
                    o



                             µs (s ) = 0 → oo
                                            o
                                            o  o
                                               o
                                               o
                                               o




        -0.02                                                     0.12


        -0.04
                                                                  0.1 F B
          −q F B -1                 -0.5           0   0.5         −q         -1          -0.5          0          0.5
                                           s                                                     s
                                                                                                        ′
               Panel E. Consumption-capital ratio: c(s)                         Panel F. The MPC: c (s)
                                                                  0.12
         0.08


                                                                  0.08
         0.04



           0oo
             o
             o
             o  o
                o
                o



                                                                  0.04
          −q F B        -1          -0.5           0   0.5         −q F B     -1          -0.5          0          0.5
                                           s                                                     s



Figure 11. The deterministic case (σK = 0 and η = 0), where the firm is financially
constrained. Productivity A = 0.185 and other parameter values are given in Table III. Under
the first-best, the firm’s debt capacity is −s = 0.25. The dotted lines depict the first-best results
with q F B = 1.271 and iF B = 0.136.

   Figure 11 plots the solution when A = 0.185. Note that iF B = 0.136, which is greater than
δ = δK = 0.11. Hence, (95) is satisfied and the first-best is unattainable. The firm underinvests and
undercompensates the entrepreneur relative to the first-best, since the marginal value of liquidity
is greater than one, m′ (s) > 1. Liquidity st decreases over time and reaches s, the permanently
absorbing state. In our example, s = −0.249. Starting at s0 = 0, it takes 25.77 years to reach
the absorbing state, where the borrowing constraint binds permanently at s25.77 = s = −0.249.
Similarly, due to the friction of limited commitment, the marginal value of liquidity is greater than
one, m′ (s) = m′ (−0.249) = 1.038 > 1. Panels C and D show that the entrepreneur reduces her
consumption and investment smoothly even with no risk. Since m′ (s) > 1, the MPC is greater
than that under first-best case.




                                                             47
                     VIII. Two-Sided Limited Commitment
   In our baseline model, the firm’s optimal policy requires that investors incur losses with positive
probability. As Figure 1 illustrates, investors make losses, p(w) < 0, when w > 1.18. But investors’
ex ante commitment to continue compensating the entrepreneur ex post even when doing so incurs
large losses for investors may not be credible. What if investors cannot commit to such loss-making
promises to the entrepreneur ex post? We next explore this issue and characterize the solution
when neither the entrepreneur nor investors are able to commit.
   Suppose that investors can commit only to making losses ex post up to a fixed fraction ℓ of the
total capital stock, so that p(wt ) ≥ −ℓ at all t. For expositional simplicity we set ℓ = 0. Then the
main difference relative to the one-sided commitment problem analyzed so far is that there is also
an upper boundary s = −p(w) = 0. Note that under two-sided limited commitment with ℓ = 0,
the firm will never be in the positive savings region. As a result, the following new conditions hold
at s = 0:
                                          σhs (0) = σm
                                                     s
                                                       (0) = 0 .                                     (96)

Using the same argument as for (49), we can express (96) as m′′ (0) = −∞ , and we verify that
µs (s) given in (23) is weakly negative at s = 0, so that s ≤ s = 0 with probability one.
   Panel A of Figure 12 shows that investors’ lack of commitment significantly destroys value. For
example, at s = 0, under full commitment by investors, m(0) = 1.198, which is 42% higher than
m(0) = 0.843, the value under two-sided limited commitment. With two-sided limited commitment,
s lies between s = −0.25 and s = 0, so that the entrepreneur has a larger credit limit of |s| = 0.25
instead of |s| = 0.208, the debt capacity under one-sided limited commitment. However, a firm with
a larger debt capacity is not necessarily less financially constrained, since investors’ limited-liability
constraint limits the entrepreneur’s self-insurance capacity.
   Interestingly, the marginal value of liquidity under two-side limited commitment is lower than
unity, m′ (s) < 1, which is quite different from the one-sided case where m′ (s) > 1. While an increase
in liquidity mitigates the entrepreneur’s inalienability, it makes the investor’s limited commitment
more likely to bind in the future, so the net effect of increasing s on m′ (s) is ambiguous. Value
destruction arises from the direct effect of the entrepreneur’s inability to hold liquid savings (s
cannot be strictly positive) and from the indirect effect of distorting consumption decisions and
investment. Panel C shows that the entrepreneur is undercompensated relative to the first-best.
Panel D shows that i(s) under two-sided limited commitment fundamentally differs from that under
one-sided limited commitment. For example, at s = 0, i(0) = 0.331 under one-sided commitment,
which is six times higher than i(0) = 0.053 under two-sided limited commitment.
   Compared with the first-best, the firm underinvests when s < −0.13 but over-invests when
−0.13 < s ≤ 0. Whether the firm under-invests or overinvests depends on the net effects of
the entrepreneur’s and investors’ limited commitment constraints. For sufficiently low values of s
(when the entrepreneur is deep in debt), the entrepreneur’s constraint matters more and hence the
firm underinvests. When s is sufficiently close to zero, investors’ limited liability constraint has a


                                                   48
         Panel A. Scaled certainty-equivalent wealth: m(s)                                Panel B. Marginal value of liquidity: m′ (s)


                              1-sided                                          1.2
          1                   2-sided              ← s =-0. 2 1
                                                                               0.8
                                  s   =-0. 25 →            ← s =0
          0o oo oo
                o

                                                                               0.4
         −q F B          -1             -0.5           0            0.5        −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                 s
                     Panel C. Consumption-capital ratio: c(s)                              Panel D. Investment-capital ratio: i(s)
        0.12
                                                                               0.3
        0.08                                                                   0.2

        0.04                                                                   0.1
                                                                                 0
          0 oo
             oooo




         −q F B          -1             -0.5           0            0.5        −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                 s
                     Panel E. Idiosyncratic risk hedge: φh (s)                       Panel F. Market portfolio allocation: φm (s)
          0
                                                                               0.8
        -0.5
                                                                               0.4
         -1
                                                                                 0
                                                                                   oo
        -1.5                                                                         oo
                                                                                     o




         −q F B          -1             -0.5           0            0.5        −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                 s
                                                              s (s)
                     Panel G. Idiosyncratic volatility of s: σh                                                                 s (s)
                                                                                          Panel H. Systematic volatility of s: σm
                                                                               0.2
          0o
           ooo  oo




                                                                               0.1
        -0.2
                                                                                 0 oooo
                                                                                     oo




        -0.4
         −q F B          -1             -0.5           0            0.5        −q F B         -1          -0.5          0            0.5
                                               s                                                                 s




Figure 12. Two-sided limited commitment. The endogenous upper boundary s = 0. Com-
pared with the first-best, s lies in the range (s, s) = (−0.25, 0) under two-sided limited commitment.
The firm underinvests when s is close to s = −0.25 and overinvests when s is close to s = 0. The
credit limit under the two-sided limited commitment |s| = 0.25 is larger than the credit limit
|s| = 0.21 in our baseline case with only inalienable human capital.


stronger influence on investment. To ensure that s ≤ 0, the entrepreneur needs to transform liquid
assets into illiquid capital even though this may compromise investment efficiency. This mechanism
causes the firm to overinvest relative to the first-best.
   Phrased in terms of the equivalent contracting problem, the intuition is as follows. Given that
the entrepreneur cares about her total compensation W = w · K and given that investors are
constrained by their ability to promise the entrepreneur w beyond an upper bound w (in this case,
w = m(0) = 0.843), investors reward the entrepreneur along the extensive margin, firm size K,


                                                                          49
which allows the entrepreneur to accumulate more human capital and earn higher compensation
payoffs through overinvestment.
   Panels E and F plot the idiosyncratic risk hedge φh (s) and the market portfolio allocation φm (s).
Neither φh (s) nor φm (s) is monotonic in s under two-sided limited commitment. The reason is that
the volatilities σhs (s) and σm
                              s (s) for s must be turned off at both s = −0.25 and s = 0 to prevent

separation by the entrepreneur and investors (see Panels G and H). This is achieved by setting
φh (s) = s = −0.25, φm (s) = β F B s = −0.05, and φh (0) = φm (0) = 0, as implied by the volatility
boundary conditions for σhs (s) and σm
                                     s (s) at s and s.




                                       IX. Conclusion
   Talent retention is a major challenge for many companies, especially for technology companies.
It is obviously a central issue for human resource management. Less obviously, however, it also
has implications for corporate financial management, as our analysis underscores. We show how
human capital flight risk affects not only firms’ compensation policy, but also their investment,
financing capacity, liquidity, and risk management policies. More liquidity and spare borrowing
capacity buttress the firm’s future compensation promises and allow the firm to retain talent in a
more cost-efficient way.
   Human capital flight risk provides a novel rationale for corporate risk management policies.
The firm’s goal in our analysis is not so much to improve the risk exposure of investors, but to offer
constrained-efficient risk exposures to its employees, who have all their human capital tied up with
the firm. Our theory helps explain in particular why when retained earnings rise, firms choose to
invest an increasing fraction of these earnings in risky financial assets (Duchin, Gilbert, Harford,
and Hrdlicka (2017)).
   In sum, the corporate risk management problem in our model boils down to a compromise
between 1) the maximization of key employees’ or the entrepreneur’s net worth, which requires full
insurance against idiosyncratic risk as well as a mean-variance-efficient risk exposure to the stock
market, and 2) the maximization/preservation of the firm’s borrowing capacity, which involves
reducing the volatility of retained earnings per unit of capital. When the firm is close to depleting
its line of credit, the priority is to survive. From a liquidity and risk management perspective,
this means that the firm cuts back on expenditures, reduces compensation, and sells insurance in
order to generate liquidity for survival. In contrast, when liquidity is plentiful, the firm adapts its
corporate policies so as to optimize the (mean-variance) preferences of its key employees.
   Although our framework is already quite rich, we impose a number of strong assumptions that
are worth relaxing in future work. For example, one interesting direction would be to allow for
equilibrium separation between the entrepreneur and investors. This could arise when, after a
productivity shock, the entrepreneur is no longer the best user of the firm’s capital stock. Investors
may then want to redeploy their capital to other more efficient uses, and the entrepreneur may
similarly find her human capital more productive elsewhere. By allowing for equilibrium separation,


                                                  50
our model could then be applied to study questions such as the life-span of entrepreneurial firms,
managerial turnover, and how the choice of investment in firm-specific versus general human capital
is affected by the firm’s financial flexibility.




                                                   51
     Appendix A.                   The Entrepreneur’s Optimization Problem
   We conjecture that the entrepreneur’s value function J(K, S) takes the form

                                                  (bM (K, S))1−γ   (bm(s)K)1−γ
                               J(K, S) =                         =             ,                    (A1)
                                                       1−γ            1−γ

where b is a constant that will be determined later. We then have

                JS     = b1−γ (m(s)K)−γ m′ (s),                                                     (A2)
                JK     = b1−γ (m(s)K)−γ (m(s) − sm′ (s)),                                           (A3)
                                                                                              
              JSK      = b1−γ (m(s)K)−1−γ              −sm(s)m′′ (s) − γm′ (s)(m(s) − sm′ (s)) ,    (A4)
                                                                             
              JSS      = b1−γ (m(s)K)−1−γ              m(s)m′′ (s) − γm′ (s)2 ,                     (A5)
                                                                                          
             JKK       = b1−γ (m(s)K)−1−γ              s2 m(s)m′′ (s) − γ(m(s) − sm′ (s))2 .        (A6)

Substituting these terms into the HJB equation (11) and simplifying, we obtain
                                          1−γ
                                     c
                                   bm(s)          −1
   0 =      max        ζm(s)                 + (i − δK )(m(s) − sm′ (s))
          c,i,φh ,φm                  1−γ
                                                                                             
                                                            σ2             γ(m(s) − sm′ (s))2
          +(rs + φm (µm − r) + A − i − g(i) − c)m′ (s) + K s2 m′′ (s) −
                                                             2                   m(s)
                                                                        
              2
                                                 γm (s)(m(s) − sm (s))
                                                     ′              ′
          + νK  φh + ρσK σm φm −sm′′ (s) −
                                                           m(s)
                    2          2                ′   2 
            (νK φh ) + (σm φm )              γm (s)
          +                        m′′ (s) −             .                                     (A7)
                      2                        m(s)

   The FOCs for consumption and investment in (12) and (13) then become

                                         ζU ′ (c) = b1−γ m(s)−γ m′ (s),                             (A8)
                                                     m(s)
                                       1 + g ′ (i) =        − s.                                    (A9)
                                                     m′ (s)

From FOCs (15) and (14), we obtain (41) and (42).
   Finally, substituting these policy functions for c(s), φh (s), and φm (s) into (A7), we obtain the
ODE for m(s):

          m(s) h         γ−1   i
   0 =           γχm′ (s) γ − ζ + [rs + A − i(s) − g(i(s))] m′ (s) + (i(s) − δ)(m(s) − sm′ (s))
          1−γ
             2            
             γσK                 m(s)2 m′′ (s)            η 2 m′ (s)2 m(s)
          −        − ρησK                          +                            ,           (A10)
               2             m(s)m′′ (s) − γm′ (s)2 2(γm′ (s)2 − m(s)m′′ (s))

where χ is defined by
                                                             γ−1    1
                                                       χ≡b    γ    ζγ .                            (A11)


                                                           52
Substituting γe given by (19) into (A10), we obtain the ODE given in (43).

Appendix A.       First-Best
   Under the first-best, the value function is given by mF B (s) = s + q F B . Substituting this
expression for mF B (s) into the ODE (A10), we obtain

              s + qF B                                                        η 2 (s + q F B )
        0 =            [γχ − ζ] + rs + A − iF B − g(iF B ) + (iF B − δ)q F B +
               1−γ                                                                     2γ
                           2
                                 
                γχ − ζ    η                                                               
            =           +     + r (s + q F B ) + A − iF B − g(iF B ) − (r + δ − iF B )q F B .      (A12)
                 1−γ      2γ

As (A12) must hold for all mF B (s) = s + q F B , we have
                                                            
                                         η2    −1         η2
                                    χ=r+    +γ      ζ −r−      ,                                   (A13)
                                         2γ               2γ

as given by (33), and
                               0 = A − iF B − g(iF B ) − (r + δ − iF B )q F B ,                    (A14)

so that (29) holds. In addition, using (A11), we obtain the expression (17) for the coefficient b.
Next, substituting m(s) = mF B (s) = s + q F B into (A8) and (A9) gives the first-best consumption
rule (32) and investment policy (25). To ensure that the optimization problem is well posed, we
require positive consumption and a positive Tobin’s q, that is, χ > 0 and q F B > 0, which imply
                                                                 
                                               η2    −1        η2
                             Condition 1 : r +    +γ      ζ−r−      > 0,                           (A15)
                                               2γ              2γ
                             Condition 2 : iF B < r + δ ,                                          (A16)

where iF B is the solution of (29). Substituting m(s) = mF B (s) = s + q F B into (41) and (42),
respectively, we obtain the first-best idiosyncratic risk hedge φFh B (s) given in (34) and the market
portfolio allocation φFmB (s) given in (35).
   The expected return for QFt B , µF B , satisfies the CAPM, where

           A − iF B − g(iF B )                                      
  µF B =            F B
                               + iF B − δK = r + δ − iF B + iF B − δK = r + β F B (µm − r) (A17)
                  q

and β F B is given by (28). The value of capital QFt B follows a GBM process as given by
                                                                               
                      dQFt B = QFt B       iF B − δK dt + (νK dZh,t + ρσK dZm,t ) ,                (A18)
                    
with drift iF B − δK , idiosyncratic volatility νK , and systematic volatility ρσK . These coefficients
are identical to those for {Kt : t ≥ 0}. Next, we apply Ito’s formula to MtF B = St + QFt B =




                                                     53
St + q F B Kt and obtain the dynamics
                                                                   
                                                     η2         η
                           dMtF B   =   MtF B     r+    − χ dt + dZm,t .                           (A19)
                                                     γ          γ

Appendix B. Inalienable Human Capital
   From the monotonicity property of J(K, S) in S, it follows that the condition given in (45)
reduces to St ≥ S t = S(Kt ) given in (46). Substituting the value function (16) into (44), we obtain
M (K, S) = M (αK, 0), which implies (47). The boundary conditions given in (49) are necessary to
ensure that the entrepreneur will stay with the firm, which implies that

                                   φh (s) = s and      φm (s) = s β F B .                          (A20)

Applying (A20) to (41) and (42), we show that (49) is equivalent to lims→s m′′ (s) = −∞ as given
in (51).


                Appendix B.                Equivalent Optimal Contract
Appendix A.     Solution of the Contracting Problem
HJB Equation for F (K, V ). Using Ito’s formula, we have

             d(Mt F (Kt , Vt )) = Mt dF (Kt , Vt ) + F (Kt , Vt )dMt + < dMt , dF (Kt , Vt ) > ,    (B1)

where

                          FKK                              FV V
dF (Kt , Vt ) = FK dKt +         < dKt , dKt > +FV dVt +        < dVt , dVt > +FV K < dVt , dKt >
                            2                               2      
                                     2 K 2F
                                    σK     KK
              = (I − δK K)FK +                  + ζ (V − U (C)) FV dt
                                         2
                   2      2 )V 2 F                                
                   (zh + zm        VV
                +                      + (zh νK + zm ρσK )KV FV K dt
                            2
                                                        p                       
                +V FV (zh dZh,t + zm dZm,t ) + σK KFK       1 − ρ2 dZh,t + ρdZm,t .           (B2)

Using the SDF M given in (8) and the martingale representation

                               Et [d(Mt F (Kt , Vt ))] + Mt (Yt − Ct )dt = 0 ,                      (B3)

we obtain (57), which is the HJB equation for the optimal contracting problem.
 Optimal Policy Functions and ODE for p(w). Applying Ito’s formula to (61) and transforming




                                                     54
(57) for F (K, V ) into the HJB equation for P (K, W ), we obtain
                                                                        
                                            ζ(U (bW ) − U (C))
rP (K, W ) =         max         Y −C +                         − xm ηK PW + (I − δK K − ρησK K)PK
                   C,I,xh ,xm                    bU ′ (bW )
                                  σ2 K 2        (x2 + x2m )K 2 PW W bU ′ (bW ) − PW b2 U ′′ (bW )
                                + K      PKK + h
                                    2                   2                  bU ′ (bW )
                                +(xh νK + xm ρσK )K 2 PW K   .                                    (B4)

The FOCs for C, I, xh , and xm are given by

                         ζ
            U ′ (bW ) = − PW (K, W )U ′ (C) ,                                            (B5)
                         b
       1 + GI (I, K) = PK (K, W ) ,                                                      (B6)
                                     νK PW K
                  xh = −                                 ,                               (B7)
                         PW W − PW bU ′′ (bW )/U ′ (bW )
                                    ρσK PW K                   ηPW
                  xm = −                                 +                             . (B8)
                         PW W − PW bU (bW )/U (bW ) K[PW W − PW bU ′′ (bW )/U ′ (bW )]
                                         ′′      ′


By substituting P (K, W ) = p(w)K into (B5) to (B8), we obtain the optimal consumption, in-
vestment, and risk management policies given by (63) to (66), respectively.           By substituting
P (K, W ) = p(w)K and the corresponding optimal policies (63) to (66) into the PDE (B4), we
find that the investor’s value p(w) satisfies ODE (71).
 Dynamics of the Entrepreneur’s Promised Scaled Wealth w. Using Ito’s formula, we have the
following dynamics for W :

                                          ∂W       1 ∂2W
                                  dWt =      dVt +        < dVt , dVt > ,                         (B9)
                                          ∂V       2 ∂V 2

where we use < dVt , dVt > to denote the quadratic variation of V , ∂W /∂V = 1/V ′ (W ), and
∂2W           ′′

∂V 2
                  (W )
       = − (VV ′ (W ))3
                        . Substituting the dynamics of V given by (56) into (B9) yields (59). Using the
dynamics for W and K, and applying Ito’s formula to wt = Wt /Kt , we can write the dynamic
evolution of the certainty-equivalent wealth w as given by (67).

Appendix B.           Equivalence


   The optimization problem for the entrepreneur is equivalent to the dynamic optimal contracting
problem for the investor in (53) if and only if the borrowing limits, S(K), are such that

                                             S(K) = −P (K, W ) ,                                 (B10)

where P (K, W ) is the investor’s value when the entrepreneur’s inalienability constraint binds. We
characterize the implementation solution by first solving the investor’s problem in (57) and then
imposing the constraint (B10).


                                                      55
   The optimal contracting problem gives rise to the investor’s value function F (K, V ), with the
promised utility to the entrepreneur V as the key state variable. The investor’s value F (K, V ) can
be expressed in terms of the entrepreneur’s promised certainty-equivalent wealth W , P (K, W ). The
optimization problem for the entrepreneur gives rise to the entrepreneur’s value function J(K, S),
with S = −P (K, W ) as the key state variable. Equivalently, the entrepreneur’s objective is her
certainty equivalent wealth M (K, S) and the relevant state variable is her savings S = −P .
   The following relations between s and w hold:

                                  s = −p(w) and m(s) = w .                                     (B11)

The standard chain rule implies

                                           1                    p′′ (w)
                           m′ (s) = −          and m ′′
                                                        (s) = −         .                      (B12)
                                        p′ (w)                  p′ (w)3

Next, we demonstrate the equivalence between the two problems by showing that by substituting
s = −p(w) into the ODE for m(s), we obtain the ODE for p(w), and vice versa. Substituting
(B11) and (B12) into the ODE (43) for m(s), we obtain the ODE (71) for p(w). Substituting
(B11) and (B12) into consumption and investment policies (37) and (39) in the liquidity and risk
management problem, we obtain the optimal consumption and investment policies (63) and (64) in
the contracting problem. Substituting (B11) and (B12) into (47) and (51), the boundary conditions
for m(s), we obtain (75) and (78), the boundary conditions for p(w).

Appendix C. Autarky as the Entrepreneur’s Outside Option
       b t ) denote the entrepreneur’s value function under autarky defined as
   Let J(K
                                                Z    ∞                       
                            b t ) = max Et
                            J(K                             −ζ(v−t)
                                                           ζe         U (Cv )dv .              (B13)
                                         I        t

Under autarky, the entrepreneur’s consumption Ct satisfies output Yt , in that

                                  Ct = Yt = At Kt − It − G(It , Kt ) .                         (B14)

The following proposition summarizes the main results.
                                                                b
PROPOSITION 2: Under autarky, the entrepreneur’s value function J(K) is given by

                                                 c(K))1−γ
                                               (bM
                                        b
                                        J(K) =            ,                                    (B15)
                                                  1−γ

                          c(K) is the certainty-equivalent wealth under autarky given by
where b is given by (17), M

                                             c(K) = mK
                                             M      b ,                                        (B16)


                                                      56
                                                                             1
                                     (ζ(1 + g ′ (bi))(A − bi − g( bi) )−γ ) 1−γ
                                 b =
                                 m                                              ,                    (B17)
                                                         b
and bi is the optimal investment-capital ratio that solves the implicit equation

                                 A − bi − g(bi)                      σ 2 γ(1 − γ)
                            ζ=                  + (bi − δK )(1 − γ) − K           .                  (B18)
                                  1 + g ′ (bi)                             2

                                           b
Proof of Proposition 2. The value function J(K) satisfies the HJB equation

                                             C 1−γ                  σ2 K 2 b
                            ζ Jb = max ζ           + (I − δK K)JbK + K    JKK .                      (B19)
                                      I      1−γ                      2

                 c(K))1−γ
               (bM
      b
Using J(K) =                 and c = A − i − g(i), we have
                   1−γ

                                                   1−γ                           2 γ(1 − γ)
                                     A − i − g(i)                                 σK
                 ζ = max ζ                                 + (i − δK )(1 − γ) −               .      (B20)
                        i                b
                                         mb                                            2

Using the FOC for i, we obtain (B17). Substituting (B17) into (B20), we obtain bi given by (B18).
Note that the entrepreneur’s value function J(K, S) satisfies the condition

                                                              b t) ,
                                                J(Kt , St ) ≥ J(K                                    (B21)

                                  c(Kt ) and M (Kt , S t ) = M
which implies that M (Kt , St ) ≥ M                          c(Kt ). By using the homogeneity
                                                                                b.
property in K, we can also establish that the lower boundary s satisfies m(s) = m


               Appendix C.                    Persistent Productivity Shocks
   By using the dynamics given in (86), we obtain the HJB equation for the value function J L (K, S)
in state L, which is given by (87), and the following HJB equation for J H (K, S) in state H:

                                                                        2 K2
                                                                       σK
  ζJ H (K, S) =         max                                   H
                                          ζU (C) + (I − δK K)JK +             H
                                                                             JKK
                    C,I,Φh ,Φm ,ΠH                                       2
                                                                                                     
                                          + rS + Φm (µm − r) + AH K − I − G(I, K) − C − λH ΠH JSH
                                             2
                                                                      H    (νK Φh )2 + (σm Φm )2 H
                                          + νK Φh + ρσK σm Φm KJKS       +                       JSS
                                                                                      2
                                          +λH [J L (K, S + ΠH ) − J H (K, S)] .                        (C1)

We then obtain the following main results.




                                                           57
PROPOSITION 3: In the region s > sL , mL (s) satisfies the ODE

                      mL (s) h          γ−1
                                                i                                   
     0 =     max               γχmL′ (s) γ − ζ + rs + AL − iL − g(iL ) − λL π L (s) mL′ (s)
             iL , π L 1 − γ
                        2             
                         γσK                   mL (s)2 mL′′ (s)           η 2 mL′ (s)2 mL (s)
                     −         − ρησK                              +
                           2             mL (s)mL′′ (s) − γmL′ (s)2 2(γmL′ (s)2 − mL (s)mL′′ (s))
                                                                   H           1−γ     !
                         L        L          L′       λL mL (s)    m (s + π L )
                      +(i − δ)(m (s) − sm (s)) +                                      −1 ,        (C2)
                                                        1−γ          mL (s)

subject to the boundary conditions

                                                                                       ′′
          lim mL (s) = qLF B + s ,          mL (sL ) = αmL (0) ,             and     mL (sL ) = −∞ ,    (C3)
          s→∞


where qLF B is provided below in Proposition 4. The insurance demand π L (s) solves
                                                                          −γ
                           dmH (s + π L )   dmL (s)          mL (s)
                                          =                                      ,                      (C4)
                                ds            ds           mH (s + π L )

as long as π L (s) satisfies π L (s) ≥ sH − s . Otherwise, the entrepreneur sets π L (s) = sH − s . We
have another set of analogous equations and boundary conditions for mH (s) and π H (s) in state H.

   The following proposition summarizes the solutions for the first-best case.

PROPOSITION 4: Under the first-best, the firm’s value QFn B (K) in state n = {H, L} is propor-
tional to K: QFn B (K) = qnF B K, where qH
                                         F B and q F B jointly solve
                                                  L

                                                                                
                    r + δ − iFL B qLF B = AL − iFL B − g(iFL B ) + λL qH
                                                                       FB
                                                                          − qLF B ,                     (C5)
                                  FB                                             
                    r + δ − iFHB qH     = AH − iFHB − g(iFHB ) + λH qLF B − qH FB
                                                                                    ,                   (C6)

and where iFL B and iFHB satisfy qLF B = 1 + g ′ (iFL B ) and qH
                                                               F B = 1 + g ′ (iF B ) . The insurance demands
                                                                               H
                                                  F B − q F B and π H = q F B − q F B .
in state L and H are given respectively by π L = qH      L               L       H



Appendix D.              Monotonicity and Concavity of the Value Function
LEMMA 1: The value function J(K, S) is strictly increasing in S.

Proof: To see that J(K, S) is strictly increasing in S, consider S1,0 < S2,0 , where Sj,0 ≥ sKj,0
for j = 1, 2. We set K1,0 = K2,0 = K0 . Let {C1,t , I1,t , Φ1,h,t , Φ1,m,t }∞   t=0 be the optimal policy
with the given initial condition (K0 , S1,0 ). Let Jb(K0 , S2,0 ) be the value function associated with an
                    b2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
alternative policy {C              b 2,h,t , Φ
                                             b 2,m,t }∞ to be described below subject to the initial condition
                                                      t=0
(K0 , S2,0 ). Let {Kj,t , Sj,t}∞
                               t=0 for j = 1, 2 denote the implied liquidity and physical capital processes
subject to the initial conditions (K0 , Sj,0 ) for any admissible policy including both the optimal and
candidate policies. We establish the following properties for {C   b2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
                                                                                  b 2,h,t , Φ
                                                                                            b 2,m,t }∞ :
                                                                                               t=0



                                                     58
    1) S2,t ≥ sK2,t for all t ≥ 0;
    2) The value function, J(K    b 0 , S2,0 ), implied by this alternative policy is larger than J(K0 , S1,0 ).
    To construct {C b2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
                                   b 2,h,t , Φ
                                             b 2,m,t }∞ , we first define another policy, {C ′ , I ′ , Φ′ , Φ′ }∞ ,
                                                         t=0                                                  t   t   h,t   m,t t=0
as follows:

              Ct′ = λC1,t , and It′ = I1,t , Φ′h,t = Φ1,h,t, Φ′m,t = Φ1,m,t ,                     for all   t ≥ 0,            (D1)

where λ > 1 and {C1,t , I1,t , Φ1,h,t, Φ1,m,t }∞                                              b be the
                                               t=0 is the optimal policy defined earlier. Let τ
stopping time such that S2,t = S1,t for the first time under the policy {Ct′ , It′ , Φ′h,t , Φ′m,t }∞
                                                                                                    t=0 with
                                                   b      b      b        b
the initial condition (K0 , S2,0 ). We now define {C2,t , I2,t , Φ2,h,t , Φ2,m,t }∞ as follows:    t=0
                                                     
                                                     C ′ = λC ,                 for   t ≤ τb ,
                                                       t      1,t
                                    b2,t
                                    C              =                                                                          (D2)
                                                     C ,                        for   t > τb ,
                                                           1,t


and

                      Ib2,t = I1,t , Φ
                                     b 2,h,t = Φ1,h,t , Φ
                                                        b 2,m,t = Φ1,m,t ,             for all     t ≥ 0.                     (D3)

                                  b2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
    With this constructed policy {C              b 2,h,t , Φ
                                                           b 2,m,t }∞ , the dynamics for S1,t and S2,t when
                                                                    t=0
t ≤ τb are given by

         dS1,t = (rS1,t − C1,t )dt + Yt dt + Φ1,h,t νK dZh,t + Φ1,m,t [(µm − r)dt + σm dZm,t ] ,                              (D4)
         dS2,t = (rS2,t − λC1,t )dt + Yt dt + Φ1,h,tνK dZh,t + Φ1,m,t [(µm − r)dt + σm dZm,t ] .                              (D5)

Since S1,bτ = S2,bτ , and S1,t and S2,t have the same dynamics when t ≥ τb, we have S2,t = S1,t for all
t ≥ τb. In addition, K1,t = K2,t for all t ≥ 0 since K1,0 = K2,0 and Ib2,t ≡ I1,t for all t ≥ 0.
   Condition 1 is satisfied under {C b2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
                                                    b 2,h,t , Φ
                                                              b 2,m,t }∞ because S2,t ≥ S1,t ≥ sK1,t = sK2,t .
                                                                       t=0
Condition 2 is also satisfied under {Cb2,t , Ib2,t , Φ
                                                     b 2,h,t , Φ
                                                               b 2,m,t }∞ because λ > 1 implies
                                                                        t=0
                                   "Z                                   Z                           #
                                            τb                              ∞
              J(K0 , S1,0 ) < E0                 ζe−ζt U (λC1,t )dt +                               b 0 , S2,0 ) .
                                                                                ζe−ζt U (C1,t )dt = J(K                       (D6)
                                        0                               τb


By definition, J(K0 , S2,0 ) is the value function under the optimal policy with the initial condi-
tion (K0 , S2,0 ), and thus Jb(K0 , S2,0 ) ≤ J(K0 , S2,0 ) holds. We have proven that J(K0 , S1,0 ) <
J(K0 , S2,0 ).

LEMMA 2: The value function J(K, S) is concave in S.

Proof: We use the same notation as in the proof for Lemma 1 whenever feasible. Let

                                                    S0λ = λS1,0 + (1 − λ)S2,0 ,                                               (D7)

                     b 0 , S λ ) be the value function associated with an alternative policy
where 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1. Let J(K    0


                                                                 59
{Ctλ , Itλ , Φλh,t , Φλm,t }∞                                                                 λ    λ
                            t=0 to be described below subject to the initial conditions for (K0 , S0 ), where
K0λ = K0 and S0λ is given by (D7). Let {Ktλ , Stλ }∞
                                                   t=0 denote the implied liquidity and physical
capital processes subject to the initial conditions (K0λ , S0λ ) for any admissible policy. We establish
the following properties implied by the policy {Ctλ , Itλ , Φλh,t , Φλm,t }∞
                                                                           t=0 :
    1) Stλ ≥ sKtλ for all t ≥ 0.
    2) The value function J(Kb 0 , S λ ) is weakly larger than λJ(K0 , S1,0 ) + (1 − λ)J(K0 , S2,0 ).
                                    0
    We construct the policy {Ctλ , Itλ , Φλh,t , Φλm,t }∞
                                                        t=0 as follows:


              Ctλ = λC1,t + (1 − λ)C2,t + [λG(I1,t , K1,t ) + (1 − λ)G(I2,t , K2,t ) − G(Itλ , Ktλ )]
                                            btλ ,
                    ≥ λC1,t + (1 − λ)C2,t = C                                                                                    (D8)
              Itλ   = λI1,t + (1 − λ)I2,t ,                                                                                      (D9)
          Φλh,t     = λΦ1,h,t + (1 − λ)Φ2,h,t ,                                                                                 (D10)
         Φλm,t = λΦ1,m,t + (1 − λ)Φ2,m,t .                                                                                      (D11)

Note that the convexity of the capital adjustment cost function G(I, K) gives rise to the inequality
in (D8). First, we show that Condition 1 is satisfied. Equation (D9) implies that
                                                                           p                        
                         dKtλ = (Itλ − δK Ktλ )dt + σK Ktλ                      1 − ρ2 dZh,t + ρdZm,t ,                         (D12)

where Ktλ = λK1,t + (1 − λ)K2,t . Similarly, (D8), (D10, and (D11) imply that

              dStλ = (rStλ + Ytλ − Ctλ )dt + Φλh,tνK dZh,t + Φλm,t [(µm − r)dt + σm dZm,t ] ,                                   (D13)

where Ytλ = AKtλ − Itλ − G(Itλ , Ktλ ). Therefore, we have Stλ = λS1,t + (1 − λ)S2,t for all t ≥ 0. The
constraints Sj,t ≥ sKj,t and additivity imply Stλ = λS1,t +(1−λ)S2,t ≥ λsK1,t +(1−λ)sK2,t = sKtλ ,
which is Condition 1.
    Next, we use the monotonicity and concavity of the utility function U (·) to prove Condition 2.
The value function under the candidate policy satisfies
                    Z       ∞                              Z   ∞                                   Z       ∞                         
b 0 , S0λ )
J(K           =E                  −ζt
                                 ζe     U (Ctλ )   dt ≥ λE             −ζt
                                                                      ζe     U (C1,t ) dt + (1 − λ)E                 −ζt
                                                                                                                    ζe     U (C2,t ) dt
                         0                                    0                                             0

                                                     = λJ(K0 , S1,0 ) + (1 − λ)J(K0 , S2,0 ) ,                                  (D14)

where J(K, S) is the value function under the optimal policy and the inequality follows from
              btλ ) = U (λC1,t + (1 − λ)C2,t ) ≥ λU (C1,t ) + (1 − λ)U (C2,t ) . We have thus proved the
U (Ctλ ) ≥ U (C
concavity of the value function.




                                                                  60
                                    REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 1994, A unified model of investment under uncertainty,
     American Economic Review 84, 1369–1384.
Ai, Hengjie, and Rui Li, 2015, Investment and CEO compensation under limited commitment,
     Journal of Financial Economics 116, 452–472.
Albuquerque, Rui, 2003, The composition of international capital flows: Risk sharing through
     foreign direct investment, Journal of International Economics 61, 353–383.
Albuquerque, Rui, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, 2004, Optimal lending contracts and firm dynamics,
     Review of Economic Studies 71, 285–315.
Albuquerue, Rui, and Neng Wang, 2008, Agency conflicts, investment, and asset pricing, Journal
     of Finance 63, 1–40.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann, 2000, Efficiency, equilibrium, and asset pricing with
     risk of default, Econometrica 68, 775–797.
Becker, Gary S., 1975, Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis with special refer-
     ence to education, 2nd edition, National Bureau of Economic Research, Columbia University
     Press.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner, 2010, Human capital, bankruptcy and
     capital structure, Journal of Finance 65, 891–926.
Ben-Porath, Yoram, 1967, The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings, Journal
     of Political Economy 75, 352–365.
Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Guillaume Plantin, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2007, Dynamic
     security design: convergence to continuous time and asset pricing implications, Review of
     Economic Studies 74, 345–390.
Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2013, Dynamic financial contracting,
     Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress (Daron Acemoglu, Manuel
     Arellano, Eddie Dekel), vol. 1, Cambridge University Press.
Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and Stëphane Villeneuve, 2010, Large risks,
     limited liability and dynamic moral hazard. Econometrica 78, 73–118.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A unified theory of Tobin’s q, corporate invest-
     ment, financing, and risk management, Journal of Finance 66, 1545–1578.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2013, Market timing, investment, and risk manage-
     ment, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 40–62.
Bolton, Patrick, and Mathias Dewatripont, 2005, Contract Theory, MIT Press.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial
     sector, American Economic Review 104, 379–421.
Brown, Jennifer, and David A. Matsa, 2016, Boarding a sinking ship? An investigation of job
     applications to distressed firms, Journal of Finance 71(2), 507–550.
Campello, Murillo, Erasmo Giambona, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2011, Liquidity
     management and corporate investment during a financial crisis, Review of Financial Studies
     24, 1944–1979.
Chien Yi-Li, and Hanno Lustig, 2010, The market price of aggregate risk and the wealth distri-
     bution, Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1596-1650.
Clementi, Gian Luca, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, 2006, A theory of financing constraints and firm
     dynamics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 229–265.
Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr, and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, An intertemporal general
     equilibrium model of asset prices, Econometrica 53, 363–384.
Deaton, Angus, 1991, Saving and liquidity constraints, Econometrica 59, 1221–1248.
DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman, 2007a, Agency and optimal investment dynamics,
     Review of Financial Studies 20, 151–188.


                                              61
DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman, 2007b, Optimal long-term financial contracting,
     Review of Financial Studies 20, 2079–2128.
DeMarzo, Peter M., Michael Fishman, Zhiguo He, and Neng Wang, 2012, Dynamic agency and
     the q theory of investment, Journal of Finance 67, 2295–2340.
DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2006, Optimal security design and dynamic capital
     structure in a continuous–time agency model, Journal of Finance 61, 2681–2724.
Di Tella, Sebastian, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2016, Optimal asset management with hidden savings,
     Working paper, Princeton University.
Donangelo, Andres, 2014, Labor mobility: Implications for asset pricing, Journal of Finance 69,
     1321–1346.
Duchin, Ran, Thomas Gilbert, Jarrad Harford, and Christopher Hrdlicka, 2017, Precautionary
     savings with risky assets: When cash is not cash, Journal of finance 72, 793–852.
Duffie, Darrell, 2001, Dynamic asset pricing theory, Third edition, Princeton University Press.
Duffie, Darrell, and Chi-Fu Huang, 1985, Implementing Arrow-Debreu equilibria by continuous
     trading of a few long-lived securities, Econometrica 53, 1337–1356.
Eberly, Janice C., Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent, 2009, Investment and value: A neoclassical
     benchmark, Working paper, Northwestern University and HEC Montréal.
Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix, 2016, Executive compensation: A modern primer, Journal of
     Economic Literature 54(4), 1232–1287.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
     of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2013, Organization capital and the cross?section
     of expected returns, The Journal of Finance 68, 1365-1406.
Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, Risk management: Coordi-
     nating corporate investment and financing policies, Journal of Finance 48, 1629–1658.
Frydman, Carola, and Dirk Jenter, 2010, CEO compensation, Annual Review of Financial Eco-
     nomics 2(1), 75–102.
Fudenberg, Drew, Bengt Holmström, and Paul Milgrom, 1990, Short-term contracts and long-term
     agency relationships, Journal of Economic Theory 51, 1–31.
Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig, 1985, Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period
     problem, Review of Economics Studies 52, 647–663.
Ganor, Mira, 2013, Agency costs in the era of economic crisis–The enhanced connection between
     CEO compensation and corporate cash holdings, Arizona Law Review 55(1), 105–149.
Green, Edward J., 1987, Lending and the smoothing of uninsurable income. In Contractual
     Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade. Minnesota Studies in Macroeconomics Series, Vol. 1,
     ed. E. C. Prescott and N. Wallace, 3–25, University of Minnesota Press.
Hall, Robert E., 2004, Measuring factor adjustment costs, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119,
     899–927.
Harris, Milton, and Bengt Holmström, 1982, A theory of wage dynamics, Review of Economic
     Studies 49, 315–333.
Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps, 1979, Martingales and arbitrage in multiperiod secu-
     rities markets, Journal of Economic Theory 20, 381-408.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841–879.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt, Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 113, 1–41.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation, Econo-
     metrica 50, 213–224.
Holmström, Bengt, 1979, Moral hazard and observability, Bell Journal of Economics 10, 74–91.
Holmström, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom, 1987, Aggregation and linearity in the provision of in-

                                               62
     tertemporal incentives, Econometrica 55, 303–328.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
     sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663–691.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 2001, LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model, Journal
     of Finance 56, 1837-1867.
Innes, Robert D., 1990, Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices,
     Journal of Economic Theory 52, 45–67.
Jeffers, Jessica, 2018, The impact of restricting labor mobility on corporate investment and en-
     trepreneurship, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Mana-gerial behavior,
     agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.
Jones, Larry E., and Rodolfo E. Manuelli, 2005, Neoclassical models of endogenous growth: The
     effects of fiscal policy, innovation and fluctuations. Handbook of Economic Growth, Elsevier.
Kehoe, Patrick J., and Fabrizio Perri, 2002, International business cycles with endogenous incom-
     plete markets, Econometrica 70, 907-928.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and David K. Levine, 1993, Debt-constrained asset markets, Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 60, 865–888.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105,
     211–248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 1996, Implications of efficient risk sharing without commitment, Re-
     view of Economic Studies 63, 595–609.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2004, Recursive macroeconomic theory, MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA.
Lorenzoni, Guido, and Karl Walentin, 2007, Financial frictions, investment and Tobin’s q, Working
     paper, MIT.
Lucas Jr, Robert E., and Edward C. Prescott, 1971, Investment under uncertainty, Econometrica
     39, 659–681.
Lustig, Hanno, Chad Syverson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Technological change and the
     growing inequality in managerial compensation, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 601–
     627.
Marcet, Albert, and Ramon Marimon, 1992, Communication, commitment and growth, Journal
     of Economic Theory 58, 219–249.
Merton, Robert C., 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time
     case, Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247–257.
Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,
     Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
Miao, Jianjun, and Yuzhe Zhang, 2015, A duality approach to continuous-time contracting prob-
     lems with limited commitment, Journal of Economic Theory 159, 929–988.
Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, The reaction of household consumption to predictable changes in social
     security taxes. American Economic Review 89, 959-973.
Piskorski, Tomasz, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2010, Optimal mortgage design, Review of Financial
     Studies 23, 3098–3140.
Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2004, Investment and liquidation in renegotiation-proof contracts with moral
     hazard, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 713–751.
Rampini, Adriano A., Amir Sufi, and S. Viswanathan, 2014, Dynamic risk management, Journal
     of Financial Economics 111, 271–296.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the distribution
     of debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293–2322.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and capital structure, Journal of
     Financial Economics 109, 466–492.

                                               63
Riddick, Leigh A., and Toni M. Whited, 2009, The corporate propensity to save, Journal of
    Finance 64, 1729–1766.
Sannikov, Yuliy, 2008, A continuous-time version of the principal-agent problem, The Review of
    Economic Studies 75, 957–984.
Sannikov, Yuliy, 2013, Dynamic security design and corporate financing, Handbook of the Eco-
    nomics of Finance, Elsevier.
Schaettler, Heinz, and Jaeyoung, Sung, 1993, The first-order approach to the continuous-time
     principal?agent problem with exponential utility, Journal of Economic Theory 61, 331-371.
Smith, Clifford W., and Rene M. Stulz, 1985, The determinants of firms’ hedging policies, Journal
     of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 391-405.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, The response of household consumption to income tax refunds, Amer-
     ican Economic Review 89, 947-958.
Stulz, René M., 1984, Optimal hedging policies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
     19, 127-140.
Stulz, René M., 1996, Rethinking risk management, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 9,
     8–25.
Thomas, Jonathan, and Tim Worrall, 1990, Income fluctuation and asymmetric information: An
     example of a repeated principal-agent model, Journal of Economic Theory 51, 367–390.
Townsend, Robert M., 1979, Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verifi-
    cation, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265–293.
Tufano, Peter, 1996, Who manages risk? An empirical examination of risk management practices
    in the gold mining industry, Journal of Finance 51, 1097–1137.
Wang, Chong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2012, A unified model of entrepreneurship dy-
     namics, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 1–23.




                                              64
