NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CATCH-22 OF EXTERNAL VALIDITY IN THE CONTEXT OF CONSTRAINTS
TO FIRM GROWTH
Greg Fischer
Dean Karlan
Working Paper 20971
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20971

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

The authors thank Tavneet Suri for comments, and acknowledge support from the Templeton Foundation.
We thank Sarah Craig and Else van Schijndel, who provided outstanding research support and project
management, and we are grateful to Ron Chua, Mau Bolante and Ricky Lim at the Asian Institute
of Management for their partnership. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Greg Fischer and Dean Karlan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Catch-22 of External Validity in the Context of Constraints to Firm Growth
Greg Fischer and Dean Karlan
NBER Working Paper No. 20971
February 2015
JEL No. M1,O1
ABSTRACT
We document the presence of multiple and varied constraints to small and medium firm growth. This
presents both a practical problem for business training programs and a challenge to academic economists
trying to identify mechanisms though which these programs may affect outcomes. External validity
needs theory. This pushes researchers to narrowly defined and highly selected sample frames, which
limits the potential for clear, generalizable policy prescriptions. Ultimately, larger samples, multi-arm
evaluations, process documentation, and narrowly-focused, theory-supported empirical work are all
needed, but the complexity of the problem limits what we learn from any single study.

Greg Fischer
London School of Economics
and CEPR
g.fischer@lse.ac.uk
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

The Catch-22 of External Validity in the Context of Constraints to Firm
Growth
By GREG FISCHER AND DEAN KARLAN*
*Fischer: London School of Economics, IPA, MIT J-PAL, 32 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, 3.09, London WC2A 2AE (email: g.fischer@lse.ac.uk),
Karlan: Yale University, IPA, MIT J-PAL and NBER, 27 Hillhouse Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511 (email: dean.karlan@yale.edu). The authors
thank Tavneet Suri for comments, and acknowledge support from the Templeton Foundation. We thank Sarah Craig and Else van Schijndel, who
provided outstanding research support and project management, and we are grateful to Ron Chua, Mau Bolante and Ricky Lim at the Asian
Institute of Management for their partnership.

There is a disconnect between academic

set of constraints facing individual small

economists’ search for individual mechanisms

businesses; and, to test a hands-on, multi-skill

that constrain firm growth and the more

teaching approach for MBA students.

complex reality facing firms and policymakers

We began with the administrative list of all

aiming to alleviate these constraints. The

tax-registered businesses in Makati City,

comprehensive, some would say scattershot,

Manila, where AIM is located. For our pilot,

approaches that are common in practice are

we restricted our attention to businesses in

considered challenging for evaluators because

operation for at least two years; reporting

of the difficulty in identifying any particular

revenues in 2010 between 1 and 15 million

causal mechanism. More targeted attempts to

Philippines Pesos (PHP)1; and in industries

improve

typically

where general consulting was feasible (e.g.,

generate mixed performance (McKenzie and

we excluded foreign exchange services). We

Woodruff 2012) or do not seem to scale either

attempted to visit all 4,212 eligible businesses.

in the market or with public support.

Nearly 40% were not reached because they

business

performance

With that in mind, we partnered with the

had changed address, closed, or otherwise

Asian Institute of Management, a leading

could not be located. We explained (but did

Philippine business school, to launch a class-

not promise) the consulting program to the

based program that had MBA students

2,533

providing consulting services for local small

Ultimately,

and medium enterprises. We had three goals,

completed, as many owners or managers were

spanning policy, research and teaching: to

either too busy to complete the interview, not

pilot a potentially scalable approach to

interested in participating, or repeatedly out of

businesses
only

that
177

were

reached.

interviews

were

improving management practices for small
businesses; to better understand the complex

1

Approximately US$ 23,600 – 354,600 at the mid-2011 exchange
rate of 42.3 PHP/USD.

the office. Of the 177 business owners

the first principal component of the constraints

interviewed, 142 upon completion of the

matrix explains 52% of the variation with

survey expressed interest in receiving free

similar weight on all obstacles.

consulting from AIM students. We completed

The dataset from our project in the

detailed qualitative and quantitative surveys

Philippines is smaller and more selected

with 95 of these businesses. Given the

(those willing to participate in a consulting

structure of our sample, we cannot argue that

program), but provides richer information,

it is representative of small and medium

more focused on perceived constraints as well

enterprises in urban and peri-urban Manila.

as

However, we note one key observation that

information about what is happening inside

has implications for both research and

the firms. Figure 1 shows the histogram of

practice: most firms have a complex set of

obstacles

constraints, many of which are interconnected.

detailed items such as employee retention into

The presence of multiple and varied

common themes such as human resource

constraints to firm growth is an emerging

management. Even after grouping, the median

theme. For example, the World Management

number of constraints is two out of a possible

Survey (Bloom, Genakos, et al. 2012) shows

five.3

detailed

quantitative

identified

per

and

firm,

qualitative

grouping

that poorly managed firms have a number of

Moreover, these constraints are quite varied

weaknesses rather than problems clustering in

and consistent with an overall observation of

any particular area. The World Bank’s

missing “managerial” capital (Bruhn, Karlan,

Enterprise Survey shows a similar pattern in

and Schoar 2010). Figure 2 shows the share of

the

The

firms in our sample identified as facing

median firm lists three significant obstacles in

constraints in a particular area. Within the

the

external
business

business

environment.

environment.2

As

with

sample for which we have detailed, qualitative

management practices, these challenges are

data, there are two clusters. Nearly 70% of

diffuse: after demeaning at the country level,

firms require some form of assistance on sales
and marketing. Another 42% need assistance
with accounting or cash flow management. No

2

Represents obstacles considered major or severe. Other
categories comprise none, minor, moderate, not applicable and don’t
know. Authors calculations from 15 potential obstacles in combined
WBES data: electricity, transportation, customs & trade regulation,
informal sector competitors, access to land, crime & disorder, access
to finance, tax rates, tax administration, business licensing & permits,
political instability, corruption, courts, labor regulations, and
inadequately educated workforce.

3

The modal constraint reported by respondents is competition;
however, detailed information in our baseline survey of 95 businesses
and from the consultants’ engagements with 26 treatment firms
suggests that this is almost universally price or quality competition in
competitive markets.

2

other category is preponderant; however, even

be

these groupings belie significant variation in

hypotheses on constraints to firm growth.

the detailed needs of firms.

helpful

for

economists

in

forming

A similar pattern of varied constraints to

For example, among the firms needing sales

firm growth and performance is evident in

and marketing assistance, one struggles to

other data. In the WMS, a small majority of

recruit sales personnel with the technical

firms are classified as poor performers (score

competence

the

less than three) for management practices

with

related to human resources (rewarding high

marketing staff turnover and an inability to

performers, getting rid of poor performers,

generate sales beyond the owner’s personal

performance clarity, and retaining human

contacts. While there are some common

capital); however, this may reflect both

themes in the challenges these firms face, little

internal and external constraints. No other

suggests a one-size-fits-all training program

practice has more than 40%.

product.

to

accurately

Another

firm

describe
struggles

would appeal to or benefit these firms.
4

Taken together, these results not only point

The Online Appendix presents summary

to a weakness in providing one-size-fits-all

statistics from the baseline, and then richer

business training interventions. They also

qualitative information on the constraints of

present a challenge for academic economists

the 26 firms that participated in the AIMS

looking to identify mechanisms though which

consulting project. These data show somewhat

training

more clustering with respect to financial

outcomes. When there is significant diversity

management. Several demonstrate a need for

in the obstacles faced by firms, it may simply

better inventory and cash flow management,

be mechanically difficult to identify the

and specific recommendations in these areas

particular channel through which a program or

by the consultants were particularly well

policy may work without large samples and

received by management.

detailed baseline diagnostics with which to

programs

may

affect

business

are quite varied,

test interactions. For example, marketing

demonstrating our main point. We also believe

training is unlikely to benefit the 40% of firms

the stories are a first step towards more

that do not appear to have any problems with

detailed ethnographic research, which could

marketing. Moreover, even a well-structured

The stories though

marketing course may fail to address the
4

specific needs of firms struggling in this area.
Available at http://karlan.yale.edu.

Firms may be aware of these challenges and

training over and beyond the diagnostics. If

therefore rationally choose not to attend such

the diagnostics are not part of everyday

trainings, a possibility consistent with low

business, which typically they would not be,

observed attendance of even subsidized

then estimating the treatment effect of the

training programs.

training in this setting is useful for cost-benefit

Based on the qualitative evidence, we posit

analysis of the training but not as much for

that identifying any one mechanism though

learning why firms are constrained.

which firm performance and growth could be

Alternatively, one could design multi-arm

improved may be hindered by a dismal

experiments that randomly assign firms to

application

theory

different training modules: some receive all,

(Kremer 1993). Each reported obstacle or poor

some receive a random subset, etc. The

management practice is a failed O-ring.

permutations here are practically unbounded,

Removing one obstacle would not improve

and the sample size required to identify

outcomes because several other still persist.

economically meaningful effects quickly gets

of

Kremer’s

O-ring

out of control when one considers the

There are two implications of this pattern.

in

variation

space but not an insurmountable one. One

Naturally any result on the relative magnitude

option would be to begin with larger sample

of treatment effects of one treatment arm to

frames, run detailed diagnostics prior to

another

treatment assignment, and then put forward

characteristics of the sample frame. Thus the

trainings that target the identified constraints

highly-self-selective nature of many business

(firms diagnosed with financial problems get

training programs suggests that such exercises

finance advice, those with human resources

are useful for learning about the relative

problems get human resources advice, etc.).

treatment effects but less useful for making

This approach is not without challenges. It

grand statements about the constraints to

tests not the training alone, but training

growth for firms overall in that market.

will

constraints

firms.5

First, it presents a challenge to the evaluation

be

across

dependent

on

the

preceded by the diagnostic process, which

Regardless of the approach, this issue also

itself may yield false positives or negatives.

makes clear the need for monitoring and

Moreover, the diagnostic process itself may be

process data to help shed light on which

a treatment, changing the firms’ behavior. An
evaluation can only assess the impact of

5

See Anderson-Macdonald and Chandy (2014) for an example of
this approach for just marketing and finance training.

4

components of training are actually adopted.

of students or other low-cost providers. We

This is critical for helping to track the theory

are, however, encouraged by the fact that even

of change of a training program: first, measure

in the face of these challenges, 60% of student

actual

teaching activities,

teams made recommendations that were

number of hours of meetings, etc.; then

implemented by clients and subjectively

measure whether participants’ knowledge

judged effective. When we restrict our

increases on the specific topics taught; then

attention to those teams independently judged

measure whether participant behavior and

as delivering satisfactory work—as we know,

choices

not every student assignment will receive full

activities,

change;

the

then

measure

whether

business outcomes change, as well as overall

effort—that rises to over 70%.
We return to our opening point. External

aspirations, motivation and “entrepreneurial

validity is typically discussed in two ways:

spirit” of the business owners.
The second implication of firms facing

with theory and with empirics. As Deaton

multiple and complex constraints is that more

(2010) argues and we agree, external validity

tailored consulting or mentoring programs

is gained by having an empirically-validated

may be more appropriate for improving firm

theory of why something is working, and that

performance (e.g., see Bloom, Eifert, et al.

theory ought to include relevant contextual

2012; Bruhn, Karlan, and Schoar 2013 for

factors. External validity is also discussed

examples

consulting

empirically: a result from one sample frame at

interventions; and Karlan, Knight, and Udry

one point in time can be used to predict results

2013 for an example of an unsuccesful

elsewhere? The less selected the sample frame

consulting intervention, on smaller firms). The

and context – i.e. the more representative it is

intervention that we piloted with AIM was

of

designed

convincingly one can translate results to

of

to

test

successful

a

potentially scalable

approach to do just that for small businesses in

a

defined

population

–

the

more

elsewhere.

low- and medium-income countries. Such

These two aspirations are at odds with each

approaches face their own set of challenges.

other. The quest for theory and cleanly

For example, providing effective business

identified mechanisms calls for narrow,

consulting in the face of multiple, diverse, and

highly-selected sample frames. Yet given the

unpredictable challenges may require a level

complexity of constraints to firm growth, any

of expertise that would be unrealistic to expect

successful attempt to identify a particular

mechanism would likely require narrowing

Countries.” The Academy of Management

one’s sample frame to highly specific firms

Perspectives

that may not even be representative of other

doi:10.5465/amp.2011.0077.

firms in the same market. In contrast, the
desire

for

empirical

breadth

Bruhn,

26

Miriam,

(1):
Dean

12–33.

Karlan,

and

and

Antoinette Schoar. 2010. “What Capital Is

representativeness pushes towards sample

Missing in Developing Countries?” American

frames that will be full of complex, changing

Economic

and amorphous issues with no readily

doi:10.1257/aer.100.2.629.

identifiable mechanisms.

Review

100

(2):

629–33.

———. 2013. “The Impact of Consulting

We need both to move forward. Through

Services on Small and Medium Enterprises:

iteration and extension—using one approach

Evidence from a Randomized Trial in

to inform the other, back and forth—we can

Mexico.” Working Paper, March.

arrive at a mosaic understanding of the

Deaton,

Angus.

constraints to firm growth. But to get there we

Randomization,

need to lower our expectations for what we

Development.”

can learn from any one study.

Literature

Stephen,

Udry.

Rajesh

(2):

424–55.

2013.

“Consulting

and

Capital

Theory of Economic Development.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 551–

Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts.

75. doi:10.2307/2118400.

2012. “Does Management Matter? Evidence

McKenzie,

from India.” The Quarterly Journal of

David,

and

Christopher

Woodruff. 2012. “What Are We Learning

qjs044.

from Business Training and Entrepreneurship

doi:10.1093/qje/qjs044.
Christos

Economic

Kremer, Michael. 1993. “The O-Ring

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit

Nicholas,

48

of

Enterprises in Ghana.” Working Paper.

Performance.” Working Paper.

Bloom,

Journal

about

Experiments with Micro and Small Tailoring

Marketing (versus Finance) Skills on Firm

November,

Learning

Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher

Chandy, and Bilal Zia. 2014. “The Impact of

Economics,

and

“Instruments,

doi:10.1257/jel.48.2.424.

REFERENCES
Anderson-Macdonald,

2010.

Evaluations around the Developing World?”

Genakos,

World Bank Policy Research Working Paper

Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2012.

6202 (September).

“Management Practices Across Firms and
6

Figure 1: Histogram of number of constraints (primary categories only) identified by each firm
(N=177), from qualitative interviews.

Figure 2: Histogram of the number of constraints identified per main category across all firms
completing qualitative interviews (N=177). Includes firms identifying at least one constraint in a
given sub-category.

