                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         A QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF SUBSIDY COMPETITION IN THE U.S.

                                               Ralph Ossa

                                         Working Paper 20975
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20975


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




I am grateful to Kerem Cosar, Jonathan Dingel, Owen Zidar, and seminar participants at various universities
and conferences for very helpful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Quantitative Analysis of Subsidy Competition in the U.S.
Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 20975
February 2015, Revised October 2017
JEL No. F12,F13,R12,R58

                                              ABSTRACT

I use a quantitative economic geography model to explore subsidy competition among U.S. states.
I ask what motivates state governments to subsidize firm relocations and quantify how strong their
incentives are. I also characterize fully non-cooperative and cooperative subsidy choices and assess
how far away we are from these extremes. I find that states have strong incentives to subsidize firm
relocations in order to gain at the expense of other states. I also find that observed subsidies are closer
to cooperative than non-cooperative subsidies but the potential losses from an escalation of subsidy
competition are large.


Ralph Ossa
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schoenberggasse 1
8001 Zuerich
Switzerland
and NBER
ralph.ossa@econ.uzh.ch
1        Introduction

U.S. state and local governments spend substantial resources on subsidies competing for mobile

…rms. According to a database from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,

the costs of such subsidies have more than tripled since 1990 reaching a total of $45 billion in

2015. This …gure is equivalent to around 30 percent of state and local business tax revenue and

adds up all subsidies that are commonly available to medium and medium-large …rms. They

include property tax abatements, customized job training subsidies, investment tax credits,

and research and development tax credits, among other things.1

        In this paper, I provide a …rst comprehensive quantitative analysis of this subsidy com-

petition in the U.S.. I …rst ask what motivates governments to subsidize …rm relocations

and quantify how strong their incentives are. I then characterize fully non-cooperative and

cooperative subsidy choices and assess how far away we are from these extremes. By doing so,

I aim to make sense of a widely used policy intervention and inform the surrounding policy

debate.

        I pursue this analysis in the context of a quantitative economic geography model which I

calibrate to U.S. states. In‡uenced by the trade policy literature, I calculate optimal subsidies,

Nash subsidies, and cooperative subsidies and then compare them to observed subsidies.

Optimal subsidies are the subsidies states would o¤er if they did not have to fear any retaliation

and shed light on the incentives states have. Nash subsidies and cooperative subsidies then

characterize the fully non-cooperative and cooperative subsidy choices thereby capturing the

worst-case and best-case scenarios.

        I …nd that states have strong incentives to subsidize …rm relocations in order to gain at

the expense of other states. Optimal subsidies average $14.9 billion, would raise real income

by an average 2.2 percent in the subsidy imposing state, and would lower real income by an

average -0.2 percent in all other states. I also …nd that observed subsidies are much closer

to cooperative than non-cooperative subsidies but that the potential costs of an escalation

of subsidy competition are large. In particular, moving from observed subsidies to Nash
    1
    The database is called Panel Database on Business Incentives and it is documented in Bartik (2017).
Earlier estimates put the annual subsidy costs at $46.8 billion in 2005 (Thomas, 2011) and $80.4 billion in
2012 (Story et al., 2012).




                                                    2
subsidies would cost on average -1.1 percent of real income while moving to cooperative (i.e.

zero) subsidies would only improve welfare minimally.

       The key mechanism in my analysis is an agglomeration externality in the New Economic

Geography tradition which derives from an interaction of internal increasing returns and

trade costs. In particular, consumers bene…t from being close to …rms because this gives

them access to cheaper …nal goods. Similarly, …rms bene…t from being close to …rms because

this gives them access to cheaper intermediate goods. By subsidizing …rm relocations, states

try to foster local agglomeration at the expense of other states so that their subsidies are

beggar-thy-neighbor policies.

       In my quanti…cation, I try to strike a balance between transparency and realism to be

able to clearly illustrate the main mechanisms and yet obtain broadly credible quantitative

results. Analytical results are notoriously hard to derive in economic geography models so

that the quantitative analysis is also meant to convey more fundamental conceptual points.

While this means that I have to make compromises, it strikes me as a natural approach in

this case, which certainly goes well beyond the arbitrary numerical examples that have long

dominated the economic geography literature.

       I am not aware of any comparable analysis of non-cooperative and cooperative policy

equilibria in a spatial environment. Most closely related is, perhaps, the recent work by

Fajgelbaum et al (2016) who use a quantitative economic geography model to study state

taxes as a source of spatial misallocation in the United States. However, they only consider

the implications of exogenous changes in state taxes and do not attempt to solve for non-

cooperative or cooperative policy equilibria. The same basic point applies to well-known

earlier contributions to the quantitative place-based policy literature such as Gaubert (2014)

and Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016).2

       The optimal subsidy argument I develop in the paper builds on the insight of Venables

(1987) that governments have an incentive to exploit the agglomeration economies backward

and forward linkages bring about. I have already explored the implications of it for tari¤ wars
   2
    Gaubert (2014) quanti…es the aggregate e¤ects of subsidies given by the national government to lagging
regions in France. Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016) estimate the incidence of state corporate taxes on the
welfare of workers, landowners, and …rms in the U.S.. See also Greenstone et al (2010) and Kline and Moretti
(2014) for related empirical analyses.




                                                     3
in a series of earlier papers (Ossa, 2011; Ossa, 2012; Ossa, 2014) and also draw on some of the

methods I developed there. Having said this, there are some fundamental di¤erences between

tari¤ wars and subsidy wars. The most striking one is that subsidy wars can potentially

improve overall welfare because the local spillovers which make subsidy wars tempting also

bring about allocative ine¢ ciencies which subsidies can correct.3,4

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I lay out the theoret-

ical framework describing the basic setup, the equilibrium for given subsidies, the general

equilibrium e¤ects of subsidy changes, and the agglomeration and dispersion forces at work.

In section 3, I turn to the calibration, explaining how I choose the model parameters, what

adjustments I make to the model, and how I deal with possible multiplicity. In section 4, I

perform the main analysis, exploring the welfare e¤ects of subsidies, optimal subsidies, Nash

subsidies, and cooperative subsidies.



2        Framework

The theoretical framework is in the New Economic Geography tradition of Krugman (1991)

and Krugman and Venables (1995). It emphasizes agglomeration economies resulting from

forward and backward linkages which arise endogenously from the interaction of …rm-level

increasing returns, transport costs, and factor mobility. The main intuition is that workers

want to be close to …rms and …rms want to be close to …rms in order to have cheaper access

to goods for …nal and intermediate use. These agglomeration economies have a beggar-thy-

neighbor character which is what governments then exploit.

        This formulation of agglomeration economies has a number of attractive features, as dis-

cussed extensively in the related literature. For example, Fujita et al (2001) emphasize that it

does not simply assume agglomeration economies with reference to imprecise notions such as
    3
     As I discuss in detail later on, the abovementioned -1.1 percent real income losses associated with an
escalation of subsidy competition are calculated relative to a benchmark in which all allocative ine¢ ciencies
are eliminated by the federal government. Absent this intervention, a subsidy war would actually increase real
incomes in all states.
   4
     My analysis is also related to the tax competition literature following Oates (1972) which emphasizes …scal
externalities. The main di¤erence is that in my model governments do not want to attract …rms for …scal
reasons but because they generate local spillover e¤ects. Having said this, Baldwin et al (2005) analyze tax
competition in a range of stylized New Economic Geography models which also feature some of the mechanism
I emphasize.




                                                       4
localized spillover e¤ects but actually derives them as an endogenous model outcome. Also,

empirical studies such as Handbury and Weinstein (2015) provide direct evidence supporting

its underlying mechanism by showing that larger regions tend to have lower variety-adjusted

price indices.

    Having said this, this New Economic Geography model has an isomorphic external in-

creasing returns representation as one might suspect from the work of Allen and Arkolakis

(2014). In particular, it can also be interpreted as a perfectly competitive Armington (1969)

model with factor mobility in which local productivity is simply assumed to be increasing

in local economic activity. In that sense, it can really capture all of the famous Marshallian

agglomeration forces deriving from specialized inputs, thick labor markets, and technological

spillovers.


2.1     Basic setup

The country is populated by workers who can freely move across regions. They consume

…nal goods and residential land and have location preferences which have an idiosyncratic

component. Goods are produced by an endogenous number of monopolistically competitive

…rms from labor, capital, commercial land, and intermediate goods. Capital is freely mobile

across regions, land can be freely put to residential or commercial use, and input-output

linkages are of the roundabout form. The total supply of labor and capital is …xed at the

national level and the total supply of land is …xed at the regional level.


2.1.1    Preferences

Concretely, the utility of worker v living in region j is given by:


                           Uj     = Uj uj                                                  (1)
                                                    !                   !1
                                      Aj      TjR             CjF
                            Uj    =
                                      Lj                     1
                                       R Z
                                                                                   !""1
                                       X           Mi                 " 1
                            CjF   =                     cFij (! i )    "    d! i
                                        i=1    0

                            ujv       F rechet (1; )



                                                    5
where Uj is its common and ujv is its idiosyncratic component. Uj aggregates amenities

Aj , residential land TjR , and …nal goods consumption CjF in a Cobb-Couglas fashion with

a land-expenditure-share        . The formula is divided by the local number of workers Lj to

express everything in per-capita terms. CjF is a CES aggregate of Mi di¤erentiated varieties

from each of the R regions with an elasticity of substitution " > 1. ujv is drawn from a

Frechet distribution in an iid fashion and                    is an inverse measure of the dispersion of workers’

idiosyncratic location preferences.

   While I include land purely for quantitative realism, the idiosyncratic location preferences

play a more central role. In particular, they ensure that the common component of utility does

not necessarily equalize across space thereby introducing a meaningful sense in which regions

can bene…t at the expense of other regions. Together, these two ingredients also give rise to the

two main congestion forces in the model, namely rising land prices and deteriorating worker-

region preference mismatch. As we will see, this mismatch also has interesting implications

for the welfare e¤ects of interregional transfer payments.


2.1.2   Technology

Varieties are uniquely associated with …rms and produced with the following technology:


                 qj   = 'j (zj fj )                                                                                     (2)
                            0                                                           ! T1              !1
                                                      L                   K
                         1 @ 1 Lj                             Kj                TjC                 CjI
                 zj   =                                                                   A
                        Mj         L                           K                    T           1
                                                                          !    "
                               XZ         Mi                 " 1
                                                                              " 1

                CjI   =                        cIij (! i )    "    d! i
                                i     0


where zj is an aggregate input which gets turned into output qj with productivity 'j after

subtracting …xed costs fj . zj combines labor Lj , capital Kj , commercial land TjC , and inter-

mediate goods CjI in a nested Cobb-Douglas fashion with                                   being the share of value added in
                          L    K               T    L   K                 T
gross production and      s,   s ,   and       s,   s + s          +      s   = 1, the shares of value added accruing to

labor, capital, and land, respectively. The formula gets divided by the number of …rms Mj to

express everything in per-…rm terms. CjI is the same CES aggregate over individual varieties

as CjF above.


                                                                   6
       Having multiple factors with varying amounts of e¤ective mobility is important for my

results.5 As I will describe in more detail shortly, local governments provide subsidies to

local …rms which they …nance through local labor taxes. For such subsidies to a¤ect the

location of economic activity, it is important that there is a more mobile factor than the one

that gets taxed. As is easy to show, they would do nothing but raise the before-tax wage

by the amount of the tax/subsidy if labor was the only factor of production, thereby leaving

incentives completely unchanged.


2.1.3      Government

I distinguish between a non-cooperative and a cooperative policy regime. In the non-cooperative

regime, local governments choose local subsidies to maximize local expected utility, which can

be written as E (Ujv j living in j). In the cooperative regime, the federal government chooses

all subsidies to maximize national expected utility, which is given by E (maxj fUjv g). National

expected utility is de…ned as the expected value of the maximum of all local utilities since

workers are freely mobile across regions and choose whichever one o¤ers them the highest

utility.

       Since subsidy changes induce workers to re-optimize their location choices, local expected

utility can in principle be de…ned over the set of ex-ante or ex-post local residents. I adopt

the ex-ante de…nition in most of what follows because it strikes me as the more natural

one. The most obvious reason is that local policy changes get voted on by current and not

future residents of the location. Moreover, we will see that this assumption implies that local

governments act (almost) as if they maximized local employment which resonates nicely with

the rhetoric of real world policy debates.

       While I am therefore quite comfortable with this assumption, I also want to be clear that

it is not an innocuous one. In particular, it is easy to verify that the local expected utility of

ex-post local residents is actually equalized across locations and equal to the national expected

utility. This implies that local governments would simply maximize national welfare if they

maximized the expected utility of ex-post local residents in which case there would no longer
   5
   While labor is freely mobile across regions, the idiosyncratic location preferences act like a mobility cost.
Hence, capital is e¤ectively the most mobile factor in this environment, followed by labor and then land.




                                                       7
be any meaningful di¤erence between the non-cooperative regime and the cooperative regime.

   Formally, maximizing the local expected utility of ex-ante local residents is equivalent to

maximizing the common component of local utility, Uj . Using the properties of the Frechet

distribution, it is easy to show that maximizing the expected utility of national residents is
                                       1
                             PR
equivalent to maximizing           U
                               i=1 i     . With that in mind, I will refer to changes in Uj as
                                                         1
                                           PR
changes in local welfare and changes in       i=1 Ui         as changes in national welfare in the

following. For future reference, I summarize the objective functions of the local and federal

governments as:


                                    Gloc
                                     j   = Uj                                                  (3)
                                                  R
                                                             !1
                                                  X
                                   Gf ed =              Ui
                                                  i=1


   To preempt any confusion, let me reiterate that Uj is just amenity adjusted per-capita

consumption. As we will see shortly, this then implies that Uj also corresponds to amenity

adjusted per-capita real income. For given amenities, local welfare changes can therefore also

be interpreted as local per-capita consumption or real income changes. As a result, I use the

expressions changes in local welfare, changes in local per-capital consumption, and changes in

local per-capita real income interchangeably in the following when discussing the local welfare

e¤ects of subsidies.

   In practice, local governments make use of a wide array of subsidy measures to provide

business incentives to local …rms. These include property tax abatements, customized job

training subsidies, investment tax credits, research and development tax credits, deal-closing

programs, and so on. I do not attempt to directly model all these di¤erent policy measures

but focus instead on their common e¤ect on business costs. In particular, I simply assume

that regional governments o¤er subsidies to all local …rms which pay for a fraction of their

overall …xed and variable costs.

   This simpli…cation helps me keep the analysis transparent and ensures I model subsidies

in a way that is compatible with the aforementioned W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment

Research business incentive database. As I will describe in more detail in the data section,



                                              8
this is the best available database on local business incentives which I use to calibrate the

subsidies local governments provide. It aims to measure the "standard deal" available to most

medium and medium-large businesses and reports local business incentives as a fraction of

local value added.

   I interpret these subsidies as deviations from bene…t tax rates, i.e. taxes for which …rms

receive public goods of equal value in return. This allows me to abstract from business taxation

and public good provision altogether which further simpli…es the analysis. I implement this

simpli…cation by interpreting statutory business taxes as bene…t taxes which do not a¤ect the

location decisions of …rms. While this at …rst looks like a strong assumption, we will see that

all results are surprisingly robust to measurement error in the subsidy variable which is where

the mistake would show up.

   In the end, the only taxes I have in the model are therefore the taxes collected to …nance

the subsidies. I assume that these taxes are levied on local residents in a lump-sum fashion

since they would ultimately have to pay for any shortfall between the revenues from taxes

collected from local businesses and the expenditures on public good provision to local busi-

nesses. Denoting the proportional subsidy on business costs by si , the wage rate by wi , the

interest rate by i, the land rental rate by ri , and local expenditures on intermediates by EiI ,

the local tax bill is given by:


                                  Si = si wi Li + iKi + ri TiC + EiI                            (4)


2.1.4   Budget constraint

Local residents earn local labor income wi Li , local land income ri Ti , and a share of national
                  L       L
capital income    i iK.   i       Li =L is simply the share of workers residing in region i so that

each worker is assumed to own an equal share of the nation’s capital stock. They use this

income for their expenditures on …nal goods EiF , residential land ri TiR , and taxes Si , as well
                                              P
as an interregional transfer i which satis…es R   i=1 i = 0. This transfer helps rationalize

inter-regional trade imbalances and captures side payments in the cooperative regime. Their




                                                   9
budget constraint is therefore given by:


                                            L
                                wi Li +     i iK   + ri Ti = EiF + ri TiR + Si +   i                    (5)


     In particular, it is easy to show that a region’s aggregate net exports are given by N Xi =
     K    L                         K
     i    i   iK +   i,   where     i      Ki =K is the share of capital employed in region i. As a result,

 i   can be calibrated to ensure that the predicted N Xi matches the data, as is commonly done
                                               K       L
in the trade literature. The term              i       i   iK arises because of the earlier assumption that

each worker owns an equal share of the nation’s capital stock. It implies that there is a

di¤erence between the capital income generated by local …rms and the one accruing to local
                           K        L
residents whenever         i   6=   i   which is then mirrored in net exports.

     Building on this intuition, Caliendo et al (2014) have recently suggested an alternative

way of dealing with aggregate trade imbalances. In particular, they do not assume that each

worker owns an equal share of the nation’s capital stock but instead make workers’ asset

holdings dependent on their state of residence. For example, workers in Florida are assumed

to own a larger share of the nation’s assets which then allows them to …nance their state’s

trade de…cit. The authors show that one can calibrate state-speci…c ownership shares in that

manner to largely explain the observed trade de…cits.

     While I am sympathetic to this idea, I believe it is not well suited for my application

because it implies that workers’ asset holdings change whenever they switch locations. For

example, workers would then bene…t from moving to Florida simply because this would give

them a larger share in the nation’s asset holdings which would clearly distort my policy

analysis. In any case, it would also be just a patch for the more fundamental problem that

it is hard to rationalize aggregate trade imbalances in static models since they are ultimately

driven by intertemporal savings and investment decisions.


2.2      Equilibrium in levels

To set the stage for my analysis of non-cooperative and cooperative subsidies, I begin by

characterizing the equilibrium for given subsidies. In this equilibrium, workers maximize

utility, …rms maximize pro…ts, free entry ensures zero pro…ts, and all goods and factor markets


                                                           10
                                                                                                                           L     K      C
clear. It can be expressed as a system of 4R equations in the 4R unknowns Pi ,                                             i ,   i ,    i ,
                                                                                      L               K
where Pi is the price index dual to CiF and CiI ,                                     i       and     i     are the regional labor and
                                                                           C
capital employment shares de…ned earlier, and                              i          TiC =Ti is the share of land in i used for

commercial purposes. In particular:6


De…nition 1 For given subsidies and a numeraire i                                             1, an equilibrium in levels is a set of
        L     K     C
 Pi ;   i ;   i ;   i   such that
                                                           L      U
                                                           i   = PR i                                                                   (6)
                                                                         j=1 Uj

                                                           R
                                                                                          !11"
                                                           X
                                             Pj =                Mi (pij )1           "
                                                                                                                                        (7)
                                                           i=1

                            R
                         1X                                                       L             T
                            (pij )1      "
                                             (Pj )"    1
                                                           Ej = (wi )                 (ri )           (Pi )1       i fi                 (8)
                         "
                           j=1

                                                                                          T
                                             ri Ti =                 EiF +                     EiI                                      (9)
                                                           1                      1

where
                                                                     K       L
                                                                     i           K
                                                       wi =          L       K
                                                                                                                                       (10)
                                                                     i           L
                                                                     K       T
                                                                     i           K
                                                        ri =         C       K
                                                                                                                                       (11)
                                                                     i           Ti

                                                                 1
                                                       EiI =           K
                                                                                 K
                                                                                 i K                                                   (12)

                                                                 L           T

                                              "        (wi )         (ri )            (Pi )1           i ij
                                 pij =                                                                                                 (13)
                                         "         1                             'i

                                                                         K   iK
                                                        Si = s i         i        K
                                                                                                                                       (14)

                                                                           K           L
                                               i   = N Xi                  i           i       K                                       (15)

                             EiF = (1              ) wi Li +          L
                                                                      i K        + ri Ti            (Si +     i)                       (16)

                                                        Ei = EiF + EiI                                                                 (17)
   6
    In the interest of brevity, I only provide an intuitive discussion of these and all other equations in the main
text. I happily provide step by step derivations upon request.



                                                                     11
                                                             1     Ai       EiF
                                               Ui =                                                                               (18)
                                                         1         Li (ri ) (Pi )1

                                                    Li                          wi
                                         Mi =            L               L           T
                                                                                                                                  (19)
                                                  "fi            (wi )       (ri )         (Pi )1

    This says that equations (6) - (9) can be reduced to a system of 4R equations in the 4R
                      L      K           C
unknowns Pi ,         i ,    i ,   and   i   by substituting equations (10) - (19). In particular, equations

(10) - (19) can be used to successively solve for their respective left-hand side variables in terms
          L     K     C
of Pi ,   i ,   i ,   i ,   and parameters which can then be substituted to eliminate those variables

from equations (6) - (9). While this is easy to do, the resulting reduced-form equations

become rather cumbersome so that it makes more sense to discuss their underlying intuitions

by considering the more transparent building blocks (6) - (19).
                                                                                                                   U
    Equation (6) follows from the fact that prob (Uiv                                    Ujv for all j 6= i) =   PR i         from the
                                                                                                                   j=1   Uj

properties of the Frechet distribution, as is also well known from the discrete choice literature.

It simply captures that better regions attract more workers, where "better" refers to the

common component of utility. This relationship is the stronger the higher is                                             , because a

high      corresponds to a low dispersion in idiosyncratic utilities. This equation also reveals

that maximizing Ui is similar to maximizing local employment as already mentioned earlier,

at least if R is su¢ ciently large.

    Equations (7) - (9) require less of an explanation, as they are simply a CES price index,

a zero-pro…t condition, and a land market clearing condition, respectively, with pij denoting

the delivered price of a good from region i in region j and                                  i      1   si . In particular, the CES

price index takes the standard form, the zero pro…t condition requires that operating pro…ts

equal subsidized …xed costs, and the land market clearing condition imposes that the total

land income in region i is equal to the sum of residential and commercial land expenditure in

region i.

    The intuitions underlying equations (10) - (13) should also be fairly clear. In particular,

equations (10) - (12) follow directly from the nested Cobb-Douglas structure of the production
                                                                                L                                                 K
function which implies that …rms spend a share                                       of their costs on labor, a share                 of
                                              T
their costs on capital, a share                   of their costs on commercial land, and a share 1                             of their

costs on intermediates. Moreover, equation (13) captures that prices are constant markups


                                                                    12
over subsidized marginal costs, where                           ij   > 1 is an iceberg transport cost in the sense that

 ij   units need to be shipped from i for 1 unit to arrive in j.

      Equation (14) is a compact version of the earlier equation (4) which summarizes subsidy

costs. It is obtained by substituting equations (10) - (12) into equation (4) after rewriting

equations (10) - (11) in terms of wi Li and ri TiC which requires using the earlier de…nitions
 L        Li     K       Ki         T        TiC
 i    =   L,     i   =   K,   and   i    =   Ti .   It says that local subsidy costs are increasing in the local

subsidy rate and the share of capital employed locally which e¤ectively serves as a proxy for

the size of the subsidized local economy since the local uses of labor, capital, commercial land,

and intermediate inputs comove.

      Equations (15) - (17) calculate transfers as well as …nal and overall expenditure on goods.
                                                                                                            K     L
Equation (15) is simply a rearranged version of the earlier relationship N Xi =                             i     i   iK +

 i,   where N Xi is set to match the aggregate net exports of region i. Equation (16) follows

from the budget constraint (5) and the fact that consumers spend a share 1                                        of their

income on goods and the remainder on residential land. Equation (17) simply says that total

expenditure on goods consists of expenditure on …nal goods by consumers and intermediate

goods by …rms.

      This leaves me with equations (18) and (19) to explain. Equation (18) is simply amenity
                                                            1
adjusted per-capita real income since                   1        EiF is total expenditure on residential land and …nal

goods and (ri ) (Pi )1              is the corresponding aggregate price index. Equation (19) follows

from the fact that zero pro…ts imply that …rms must be of a constant size zi = "fi , as is

typically the case in such environments. This then implies that the number of …rms is given
                               L             K              T
                                                 TiC                    CiI   1
                1    1   Li         Ki
by Mi =        "fi        L          K              T                  1          which further simpli…es to equation (19)

upon substituting equations (10) - (12).


2.3       Equilibrium in changes

Before using this system of equations to analyze non-cooperative and cooperative subsidies, it

is convenient to …rst express it in changes following Dekle et al’s (2007) "exact hat algebra".

This technique is now standard in the quantitative trade literature and has also been applied

recently in economic geography settings (see, for example, Redding 2016). Here, the main

advantage is that it eliminates the need to explicitly estimate the technology parameters 'i

                                                                       13
and fi , the preference parameters Ai , and the trade cost parameters                                                ij ,   thereby very much

simplifying the quantitative analysis. In particular:


De…nition 2 For given subsidy changes and a numeraire i                                                1, an equilibrium in changes is
        n       L K      C
                           o
a set of P^i ; ^ ; ^ ; ^
              i   i      i   such that


                                                                          ^i
                                                                          U
                                                  ^L =                                                                                   (20)
                                                   i   PR                  L      ^j
                                                                  j=1      j      U


                                                        R
                                                                                           !11"
                                                        X
                                            P^j =                    ^ pij )1 "
                                                                  ij Mi (^                                                               (21)
                                                        i=1

                   R
                   X                                   " 1                            L           T              1
                             ij    pij )1
                                  (^        "
                                                 P^j          ^ j = (w
                                                              E      ^i )                 (^
                                                                                           ri )            P^i          ^i               (22)
                   j=1


                                                r^i = 1            C
                                                                   i
                                                                          ^iF +
                                                                          E               C ^I
                                                                                          i Ei                                           (23)

where
                                                                          ^K
                                                                           i
                                                              w
                                                              ^i =                                                                       (24)
                                                                          ^L
                                                                              i

                                                                          ^K
                                                                          i
                                                              r^i =                                                                      (25)
                                                                          ^C
                                                                           i

                                                              ^iI = ^ K
                                                              E       i                                                                  (26)

                                                              L           T                 1
                                        p^ij = (w
                                                ^i )              (^
                                                                   ri )             P^i               ^i                                 (27)

                                                                     K ^K         K
                                                       Si0 = s0i     i i           K
                                                                                                                                         (28)


                  ^ F = (1                      wi Li ^ L              L ^L       K   ri Ti                 Si0 +       0
                                                                                                                        i
                  Ei                   )             w
                                                     ^i i +            i i           + F r^i                                             (29)
                                                EiF                                F
                                                                                  Ei  Ei                       EiF
                                                        F        I
                                                  ^i = Ei E
                                                  E       ^iF + Ei E
                                                                   ^I                                                                    (30)
                                                       Ei       Ei i
                                                                ^F
                                                  ^i = 1
                                                  U
                                                                E i
                                                                                                                                         (31)
                                                                                      1
                                                       ^ L (^    P^i
                                                         i ri )




                                                                    14
                                                                                     L
                                              ^i =                          ^i ^ i
                                                                            w
                                              M                     L            T               1                                 (32)
                                                       (w
                                                        ^i )            (^
                                                                         ri )              P^i

and
                                                                                Xij
                                                       ij       = PR                                                               (33)
                                                                            m=1 Xmj

                                                                    Xij
                                                           ij   = PR                                                               (34)
                                                                   n=1 Xin

                                                                            L    R
                                                                                 X
                                                     wi Li =                             Xin                                       (35)
                                                                            i n=1

                                                                        K       R
                                                                                X
                                                      Ki =                            Xin                                          (36)
                                                                        i       n=1

                                                                            T    X
                                                     ri TiC =                            Xin                                       (37)
                                                                            i     n

                                                                                 R
                                                                                 X
                                                                    1
                                                     EiI   =                             Xin                                       (38)
                                                                        i        n=1

                                                                    R
                                                                    X
                                                     EiF =                  Xmi           EiI                                      (39)
                                                                m=1

                                                        Ei = EiF + EiI                                                             (40)

                                                  ri Ti =                   EiF + ri TiC                                           (41)
                                                                1

                                                           K       Ki
                                                           i    = PR                                                               (42)
                                                                                i=1 Ki

                                                                C           ri TiC
                                                                i       =                                                          (43)
                                                                             ri Ti

       Conditions (20) - (32) are calculated by expressing conditions (6) - (19) in changes, where

a "hat" denotes the proportional change of a variable from some original value x to some
                                 x0
new value x0 , x
               ^=                x    induced by a change in subsidies (from si to s0i ) or transfers (from                           i

to      0 ).   Using conditions (33) - (43), their coe¢ cients can be expressed in terms of easily
        i

observable quantities such as the value of trade ‡owing from region i to region j, Xij =

Mi (pij )1      "
                    (Pj )"   1
                                 Ej . In the end, all one needs to solve the model in changes is data on Xij ,
 L                                                                                                   L       K       T
 i ,   and si , as well as estimates of the parameters , , ",                                            ,       ,       , and .

                                                                        15
      Besides substantially simplifying the quanti…cation, this exact hat algebra approach also

ensures that all counterfactuals are computed from a benchmark which perfectly matches ob-

served regional employment, regional production, regional subsidies, and interregional trade.

Essentially, it imposes a restriction on the set of unknown parameters f'i ; fi ; Ai ;                        ij g   such
                        L                                                           L
that the predicted      i   and Xij exactly match the observed                      i   and Xij given the observed si
                                              L       K       T
and the model parameters             ; ; ";       ;       ;       ;   . I will elaborate further on this in a later

section in which I discuss the model …t.


2.4     Isomorphism

Building on Allen and Arkolakis (2014), I show in Appendix 1 that the model can also be

interpreted as an Armington model with external increasing returns to scale. In particular,

suppose instead that each region makes one di¤erentiated variety under conditions of perfect

competition subject to the aggregate production function Qi = 'i (Zi )1+ , where outputs,

Qi , and inputs, Zi , are now represented in capital letters to emphasize that they refer to

aggregate quantities.       i   > 0 is an external increasing returns parameter which captures that

local productivity is increasing in local employment.

      Keeping the rest of the model unmodi…ed, I show in the appendix that such an Armington

model is isomorphic to the above New Economic Geography model under the assumption

that     = 1= ("     1). Intuitively, the local price index is decreasing in local employment in

both models, with the mechanism operating through changes in variety in the New Economic

Geography model and through changes in productivity in the Armington model. I exploit this

feature to assess how robust my results are to my particular model speci…cation by allowing

for    6= 1= ("    1) in sensitivity checks.



3      Calibration

3.1     Data

I apply this model to analyze subsidy competition among U.S. states, focusing on manufactur-

ing in the lower 48 states in the year 2007. Recall from the above discussion that I need data
                                                                          L
on interregional trade ‡ows Xij , employment shares                       i ,   and subsidies si , as well as estimates


                                                              16
                                  L        K       T
of the parameters       ; ; ";         ;       ;       ;   . I obtain this information from the 2007 Commodity

Flow Survey, the 2007 Annual Survey of Manufacturing, the business incentive databases of

Bartik (2017) and Story et al (2012), the 2007 BEA Input-Output Table and BLS Capital

Income Table, as well as work by Redding (2016) and Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016).

       I construct the matrix of interstate trade ‡ows from the Commodity Flow Survey scaled

to match state-level manufacturing production from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing.

Using the publicly available Commodity Flow Survey data, I begin by constructing a matrix

of interstate freight shipments. I use the reported values which aggregate over all modes of

transport and all included industries in order to avoid having to deal with the many missing

values there are at …ner levels of detail. In the end, there are still about 8 percent missing

values, all pertaining to interstate rather than intrastate ‡ows.

       I interpolate these missing interstate ‡ows using the standard gravity equation my model
                                 1 "
implies: Xij = Mi (pii    ij )         (Pj )"      1
                                                       Ej . In particular, I estimate this equation by regressing

log trade ‡ows on origin …xed e¤ects, destination …xed e¤ects, and standard proxies for trade

costs, namely log distance between state capitals and a dummy for whether i and j share a

state border. Reassuringly, the estimation delivers a positive common border coe¢ cient and

a plausible distance elasticity of trade ‡ows of -1.01. The correlation between predicted values

and observed values is 96 percent.

       I then scale these freight shipments to ensure they add up to the total manufacturing

shipments reported in the Annual Survey of Manufacturing for each state. On average, the

total freight shipments implied by the Commodity Flow Survey are almost 2.5 times larger

than the total manufacturing shipments reported in the Annual Survey of Manufacturing.7

However, notice that trade shares and not trade ‡ows enter into equations (20) - (43) used

to calculate the e¤ects of subsidy changes so that these scalings only matter if they a¤ect

di¤erent states di¤erentially.
                                                             L
       I obtain the vector of labor shares                   i   from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing. In

particular, I simply calculate the total number of U.S. manufacturing workers and determine
   7
    In part, this simply re‡ects the fact that the aggregate freight shipments I use from the Commodity Flow
Survey include all goods captured by the Standard Classi…cation of Transported Goods which includes not
just manufacturing goods. However, the Commodity Flow Survey also double-counts trade ‡ows if they are
shipped indirectly, say …rst from i to m and then from m to j.




                                                                 17
the share of those employed in a particular state. These shares range from 0.03 percent for

Wyoming to 10.98 percent for California and their distribution is as one would expect. In

particular, manufacturing is mainly concentrated in California, Texas, and the traditional

manufacturing belt states stretching all the way from New York to Illinois. Also, there is

generally little manufacturing activity in the Interior West of the country.

   I obtain most of my subsidy measures from a new Panel Database on Business Incentives

from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. This database is the best available

database on local business incentives and is documented in detail in Bartik (2017). It aims

to measure the "standard deal" available to most medium and medium-large businesses and

reports local business incentives as a fraction of local value added. It mainly includes property

tax abatements, customized job training subsidies, investment tax credits, and research and

development tax credits.

   As my subsidy measure I use the …rm-age weighted average of the present value of busi-

ness incentives available to manufacturing …rms in 2007. This average is calculated by …rst

simulating the present value of business incentives available to new …rms over a 20-year time

period and then adjusting the starting years to match the …rm age distribution in 2007. This

measure is readily available from the database and strikes me as the most reasonable one

for my purposes since I cannot capture the time pro…le of business incentives in my static

environment.

   I supplement the information available from the Panel Database on Business Incentives

with information available from the New York Times’Business Incentive Database compiled

by Story et al (2012). This is necessary because the Panel Database on Business Incentives

currently covers only 32 states plus the District of Columbia in an e¤ort to economize on

resources. However, the missing 14 states only account for less than 10 percent of all U.S.

private sector GDP so that the gap in the Panel Database on Business Incentives is smaller

than it …rst seems.

   In contrast to the Panel Database on Business Incentives, the New York Times’ Busi-

ness Incentive Database does not attempt to back out the "standard deal" available to most

businesses but simply reports an estimate of the total annual value of all business incentives

including sales tax abatements, property tax abatements, corporate tax abatements, cash


                                               18
grants, loans, and free services. I correct for this discrepancy by scaling the entire New York

Times data such that it lines up with the Panel Database on Business Incentives for the 32

states included in both datasets.

   Unfortunately, the value of subsidies going to manufacturing …rms is not straightforward to

determine in the New York Times’Business Incentive Database since many incentive programs

are not classi…ed by industry. To obtain at least a rough estimate, I take the value of subsidies

going explicitly to manufacturing (around 32 percent), disregard all subsidies going explicitly

to agriculture, oil, gas and mining, and …lm and allocate the residual (about 53 percent) to

manufacturing based on manufacturing shares in state GDP obtained from the Bureau of

Economic Analysis.

   In order to bring these subsidy measures in line with their representation in the theory, I

express them as a fraction of total revenues which is the same as total costs since free entry

is assumed to drive pro…ts down to zero. The resulting subsidy rates do not exhibit any clear

geographic pattern and average 0.5 percent nationwide. New Mexico (3.8 percent), Vermont

(3.2 percent), and Oklahoma (2.5 percent) are the three most generous states while Colorado

(0.0 percent), Arkansas (0.0 percent), and Delaware (0.0 percent) are the three least generous

states.

   I estimate the shares of labor, capital, and land in value added from the 2007 input-output

tables of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. In particular, I calculate the share of labor in

value added as the share of employee compensation in value added net of taxes. I then divide

the residual into the capital share and the land share by using the shares of equipment,

intellectual property, and inventories in all assets and the share of structures and land in all

assets from the 2007 capital income tables of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Aggregating
                                           L             K                 T
over all manufacturing industries, I …nd       = 0:57,       = 0:33, and       = 0:10.

   I use the same input-output tables to calculate the share of value added in gross produc-

tion. In doing so, I have to recognize that my model does not directly map into published

input-output tables for two reasons. First, I do not have any investment in my model while

the published input-output tables distinguish between purchases which are depreciated im-

mediately and purchases which are capitalized on the balance sheet. Second, I only have

manufacturing industries in my model while the published input-output tables encompass the


                                                19
entire economy.

   I deal with the …rst issue by scaling all rows in the main body of the use table by one plus

the ratio of private …xed investment to total intermediates. By doing so, I e¤ectively treat all

purchases …rms make as intermediate consumption which matters mostly for durable goods

industries such as machinery. Otherwise, I would essentially assume that …rms do not value

cheap access to machinery only because they capitalize them on their balance sheets. I deal

with the second issue by simply cropping the input-output table to include only manufacturing

industries. Using this procedure, I …nd    = 0:58.

   I take the remaining parameters , , and " from the literature. I particular, I set     = 0:25

following Redding (2016) who bases his choice on housing expenditure shares documented by

Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011). Moreover, I set       = 1:2 as in Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016)

who estimate it by exploiting the fact that it also represents a local labor supply elasticity.

Finally, I pick a value of " = 5 which represents a typical estimate from the trade literature.

Needless to say, the estimates of   and " have to be handled with particular caution so I also

provide extensive sensitivity checks.


3.2   Adjustments

As laid out so far, the framework has two debatable implications which I will now discuss.

First, subsidies can have an e¢ ciency enhancing e¤ect in addition to their main beggar-thy-

neighbor e¤ect since goods prices are too high relative to land and factor prices as a result

of a markup distortion. Second, subsidies can have a second beggar-thy-neighbor e¤ect in

addition to their main agglomeration e¤ect since they also bring about an interregional wealth

redistribution by a¤ecting the real value of the nominal transfers which were introduced to

rationalize aggregate trade de…cits.

   It is not clear how to best deal with the issue that subsidies can have an e¢ ciency enhancing

e¤ect. Essentially, one can either eliminate the markup distortion or embrace it as a central

feature of the economic environment. The former approach can be justi…ed by arguing that

the markup distortion is just one of many distortions a¤ecting real-world economies and

therefore should not be overemphasized. The latter approach can be defended by pointing

out that the markup distortion is not just any distortion but one that is intimately related to

                                              20
the agglomeration externality.

         The intimate relationship between the allocative ine¢ ciency and the agglomeration exter-

nality is particularly clear in the isomorphic external increasing returns to scale representation

introduced above. In this representation, the external increasing returns not only allow re-

gions to gain at the expense of one another but also imply that goods are underprovided

due to a wedge between private and social marginal costs. This implies that the same local

spillovers which make subsidies beggar-thy neighbor policies also bring about the allocative

ine¢ ciency which subsidies can correct.

         In light of this, I report results following both approaches so that readers can make their

own choice. In particular, I extend the model by allowing for a federal cost subsidy …nanced

by lump-sum taxes on all national residents. This federal subsidy is set to exactly neutralize

the markup distortion so that state subsidies then have no additional e¢ ciency enhancing

e¤ect (the details can be found in Appendix 2). When I discuss my …ndings, I always start

by considering the case with such a federal subsidy and then ask how the results change if it

is removed.

         The prediction that subsidies also bring about an interregional wealth redistribution strikes

me as collateral damage from a modeling patch. The issue is simply that the nominal transfer
                                                                                        j
 j       is evaluated in real terms in the indirect utility function so that           Pj   is what governments

care about. One implication of this is that governments then have an incentive to manipu-

late relative prices such that the real value of the transfer they make (receive) is minimized

(maximized). Unfortunately, this incentive is strong enough to severely contaminate the

quantitative results given the large trade imbalances in the dataset.

         In order to avoid this problem, I follow my approach in Ossa (2014) and …rst use the

model to purge the trade data from the interregional transfers and then work with the purged

data subsequently. Notice that this could be done by setting                   0   = 0 and s0i = si in equations
                                                                               i
                                                                                                             " 1
                                                              ^ ij = M
(20) - (43) and then calculating the implied trade ‡ows using X           pii )1
                                                                     ^ i (^                        "
                                                                                                       P^j         ^j .
                                                                                                                   E

However, I use a slightly modi…ed version of the model in an attempt to minimize the di¤erence
                                                                                             L
between the purged data and the original data. In particular, I treat                        i   as exogenous by
          L
setting ^ i = 1 and dropping equation (20).8
     8
         Another advantage of purging the data from interregional transfers is that I do not have to take a stance


                                                          21
    This procedure does not a¤ect the pattern of interregional trade ‡ows with the correlation

between original and purged data being 99.1 percent. It also does not a¤ect the cross-regional
                                                                                                          K
distribution of capital with the correlation between original and purged capital shares                   i
                                                            L
being 99.9 percent (recall that the labor shares            i   are held …xed). Just as in Dekle et al

(2007), the main e¤ect is that the prices of …xed factors rise (fall) in regions running trade
                                                  L    T
surpluses (de…cits). The adjustments in w
                                        ^i r^i             range from -18.1 percent in Montana to 6.0

percent in Wisconsin and are between -5.5 percent and 6.0 percent for 44 out of 48 states.


3.3      Multiplicity

As is usually the case in New Economic Geography models, there are multiple equilibria if the

agglomeration forces are su¢ ciently strong relative to the dispersion forces. Concretely, this
                                                                       L     K     C
means that equations (20) - (43) can have solutions other than P^i = ^ i = ^ i = ^ i = 1 for

factual subsidies, which is always an equilibrium by construction because it corresponds to the

factual situation. Multiple equilibria are more likely the higher is          since location preferences

are then less dispersed. Multiple equilibria are also more likely the lower is " since consumers

and …rms then care more about being close to …rms.

    Figure 1 illustrates the structure of equilibria in the calibrated model for various values of

  and ". This …gure is constructed by checking if equations (20) - (43) converge to di¤erent

solutions for a large sequence of random starting guesses over a …ne grid of values for

and ". As can be seen, my benchmark values                    = 1:2 and " = 5 are safely within the

region in which there is a unique equilibrium. The same is true for all values within the

ranges     2 [0:8; 1:6] and " 2 [4; 6] which I work with in sensitivity checks (labelled "range of

considered parameters" in the …gure).


3.4      Model …t

Model …t is typically not discussed in papers using Dekle et al’s (2007) "exact hat algebra"

method since the model perfectly …ts the data used in the calibration by construction. This is

no di¤erent in my application, where the method essentially imposes a restriction on the set
on the units in which they are held …xed. This would raise serious interpretational issues which are usually
ignored in the quantitative trade literature.



                                                      22
                                                                             L
of unknown parameters f'i ; fi ; Ai ;      ij g   such that the predicted    i   and Xij exactly match the
               L                                                                                  L       K       T
observed       i   and Xij given the observed si and the model parameters               ; ; ";        ;       ;        ;   .

As is usually the case, the unknown parameters are not uniquely identi…ed since there are

more parameters than empirical moments.

        However, some progress can be made by imposing the restrictions                ij   =    ji   and         ii   =1

for all i and j. In particular, it is then possible to "invert" the model and back out relative

trade costs, amenities, productivities, and many other variables which seems useful to get

a sense of the parameter variation needed to explain the observed economic geography. As

I discuss in more detail in Appendix 3, the variation in trade ‡ows is mainly explained by

variation in trade costs which are highly correlated with distance. Moreover, the variation in

manufacturing employment is mainly explained by variation in amenities with Wyoming and

California having the worst and best amenities, respectively.



4        Analysis

4.1       Welfare e¤ects of subsidies

Figure 2 summarizes what happens if Illinois unilaterally deviates from its factual subsidy

indicated by the vertical line. The top panel depicts Illinois’local welfare change as well as

the average of the local welfare changes of all other states. The center panel shows the change

in the number of …rms in Illinois as well as the average of the changes in the number of …rms

in all other states. The bottom panel summarizes the e¤ects on the shares of labor and capital

employed in Illinois. As can be seen, higher subsidies allow Illinois to gain at the expense of

other states and attract …rms, labor, and capital to Illinois.9

        These local welfare changes are driven by a combination of home market e¤ects, terms-of-

trade e¤ects, and congestion e¤ects. Essentially, Illinois gains by attracting economic activity

from other states because this reduces Illinois’ price index and improves Illinois’ terms-of-

trade. These gains are attenuated by competition for Illinois’…xed factor land which drives

up Illinois’land rental rates and subjects Illinois’…rms to diminishing returns. This can be
    9
   I started this project when I was still at the University of Chicago which is why I always use Illinois as an
example. There is nothing special about Illinois and I could have used any other state.




                                                       23
best explained with reference to the following decomposition of the welfare e¤ects of small

subsidy changes which I derive in the appendix:

                   dUj        1X              1    dMi   1X                   dpjj        dpii
                         =             ij              +             ij                              (44)
                   Uj                     "       1 Mi                         pjj        pii
                                   i
                             |           {z           } | i                   {z                 }
                                 home market e¤ect               terms-of-trade e¤ect
                                                                                          !
                                                                          L           C
                                       drj        dPj            T
                                                                     d    j     d     j
                                       rj         Pj                     L           C
                                  |          {z         }                j           j
                                                             |            {z              }
                                 residential congestion      commercial congestion


   The …rst term captures a home market e¤ect which is also sometimes referred to as …rm

relocation or …rm delocation e¤ect. In particular, Illinois’ subsidy induces some …rms to

relocate to Illinois from other states. This has two con‡icting e¤ects on Illinois’price index

since Illinois’consumers now have access to more domestic varieties but fewer foreign varieties.

However, Illinois’consumers gain more from the increase in the number of domestic varieties

than they lose from the decrease in the number of foreign varieties since they spend more on

domestic varieties because of trade costs.

   The second term captures a terms-of-trade e¤ect. In particular, the relocation of economic

activity to Illinois increases labor and land demand in Illinois relative to other states so that

Illinois’wage and land rental rates increase relative to other states. Given that wage and land

rental rate changes directly translate into price changes in this constant markup environment,

this then increases the prices of goods Illinois exports to other states relative to the prices

of goods Illinois imports from other states which amounts to an improvement in Illinois’

terms-of-trade.

   While these relative wage and relative rent e¤ects are the dominant e¤ects on Illinois’

terms-of-trade, two additional e¤ects need to be taken into account. In particular, there is

an adverse direct subsidy e¤ect which arises because Illinois’ subsidies directly reduce the

price of goods made in Illinois. Also, there is an adverse intermediate cost e¤ect which arises

because production relocations to Illinois reduce the price index of intermediate goods in
                  dT oT     P      dp     dpi
Illinois. De…ning T oTjj = 1 i ij pjj     pi , this can be seen immediately from the pricing




                                                        24
equation (13) which implies:

                       dT oTj              X              dwj         dwi      X                              drj      dri
                                       L
                              =                     ij                     + T                         ij                                 (45)
                       T oTj                               wj          wi                                      rj      ri
                                            i
                                   |                     {z               } | i                             {z                 }
                                  relative wage e¤ect                                        relative rent e¤ect
                           1X              d    j    d   i       1      X                        dPj        dPi
                       +          ij                         +                         ij
                                                j        i                                       Pj         Pi
                              i                                           i
                         |             {z                    } |                            {z                     }
                             direct subsidy e¤ect                     intermediate cost e¤ect


    The third and fourth terms in equation (44) capture residential and commercial congestion

e¤ects, respectively. Residential congestion arises if local workers consume less residential land

relative to …nal goods which happens if local land rental rates rise relative to the local goods

price index. Commercial congestion arises if local …rms run into diminishing returns by using

less commercial land per worker which happens if local land rental rates rise faster than local
                                                                                   L              C
                                                                              d              d               dri       dwi
wages. The latter point follows from the fact that                                L
                                                                                   i
                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                       =      ri        wi ,   which should be
                                                                                  i              i

straightforward to verify.

    As an illustration, I have used formula (44) to decompose the e¤ects of a 5 percent subsidy

imposed by Illinois. Illinois’ welfare goes up by 1.2 percent of which 1.6 percent are due to

home market e¤ects, 1.0 percent are due to terms-of-trade e¤ects, and -1.4 percent are due

to congestion e¤ects. The terms-of-trade e¤ect consists of relative wage, relative rent, direct

subsidy, and intermediate cost e¤ects of 5.4 percent, 0.5 percent, -4.5 percent, and -0.3 percent,

respectively. The congestion e¤ect consists of residential and commercial congestion e¤ects of

-2.3 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively.10


4.2    Optimal subsidies

I now compute the optimal subsidies of all 48 states, assuming each time that all other states

do not deviate from their factual subsidies. The goal is to quantify how much states could gain

from unilateral policy interventions and set the stage for the subsequent analysis of subsidy

wars. As I describe in detail in Appendix 4, I compute optimal subsidies by maximizing Gloc
                                                                                        j

as de…ned in equation (3) using the Su and Judd (2012) method of mathematical programming
  10
     I have scaled all e¤ects from decomposition (44) so that they sum to the welfare e¤ects computed using
the system of equilibrium conditions. This is necessary because equation (44) is just a linear approximation
for discrete subsidy changes which ignores second-order distortions to expenditure shares.



                                                                 25
with equilibrium constraints. This ensures fast convergence despite the high dimensionality

of the analysis.

   Figure 3 summarizes the optimal subsidies of all 48 states. As can be seen, they range

from 5.8 percent for Tennessee to 12.2 percent in Louisiana and are strongly related to states’

own trade shares. The own trade share is an inverse measure of a state’s trade openness

calculated as the share of purchases it makes from itself. The variation in the own trade

shares is mainly driven by variation in trade costs even though state size of course also plays

a role. For example, California has by far the highest own trade share and also by far the

largest manufacturing employment share.

   The tight optimal subsidy-own trade share relationship can be explained with reference to

the home market e¤ect which is the dominant e¤ect throughout the analysis. In particular,

recall that consumers gain more from the larger number of domestic …rms than they lose from

the smaller number of foreign …rms because they spend more on domestic varieties than on

foreign varieties. The own trade share essentially quanti…es how much more they spend on

domestic varieties than on foreign varieties and therefore determines how much they gain from

attracting …rms.

   Figure 4 turns to the local welfare e¤ects associated with the optimal subsidies from Figure

3. As can be seen, they range from 0.2 percent for New Mexico to 4.6 percent for California

and are strongly increasing in states’optimal subsidies. Recall from above that New Mexico,

Vermont, and Oklahoma have the highest factual subsidy rates in my sample which explains

why they appear as an outlier in Figure 4. In particular, all welfare e¤ects are measured

relative to factual subsidies and not zero subsidies and these three states are already closer

to their optimal subsidies in the baseline case.

   Figure 5 con…rms the earlier claim that optimal subsidies are very close to employment-

maximizing subsidies. One way to interpret this is that the results are robust to governments

maximizing local employment instead of local welfare. Another way to interpret this is that

local employment maximization is a good rule of thumb for local welfare maximization. Either

way, it is a comforting …nding since local jobs feature most prominently in real-world policy

debates. It arises simply because workers move to the states which are most attractive as




                                              26
                                    L         U
captured by the relationship        i   =   PR i        .
                                             j=1   Uj

       Figure 6 illustrates the geographic propagation of the local welfare e¤ects of optimal

subsides using again the example of Illinois. It shows that most of Illinois’neighbors actually

gain from Illinois’optimal subsidies with the losses arising in more distant states. The reason

is simply that Illinois’neighbors trade a lot with Illinois and can therefore reap some of the

bene…ts of Illinois’increased product variety. While this may be obvious in the context of this

model, it does not always seem to be appreciated by real world policymakers who sometimes

worry particularly about subsidies imposed by neighboring states.

       Table 1 expands on the results from Figures 3 and 4 listing the optimal subsidies together

with their welfare e¤ects. It reports the optimal subsidies as well as the local welfare gains of

the subsidy imposing state (under "own"), the average local welfare losses in all other states

(under "other"), and the national welfare loss (under "national"). The optimal subsidies and

local welfare e¤ects are also reported in dollar terms, where the dollar values are calculated

by multiplying subsidy rates with subsidy bases and percentage local welfare changes with

local per-capita …nal expenditures.11

       Optimal subsidies average 9.6 percent or $14.9 billion, would raise local welfare by an

average 2.2 percent or $1.2 billion in the subsidy imposing state, and would lower local welfare

by an average -0.2 percent or -$2.9 billion in all other states. Notice that the dollar gains

of the subsidy imposing state are always smaller than the dollar losses of all other states

combined which suggests that subsidies are an ine¢ cient beggar-thy-neighbor policy. This is

then also corroborated by the national welfare e¤ects in Table 1 which are all negative and

average -0.07 percent.

       Table 2 shows the results of four sensitivity checks. Panel A reports the sensitivity of the

results to the value of        within roughly the 95 percent con…dence interval of the estimate

reported by Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016). Recall that                    is an inverse measure of the

dispersion of workers’ location preferences so that a higher               means that workers are more

willing to move. For each value of , Panel A reports the average optimal subsidy and average
                                                                                                           1
  11                                                                                            PR
    Recall from above that I refer to changes in Uj as local welfare changes and changes in        i=1 Ui    as
national welfare changes and that subsidy induced changes in local welfare correspond to changes in local per-
capita real income. By multiplying the percentage local welfare changes with local per-capita …nal expenditures
I obtain the dollar changes which correspond to the percentage changes for …xed prices.



                                                            27
own, other, and national welfare e¤ect analogously to the last line in Table 1. As can be seen,

all result are remarkably robust to variation in .

   Panel B considers the sensitivity of varying " following the same format as Panel A. "

is the elasticity of substitution among product varieties for which the trade literature has

identi…ed [4; 6] as a reasonable range. As can be seen, the optimal subsidies and their welfare

e¤ects are strongly decreasing in " which makes sense since " is also an inverse measure of the

agglomeration externality. This perhaps most obvious in the isomorphic external increasing

returns model introduced earlier in which        = 1= ("     1) parametrizes the strength of the

external increasing returns.

   Panel C turns to the sensitivity of varying       in the external increasing returns model now

keeping " unchanged. In this case, the New Economic Geography model and the external

increasing returns model are no longer isomorphic so that we can assess what role the partic-

ular model speci…cation plays. To make Panels A and B comparable, I calculate the range of

 in Panel C by applying the formula        = 1= ("    1) to the range of " in Panel B. As can be

seen, the optimal subsidies and their welfare e¤ects are again strongly increasing in , now

even more so than implicit in Panel B.

   Panel D suggests that measurement error in my subsidy dataset would only have minimal

e¤ects on the results. This is important since I interpret subsidies as deviations from bene…t

tax rates in the theory which does not map exactly into the measured subsidy rates. In

particular, Panel D shows the maximum and minimum optimal subsidies I obtain in 1,000

calculations in which I replace the measured subsidy rates with a bootstrap sample. These

maximum and minimum values are very similar in all cases which implies that the optimal

subsidies do not depend much on the measured subsidies.

   Figures 7 and 8 explore the e¤ects of removing the federal subsidy which was imposed

to correct for the markup distortion so far. As can be seen, the optimal subsidies become a

bit larger and their "own" welfare e¤ects become a bit smaller while their overall pattern is

preserved. On average, the optimal subsidy is 10.1 percent with "own" and "other" welfare

e¤ects of 1.5 percent and -0.03 percent, respectively. As I discussed earlier, state subsidies then

also have an e¢ ciency enhancing character in addition to their beggar-thy-neighbor character

because they counteract the markups charged by …rms.


                                                28
4.3   Nash subsidies

I now turn to the best-response equilibrium in which all states retaliate optimally. This is

meant to capture the extreme case of fully non-cooperative policy making which I will also

refer to as a subsidy war. As I explain in detail in Appendix 4, it can be found by iterating

over the algorithm used to compute optimal subsidies until a …xed point is reached. I have

experimented extensively with this procedure and it appears that the …xed point is unique.

To avoid confusion, I call the resulting best-response subsidies Nash subsidies and continue

using the term optimal subsidies as before.

   Figure 9 plots the Nash subsidies against the optimal subsidies from Figure 3. As can

be seen, the Nash subsidies tend to be slightly lower than the optimal subsidies but the

overall correlation is very high. Intuitively, optimal subsidies are higher than Nash subsidies

because states’own trade shares respond more to optimal subsidies than to Nash subsidies.

In particular, states attract more …rms if other states do not retaliate which then induces

them to spend more on domestic goods. This, in turn, magni…es states’incentives to impose

further subsidies following the logic discussed above.

   Figures 10 and 11 illustrate the local welfare e¤ects associated with these Nash subsidies.

As can be seen, they range from -3.1 percent for Delaware to 2.3 percent in Montana so that

not all states lose from a subsidy war. The welfare gains are decreasing in states’capital-labor

ratios since subsidies are …nanced by workers but cover labor and capital costs. As a result,

per-capita taxes are higher in capital abundant states which results in lower per-capita real

incomes there. At the same time, subsidies are no longer e¤ective at inducing …rm relocations

because they are o¤ered everywhere.

   Table 3 elaborates on these …gures analogously to Table 1. Of course, there is now only

one set of Nash subsidies instead of 48 sets of optimal subsidies so that there is no distinction

between "own" and "other" welfare e¤ects. On average, Nash subsidies are 9.1 percent or

$9.9 billion and bring about local welfare losses of -1.1 percent or -$0.6 billion. These local

welfare losses add up to -$30.9 billion across the entire country and the national welfare loss

is -1.3 percent. All in all, a full-out escalation of subsidy competition would therefore have

large negative welfare e¤ects.



                                               29
   Table 4 considers the sensitivity of these …ndings analogously to Table 2. In particular,

its various panels again report the e¤ects of changing the parameters       , ", and    in the

New Economic Geography or external increasing returns version of the model as well as the

minimum and maximum Nash subsidies obtained when by replacing the subsidy data with

a bootstrap sample 1,000 times. Just as in the case of optimal subsidies, the Nash subsidy

results are very robust to changes in    or measurement error in the subsidy data but strongly

respond to changes in " and .

   Figures 12 and 13 explore the e¤ects of removing the federal subsidy analogously to Figures

7 and 8. While the Nash subsidies are again rather similar with and without the federal

subsidy, it turns out that a subsidy war bene…ts all states without the federal subsidy. As

should be clear by now, the reason is that the state subsidies counteract the markup distortion

which consumers of intermediate and …nal goods otherwise face. Essentially, states then

unintentionally improve the e¢ ciency of the national economy as their attempts to attract

…rms from each other more or less cancel out.

   My assessment of the welfare e¤ects of subsidy wars therefore critically depends on whether

or not I start from a …rst-best or a laissez-faire benchmark. As I explained earlier, there are

good reasons for making either comparison so that I hesitate to take a strong stance. What

is clear, however, is that subsidy wars at best move the economy in the right direction and

are not a substitute for …rst-best policies. This is also why I emphasize the case with federal

subsidies in most of the paper because I do not want to mislead the reader into endorsing

distortionary policies.


4.4   Cooperative subsidies

I now consider cooperative subsidy policy leaving behind the best-response logic from the

subsidy war. The goal is to characterize the best-case scenario and assess how much there is

to gain relative to the status quo. I assume that the federal government sets state subsidies

as well as interstate transfers   j   with the objective of maximizing national welfare. As I

explain in detail in Appendix 4, I again use the Su and Judd (2012) method of mathematical

programming with equilibrium constraints which ensures fast convergence despite the high

dimensionality of the analysis.

                                               30
    As one would expect, the cooperative state subsidies are zero or such that prices get

reduced by the extent of the markup, depending on whether or not the federal government

already corrects for the markup distortion with a federal subsidy. In this case, there is no

meaningful distinction between either scenario because a common federal subsidy or uniform

state subsidies achieve exactly the same policy goal. As is illustrated in Figure 14, the

interstate transfers are used to redistribute per capita income with the result of reducing but

not eliminating interstate inequality.

    This redistribution improves national welfare by allowing more workers to live in states

that better match their idiosyncratic preferences. In particular, some workers in richer states

are attracted purely by better consumption possibilities in the sense that their ujv ’s are

actually higher for poorer states. Transfers from richer to poorer states allow some of these

workers to relocate to states for which they have higher ujv ’s thereby improving the average

match quality. At the same time, there is still inequality in the cooperative equilibrium since

transfers come at the cost of reducing production e¢ ciency.12

    Starting at factual subsidies, cooperation would increase national welfare by 0.5 percent.

Almost the entire e¤ect is due to the use of transfers, setting subsidies to zero alone only

brings about a welfare gain of 0.002 percent. From a welfare perspective, factual subsidies

are therefore much closer to the best-case scenario than the worst-case scenario (recall that

the national welfare loss of moving to Nash subsidies is 1.3 percent). Table 5 provides more

detail on these numbers which Table 6 complements with sensitivity checks analogous to the

earlier Tables 1-4.13

    Figure 15 compares non-cooperative and cooperative subsidies to factual subsidies. The

light grey lines represent non-cooperative subsidies at various degrees of escalation. In par-

ticular, the top grey line shows the fully non-cooperative subsidies while the bottom grey

line (the x-axis) shows the fully cooperative subsidies and the intermediate grey lines show
  12
     If I did not allow the federal government to set interstate transfers, it would attempt to achieve a similar
redistribution by manipulating the terms-of-trade using state subsidies. In particular, it would set higher
subsidies in poorer states than in richer states thereby improving the terms-of-trade of poorer states relative
to richer states.
  13
     I do not report the sensitivity of cooperative subsidies with respect to initial subsidies because cooperative
subsidies are always zero anyway. Careful readers might notice that there are minor deviations from zero in
two of the reported sensitivity checks (for      = 1 and      = 0:20) which I believe are due to computational
imprecisions.




                                                        31
proportionately scaled versions with the scalings decreasing in 10 percentage point steps. The

factual subsidies are superimposed onto this using state labels and states are always sorted in

increasing order of their non-cooperative subsidies.

       With the exception of a few outliers, factual subsidies are much closer to cooperative than

non-cooperative subsidies. This is not surprising since one would not expect U.S. states to be

in a fully escalated subsidy war. Besides perhaps engaging in tacit cooperation, U.S. states also

act in the shadow of the federal government which might try to restrict subsidy competition

if it became too extreme. For example, the federal government could adopt the argument of

some legal scholars that state incentive programs violate the constitution’s Commerce Clause

because they discriminate against out-of-state businesses.14

       Figure 16 compares (log) subsidy costs in the factual equilibrium to (log) subsidy costs

in the Nash equilibrium. It shows that states with higher factual subsidies also tend to have

higher Nash subsidies, which is less apparent when subsidies are expressed as percentage

rates in Figure 15. While this is an encouraging observation, it clearly has to be taken with

a large grain of salt. Most importantly, the factual subsidy costs I measure are likely to

be incomplete and imprecise proxies for the business incentives state governments actually

provide, as I discussed in the data section above.

       Brushing measurement concerns aside for a moment, one can actually make optimal subsi-

dies line up exactly with factual subsidies by allowing state governments to be partially coop-

erative. In particular, suppose that state governments maximize a Cobb-Douglas combination
                                                                                     1 j
                                                                           j
                                                                             PR
of local welfare and national welfare with local welfare weights j : (Uj )    i=1 Ui     . The

local welfare weights listed in Table 7 then equalize optimal subsidies and factual subsidies

as is veri…ed in Figure 17. Notice that these weights are all below 1 percent suggesting again

that the factual regime is close to cooperative.15
  14
      More precisely, the argument refers to the "dormant" Commerce Clause which U.S. courts have inferred
from the Commerce Clause of the U.S. constitution. It holds that states are prohibited from passing legislation
which interferes with interstate commerce even if Congress does not intervene. The legal debate therefore
focuses on the question of whether state incentive programs interfere with interstate commerce. See Rogers
(2000) for an interesting overview.
   15
      Given the high correlation between optimal subsidies and Nash subsidies, these weights also bring Nash
subsidies close to factual subsidies.




                                                      32
5    Conclusion

In this paper, I provided a …rst comprehensive quantitative analysis of subsidy competition

in the U.S.. I …rst showed that states have strong incentives to subsidize …rm relocations in

order to gain at the expense of other states. I then showed that observed subsidies are much

closer to cooperative subsidies than non-cooperative subsidies but that the potential costs of

an escalation of subsidy competition are large.

    As with all calibration studies, my quantitative results are best interpreted as rough esti-

mates which have to be taken with a grain of salt. The reason is simply that they are obtained

from a theoretical model with numbers which abstracts from many features of reality. Having

said this, they still provide the best guess available from the academic literature to date of

the potential gains and losses from more or less subsidy competition in the U.S.. As such,

they hopefully serve as a useful input into policy discussions as well as a useful benchmark

for future academic research.

    While I used my framework to study subsidy competition among regional governments,

it should be clear that it can also be applied to study subsidy competition among national

governments. In my view, this would be a valuable contribution to the international subsidy

competition/tax competition literature in that it would go beyond the usual analysis of …scal

externalities. In particular, it would make the case that national governments care about

attracting multinational …rms not only because they expand the national tax base but also

because they generate spillover e¤ects for the national economy.




                                              33
6     Appendix

6.1   Appendix 1: Isomorphism with Armington model

Introducing only the modi…cations described in subsection 2.4, it should be easy to verify that

out of all the conditions in De…nition 1 only (7), (8), (13), and (19) change. In particular, the

Armington analog to equation (7) is

                                                    R
                                                                             !11"
                                                    X
                                      Pj =                 (pij )1       "

                                                    i=1


since the number of …rms is now exogenous and normalized to one. Also, the Armington

analog to equation (8) is

                                    R
                                    X
                                L
                                          (pij )1     "
                                                          (Pj )"    1
                                                                        Ej =        i wi Li
                                    j=1


                                          L
which simply says that a fraction             of …rm revenues is spent on worker compensation. The

Armington analog to equation (13) is

                                                  L            T
                                          (wi )       (ri )             (Pi )1       i ij
                              pij =
                                                               'i Z i


which should be intuitive since …rms no longer charge markups but productivity is now 'i Zi .

Finally, the Armington analog to equation (19) is

                                       Li                          wi
                              Zi =            L            L            T
                                                  (wi )        (ri )           (Pi )1


which should make sense since Zi = Mi zi in the original model and now Mi is exogenous and

normalized to one.

    Equations (7), (8), (13), and (19) from the main model can be combined into the two




                                                           34
condensed equilibrium conditions

                                  0                                                                                                 1    1
                                    R                                                                                                   1 "
                                   X  Li                                     wi                                               1 "
                                  @                                                                               i ij              A
                             Pj =      L                             L            T                       "
                                                            (wi )        (ri )            (Pi )   1               '
                                                                                                                  ~i
                                         i=1


                             R
                             X                  1 "                                                                                        "
                                         ij                                                           L           T
                                                       (Pj )"   1
                                                                    Ej = ( i )"             (wi )         (ri )           (Pi )1
                                     '
                                     ~i
                             j=1

where I have replaced the original productivity parameter with a rescaled one satisfying
                               1
               " " fi         1 "
'
~i =                                'i . Similarly, the abovementioned Armington analogs to equations (7),
            (" 1)("     1)


(8), (13), and (19) can be combined into the two condensed equilibrium conditions

                      0                                                                                                                              1    1
                                                                                                                                                         1 "
                          R
                          X                     (" 1)                                      (" 1)                                               1 "
                 B                  Li                                            (wi )                                             i ij             C
            Pj = @                     L                                                                  (1+ )(" 1)                                 A
                                                                     L            T                                                 'i
                          i=1                                (wi )        (ri )           (Pi )1

   R
   X                    1 "                                          1     (" 1)                                                                     1+        " 1
                 ij                                        wi Li                                                  L           T
                              (Pj )"       1
                                               Ej =             L
                                                                                       ( i )"         (wi )           (ri )         (Pi )1
               'i
      j=1

where I have left the original productivity parameter unchanged. The isomorphism can now
                                                1
be seen by imposing                    =       " 1    on the condensed Armington conditions which reveals that both

models are identical up to the scale of 'i .


6.2     Appendix 2: Equilibrium conditions with federal subsidies

As discussed in subsection 3.2, I introduce a federal subsidy sI = 1=" on …nal and intermediate

consumption to correct a markup distortion faced by consumers and …rms. With such a

subsidy, the equilibrium conditions in levels and changes summarized in De…nition 1 and

De…nition 2 extend to:


De…nition 1 (extended) For given subsidies and a numeraire i                                                                        1, an equilibrium in
                                       L        K      C
levels is a set of Pi ;                i ;      i ;    i    such that


                                                                      L      U
                                                                      i   = PR i
                                                                                      j=1 Uj




                                                                                  35
                                                               R
                                                                                                     !11"
                                                               X
                                              Pj =                        Mi (pij )1             "

                                                                  i=1

                        R
                      1X                                                                    L                T                          1
                         (pij )1         "
                                             (Pj )"       1
                                                              Ej = (wi )                        (ri )                        I
                                                                                                                                 Pi             i fi
                      "
                       j=1

                                                                                                     T
                                                                          F
                                         ri Ti =                              EiF +                              F
                                                                                                                     EiI
                                                          1                                 1

where
                                                                              K         L
                                                                              i             K
                                                              wi =            L      K
                                                                              i             L
                                                                              K      T
                                                                              i             K
                                                              ri =            C     K
                                                                              i             Ti

                                                                          1
                                                          EiI =                     K
                                                                                            K
                                                                                            i K
                                                                          F

                                                                      L             T                                1
                                                          (wi )           (ri )                      FP
                                              "                                                              i                   i ij
                                 pij =
                                         "        1                                         'i
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                   X                                     K
                                    Si =          si K
                                                     i            +       L F
                                                                          i s
                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                 m m                       K
                                                                                     m

                                                                               P                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                            XX
                  F                      K            L                       P Pn Xin                                     L          F
          i   =       N Xi               i            i       K                                                            i      s                    Xmn
                                                                               m   n Xmn                                                    m    n

                             F
                                 EiF = (1                 ) wi Li +                L
                                                                                   i K       + ri Ti                     (Si +            i)


                                                              Ei = EiF + EiI

                                                              1       Ai        F EF
                                                                                   i
                                             Ui =
                                                          1           Li (ri ) ( F Pi )1

                                                Li                                          wi
                                  Mi =                    L                   L              T
                                              "fi                 (wi )            (ri )                 (       F P )1
                                                                                                                    i


De…nition 2 (extended) For given subsidy changes and a numeraire i                                                                                     1, an equilibrium
                      n        L K         C
                                             o
in changes is a set of P^i ; ^ i ; ^ i ; ^ i such that


                                                                                  ^i
                                                                                  U
                                                      ^L =
                                                       i   PR                       L       ^j
                                                                          j=1       j       U


                                                                              36
                                         R
                                                                                 !11"
                                         X
                             P^j =                    ^ pij )1 "
                                                   ij Mi (^
                                         i=1

        R
        X                                " 1                                L                 T              1
              ij    pij )1
                   (^         "
                                   P^j         ^ j = (w
                                               E      ^i )                      (^
                                                                                 ri )                  P^i       ^i
        j=1


                                  r^i = 1              C
                                                       i
                                                            ^iF +
                                                            E                   C ^I
                                                                                i Ei


where
                                                            ^K
                                                             i
                                               w
                                               ^i =
                                                            ^L
                                                             i

                                                           ^K
                                                               i
                                               r^i =
                                                           ^C
                                                               i

                                               ^iI = ^ K
                                               E       i

                                               L               T                      1
                         p^ij = (w
                                 ^i )              (^
                                                    ri )                   P^i                    ^i
                                                                                                   !
                                                                   X                                   K
              Si0   =        s0i K ^K    +       L ^L F                     0 K ^K
                                 i i             i i s                      m m m                        K
                                                                       m


        ^iF = 1               wi Li ^ L                 L ^L       iK b ri Ti                           Si0 +    0
                                                                                                                 i
        E                          w
                                   ^i i +               i i            i + F r^i
                    F         EiF                                  EiF    Ei                               EiF
                                          F        I
                                    ^i = Ei E
                                    E       ^ F + Ei E
                                                     ^I
                                             i
                                         Ei       Ei i
                                                 ^F
                                   ^i = 1
                                   U
                                                 E i
                                                                            1
                                        ^ L (^    P^i
                                          i ri )

                                                                       L
                             ^i =                          ^i ^ i
                                                           w
                             M                     L               T                      1
                                         (w
                                          ^i )         (^
                                                        ri )                    P^i

and
                                                            Xij
                                         ij    = PR
                                                           m=1 Xmj

                                                   Xij
                                          ij   = PR
                                                  n=1 Xin

                                                           L   R
                                                               X
                                     wi Li =                               Xin
                                                           i n=1



                                                       37
                                                                     K       R
                                                                             X
                                                   Ki =                               Xin
                                                                     i       n=1

                                                                         T       X
                                                  ri TiC =                            Xin
                                                                         i        n

                                                                              R
                                                                              X
                                                             1
                                                  EiI =                  F
                                                                                      Xin
                                                                 i            n=1

                                                             R
                                                             X
                                                  EiF   =                Xmi           EiI
                                                             m=1

                                                        Ei = EiF + EiI

                                                                         F
                                              ri Ti =                        EiF + ri TiC
                                                         1

                                                        K       Ki
                                                        i    = PR
                                                                             i=1 Ki

                                                             C           ri TiC
                                                             i   =
                                                                          ri Ti

6.3      Appendix 3: Model …t

Appendix Figure 1 illustrates that the variation in trade ‡ows is largely explained by variation

in trade costs by plotting the (log) export shares from Illinois against the (log) trade costs
                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                 Xij Xji   2(1 ")
from Illinois. The trade costs are backed out using the Head-Ries index                                           ij   =         Xii Xjj            ,

which follows from equations Xij = Mi (pij )1                                "
                                                                                 (Pj )"     1
                                                                                                Ej and (13) under the assumption

that     ij   =   ji   and     ii   = 1. Appendix Figure 2 then shows that these trade costs are highly

correlated with distance, just as one would expect.

     Appendix Figure 3 illustrates that variation in manufacturing employment is largely

explained by variation in amenities with Wyoming and California having the worst and
                                                                                                                                           Ai
best amenities, respectively. Relative amenities are backed out using the formula                                                          Aj   =
                               1
         1+       ri      Pi
     L            rj     Pj                                                                                 L          EiF
     i
     L                 EF
                                     which follows from equations (6) and (18).                             i
                                                                                                            L   and    EjF
                                                                                                                             can be directly
     j                  i                                                                                   j
                       EF
                        j
                                                                                 PR                                          1       PR
read o¤ of the data keeping in mind that EiF =                                        m=1 Xmi          EiI and EiI =             F     n=1 Xin .
                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                 1
Pi                                       Pi       P                                   1 "       1 "

Pj   can be calculated from              Pj   =     m        mj
                                                                             mi
                                                                             mj
                                                                                                      using the trade costs from the



                                                                     38
                                                                                                                                   ri
Head-Ries index which follows straightforwardly from equation (7).                                                                 rj   is calculated from
                       T
ri       1
             EiF + 1       EiI Tj
rj   =               T              using state land areas as proxies for Ti .
         1
             EjF + 1       E I Ti
                            j



6.4      Appendix 4: Decomposition of welfare e¤ects

Di¤erentiating equation (18) yields:

                                                                          L
                                      dUj  dEjF                      d    j        dPj                    drj       dPj
                                          = F                            L
                                      Uj   Ej                            j         Pj                     rj        Pj

                                                           PR                                                                                     PR
     Equations (13) and (8) imply                              n=1 Xjn            = Mj ("                 1) pjj 'j fj . Since Ej =                m=1 Xmj ,

one can write Ej = Mj ("                      1) pjj 'j fj               N Xj . Around N Xj = 0, one therefore obtains:

                                                       dEj   dMj   dpjj                               dN Xj
                                                           =     +
                                                       Ej    Mj    pjj                                 Ej

     Recall from the discussion of equation (19) in the main text that the number of …rms can
                                                       T!
                                                           L                  K                                         1
                                     1        1    Lj              Kj                  TjC                    CjI
be expressed as Mj =                "fj                L             K                  T                    1               . Exploiting the fact that
         EII
CjI =    Pj ,   this implies:

                                                                                                  !                                           !
                                                   L                  K                       C
                       dMj                L
                                              d    j       K
                                                                d     j            T
                                                                                       d      j                             dEjI        dPj
                           =                      L
                                                       +             K
                                                                              +              C
                                                                                                      + (1          )
                       Mj                         j                  j                       j                              EjI         Pj

     Di¤erentiating equation (7) yields:

                                                        X      R
                                                  dPj                             dpii                1    dMi
                                                      =                  ij
                                                  Pj                              pii             "       1 Mi
                                                               i=1




                                                                                  39
   These four equations can be combined to:

                                       R                                           R
                        dUj       1X                   1    dMi   1X                               dpjj   dpii
                              =               ij                +                             ij
                        Uj                         "       1 Mi                                     pjj   pii
                                       i=1                                         i=1
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                          L
                                             drj       dPj                    T
                                                                                    d     j        d C
                                                                                                     j
                                             rj        Pj                                L            C
                                                                                         j            j
                                                                                                     !
                                      1                    dEjI               dEjF            dEj
                                  +          (1        )                 +
                                                               EjI            EjF             Ej
                                                                                   !                    !
                                                                K              L
                                      1           K
                                                           d    j         d    j           dN Xj
                                  +                            K              L
                                                               j              j             Ej

   This equation simpli…es to equation (44) in the main text because the last two terms are

equal to zero around si =         i   = N Xi = 0. To see why the second to last term is zero, notice
                                                                                                                             Ki             1   Ki
that EiF =Ei =        and EiI =Ei = 1             if si =            i   = N Xi = 0 since then EiF =                         K    , EiI =       K    ,
                Ki
and Ei =         K   as follows from combining equations (9), (10), (11), (15), (16), and (17). To

see why the last term is zero, make use of some of the same relationships, namely (15) and
       Ki
Ei =    K   .


6.5    Appendix 5: Algorithm

I compute the optimal subsidies of state i by solving n                                            min           o
                                                                                                                             ^i subject to the
                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                 L K C
                                                                                    s0i ;P^j ; ^ j ; ^ j ; ^ j
                                                                                                                 j=1;:::;R
equilibrium conditions in changes as summarized in De…nition 2 (extended) in Appendix 2.

Notice that minimizing         ^i is equivalent to maximizing Ui which is, in turn, equivalent to
                               U

maximizing Gloc
            i from equation (3). This follows the approach of Su and Judd (2012) which

builds on the idea of mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints.

   I compute Nash subsidies following the same method I applied in Ossa (2014). Starting

at factual subsidies, I compute each state’s optimal subsidies, then impose these optimal

subsidies, and let all states reoptimize given all other states’optimal subsidies, and so on, until

the solution converges in the sense that no state has an incentive to deviate from its subsidies.

I have experimented with many di¤erent starting values without …nding any di¤erences in the

results which makes me believe that the identi…ed Nash equilibrium is unique.

   I compute cooperative transfers and subsidies analogously to optimal subsidies by solv-



                                                                     40
                                                                        1
                                                   PR     L   ^j
ing   n                 min        o                j=1   j   U             subject to the equilibrium conditions in
          s0i ;      ^ ^L ^K ^C
                  0 ;P
                  i i; i ; i ; i
                                       i=1;:::;R
changes as summarized in De…nition 2 (extended) in Appendix 2. Notice that minimizing
                  1                                        1
   PR     L ^                                     PR
     j=1 j   Uj     is equivalent to maximizing        U
                                                    j=1 j    which is, in turn, equiva-

lent to maximizing Gf ed from equation (3). To accelerate convergence, I provide analytic

derivatives of the objective functions and the equilibrium constraints throughout.




                                                                   41
References

 [1] Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Econ-

    omy." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1085-1140.

 [2] Armington, Paul. 1969. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of

    Production." IMF Sta¤ Papers 16: 159-176.

 [3] Baldwin, Richard, Rikard Forslid, Philippe Martin, Gianmarco Ottaviano, and Frederic

    Robert-Nicoud. 2005. Economic Geography and Public Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton

    University Press.

 [4] Bartik, Timothy. 2017. "A New Panel Database on Business Incentives for Economic

    Development O¤ered by State and Local Governments in the United States." Prepared

    for the Pew Charitable Trusts.

 [5] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte.

    2014. "The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy."

    NBER Working Paper No. 20168.

 [6] Davis, Morris and Francois Ortalo-Magne. 2011. "Household Expenditures, Wages,

    Rents." Review of Economic Dynamics 14: 248-261.

 [7] Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Sam Kortum. 2007. "Unbalanced Trade." American

    Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97(2): 351-355.

 [8] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, and Owen Zidar.

    2016. "State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation." NBER Working Paper 21760.

 [9] Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables. 2001. The Spatial Economy:

    Cities, Regions, and International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[10] Gaubert, Cecile. 2014. "Firm Sorting and Agglomeration." University of California at

    Berkeley, Mimeo.




                                            42
[11] Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. "Identifying Agglom-

    eration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings." Journal

    of Political Economy 118(3): 536-598.

[12] Handbury, Jesse and David Weinstein. 2015. "Goods Prices and Availability in Cities."

    The Review of Economic Studies 82(1): 258-296.

[13] Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti. 2014. "Local Economic Development, Agglomera-

    tion Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley

    Authority." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1): 275-331.

[14] Krugman, Paul. 1991. "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography." Journal of Polit-

    ical Economy 99(3): 438-499.

[15] Krugman, Paul and Anthony Venables. 1995. "Globalization and the Inequality of Na-

    tions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 857-880.

[16] Oates, Wallace. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. Hartcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.

[17] Ossa, Ralph. 2011. "A "New Trade" Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations." Journal of

    Political Economy 119(1): 122-152.

[18] Ossa, Ralph. 2012. "Pro…ts in the New Trade Approach to Trade Negotiations." American

    Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 104(12): 4104-4146.

[19] Ossa, Ralph. 2014. "Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data." American Economic Review

    104(12): 4104-46.

[20] Redding, Stephen. 2016. "Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare." Journal of Inter-

    national Economics 101: 148-167.

[21] Rogers, James. 2000. "The E¤ectiveness and Constitutionality of State Tax Incentive

    Policies for Locating Businesses: A Simple Game Theoretic Analysis." The Tax Lawyer

    53(2): 431-458.




                                            43
[22] Suarez Serrato, Juan and Owen Zidar. 2016, "Who Bene…ts from Corporate Tax Cuts? A

    Local Labor Market Approach with Heterogeneous Firms." American Economic Review

    106(9): 2582-2624.

[23] Story,   Louise,     Ti¤     Fehr,    and    Derek     Watkins.    2012.     "Explore

    Government      Subsidies."     The    New     York     Times.     Accessed     using:

    http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/12/01/us/government-incentives.html.

[24] Su, Che-Lin and Kenneth L. Judd. 2012. "Constrained Optimization Approaches to Es-

    timation of Structural Models." Econometrica 80(5): 2213-2230.

[25] Thomas, Kenneth. 2011. "Investment Incentives and the Global Competition for Capital.

    New York: Palgrove-MacMillan.

[26] Venables, Anthony. 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products: A

    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model." The Economic Journal 97(387): 700-717.




                                           44
               F i g u r e 2: Effects of subsidy imposed by IL
                                                                                                    0.5




  0                                                                                                 0
                                                  IL local welfare change in % (left scale)
                                                  Other local welfare change in % (right scale)

                                                                                                    -0.5
      -5   0                           5                            10                            15
                                Subsidy (in %)
50
                                                                                                    2


  0                                                                                                 0
                                                       IL variety change in % (left scale)
                                                       Other variety change in % (right scale)
                                                                                                    -2
-50
      -5   0                           5                            10                            15
                                Subsidy (in %)
5.3                                                                                                 10

5.2                                                                                                 8

5.1                                                                                                 6

  5                                                      IL employment share in % (left scale)      4
                                                         IL capital share in % (right scale)
4.9                                                                                                 2

4.8                                                                                                 0
      -5   0                           5                            10                            15
                                Subsidy (in %)




                                  45
                                                                             Figure 3: Optimal subsidies
                            13


                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                WA                              CA
                            12                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                     AZ                                    TX
                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                      MN
                                                                                                                 UT IA              NC
                            11                                                                                     MA     MI
                                                                                                           ME   AL WI
                                                                                                                OK

                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                        VA
                                                                                                 KS
     Optimal subsidy in %




                            10                                                                               NY
                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                               OH
                                                                                       AR
                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                  IN
                                                                              SD
                                                                            ID
                             9                                             MS
                                                                           NE
                                                                         ND                 IL
                                                                          VT SC
                                                                           KY


                                                              DE
                             8                                     NJ
                                                         WY
                                                         NV

                                                        MD
                                                  NH
                             7                     NM
                                                 WV
                                            RI



                             6        MT
                                           TN




                             5
                                 15    20               25              30             35               40           45              50              55               60        65
                                                                                       Own trade share in %




                                                                  Figure 4: Welfare gains of optimal subsidies
                             5

                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                            4.5
                                                                                                                                                                      WA
                                                                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                                                                  OR
                             4
                                                                                                                                                                 AZ
                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                            FL
                            3.5                                                                                                                        CO
Local welfare change in %




                                                                                                                                                     MN
                                                                                                                                              NC
                             3                                                                                                             WI UT
                                                                                                                                               IA
                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                           MI
                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                          ME
                            2.5                                                                                                 VA CT

                                                                                                                               KS
                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                       MO
                             2                                                                                   AR        NY
                                                                                                               PA
                                                                                                              SD                           OK
                                                                                                            ID
                                                                                                         MS    IN
                                                                                                      ILND
                                                                                                         NE
                            1.5
                                                                                                 KY
                                                                                       DE
                                                                                                      SC
                                                                              WY
                                                                             NVNJ
                             1                                     NH
                                                                    MD

                                                         RIWV                                     VT
                                           TN MT
                            0.5

                                                              NM

                             0
                                  5         6                 7                    8                    9                 10                   11                12             13
                                                                                       Optimal subsidy in %




                                                                                                 46
                                                                         Figure 5: Maximizing employment instead of welfare
                                          14

                                                                                                                                                  CA

                                          13                                                                                                 TX

                                                                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                                              OR
                                                                                                                                             AZ
     Employment-maximizing subsidy in %   12                                                                                            FL

                                                                                                                                NC CO
                                                                                                                                   MN
                                                                                                                             MI IA
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                              MAUT
                                          11                                                                                AL
                                                                                                                            OK
                                                                                                                            ME
                                                                                                                    VA CT
                                                                                                              OH NY
                                                                                                               GA KS
                                                                                                               MO
                                          10                                                               PA
                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                 IL      SD
                                                                                                       ID
                                                                                                    MS
                                                                                                    NE
                                           9                                                    SCND
                                                                                              KY
                                                                                               VT


                                                                                     NJ DE
                                           8                                        WY
                                                                                   NV

                                                                              MD
                                                                             NH
                                           7                            NM
                                                                      WV
                                                                     RI



                                           6               TN MT




                                           5
                                               5            6            7           8            9               10         11              12         13     14
                                                                                     Welfare-maximizing subsidy in %




                                                   Figure 6: Welfare effects resulting from optimal subsidy imposed by IL                                      % change


 WA                                                                                                                                                                       1.4
                                                                                                                                                          ME
                                                               MT                   ND                                                                  NH
                                                                                                MN                                                     VT                 1.2
 OR                                                  ID                                                                MI
                                                                                                              WI                          NY CTMA
                                                                                    SD                                                         RI
                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                    WY                                                                 PA NJ
                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                     NE                                           OH     MDDE                             0.8

                                          NV              UT                                                      IL IN              WV
                                                                     CO                                                                VA                                 0.6
CA                                                                                       KS             MO              KY
                                                                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                                        TN                                                0.4

                                                     AZ                                  OK                AR                        SC
                                                                    NM                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                                  MS    AL
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                                     FL
                                                                                                                                                                          -0.2


                                                                                                                                                                          -0.4




                                                                                                      47
                                                                              Figure 7: Optimal subsidies w/ and w/o federal subsidies
                                                  14

                                                                                                                                                                         CA

                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                                                 FL AZ
                                                                                                                                                                     OR
                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                        MNCO
        Optimal subsidy w/o federalsubsidy in %
                                                                                                                                                  MINC
                                                                                                                                                 WI  IA
                                                                                                                                                    UT
                                                                                                                                                 ALMA
                                                                                                                                                 OK
                                                  11                                                                                            ME
                                                                                                                                           CT
                                                                                                                                OH NY VA
                                                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                                 GA
                                                                                                                                 MO
                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                            INAR
                                                  10
                                                                                                                      IDSD
                                                                                                                IL
                                                                                                                   MS
                                                                                                                   NE
                                                                                                                SC
                                                                                                               VT
                                                   9                                                          KY ND


                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                        DE
                                                   8                                             NV
                                                                                                  WY
                                                                                       NH
                                                                                        MD
                                                                                 NM
                                                                              RI
                                                   7                           WV

                                                                      MT
                                                                 TN

                                                   6



                                                   5
                                                        5         6                7               8               9             10              11                 12                 13          14
                                                                                              Optimal subsidy w/ federal subsidy in %




                                                                              Figure 8: Own welfare gains w/ and w/o federal subsidies
                                                   5


                                                  4.5


                                                   4
Own welfare gain w/o federal subsidy in %




                                                  3.5                                                                                                                                         CA

                                                                                                                                                                                  TX

                                                   3                                                                                                                                   WA
                                                                                                                                                                             OR
                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                    AZ
                                                  2.5                                                                                                       FL
                                                                                                                                            NC
                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                  MN
                                                                                                                                     IA
                                                                                                                                      WI
                                                   2                                                                             MI MAUT

                                                                                                                           VA AL
                                                                                                                   OH     CTME
                                                                                                                   MO
                                                                                                                    GA
                                                                                                                     KS
                                                  1.5                                                        PA
                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                     IN      AR
                                                                                                 IL       SD
                                                                                                         OK
                                                                                                 NEND
                                                                                                    MS ID
                                                   1                                        KY
                                                                                       DE
                                                                                    WYSC
                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                    NV
                                                                              MD
                                                                              NH
                                                  0.5                 TN WV
                                                                         VT
                                                                         RI
                                                                       MT

                                                            NM
                                                   0
                                                        0        0.5          1              1.5             2            2.5         3               3.5                4              4.5        5
                                                                                             Own welfare gain w/ federal subsidy in %




                                                                                                                       48
                                                                Figure 9: Nash subsidies vs. optimal subsidies
                               13

                                                                                                                                                   CA

                               12                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                                                                  WA
                                                                                                                                                   LA
                                                                                                                                                OR
                                                                                                                                            FL AZ
                               11
                                                                                                                                  NC MNCO
                                                                                                                                MI IA
                                                                                                                               WIMA
                                                                                                                                  UT
                                                                                                                               AL
                                                                                                                               OK
                                                                                                                              ME
                               10
Nash subsidy in %




                                                                                                                         CT
                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                                              OH NY
                                                                                                                  KS
                                                                                                               GA
                                                                                                               MO
                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                       IN
                                9                                                                        AR

                                                                                                      SD
                                                                                              IL    ID
                                                                                                 MS
                                                                                                 NE
                                                                                            VTSC
                                                                                               ND
                                8                                                          KY



                                                                             NJ DE

                                7                                            WY
                                                                            NV
                                                                     MD
                                                                    NH

                                                              NM
                                                           RIWV
                                6

                                               MT
                                          TN

                                5
                                    5      6                    7             8                 9              10               11            12             13
                                                                                  Optimal subsidy in %




                                                                    Figure 10: Determinants of welfare change
                                3


                                           MT

                                2



                                                          ID
                                1
                                                     RI
   Local welfare change in %




                                                           NH
                                                                       NM

                                0
                                                                  MSNE
                                                                 AR                        NV
                                                                       MN UT
                                                                VT        SD CA
                                                                        FL
                                                                                  TN
                                                                                      ND
                               -1                                            WI     CO
                                                                             GAKS          AZ WA
                                                                            OK
                                                                             AL
                                                                             ME
                                                                                    SC IL
                                                                                    PAOH NJ                    OR
                                                                                       MA  WV
                                                                                       NYMIMO
                                                                                            KY
                                                                                            CT
                                                                                             MD IA     TX
                               -2                                                              VA
                                                                                                  IN

                                                                                                             NC                                         WY


                               -3                                                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                            DE




                               -4
                                    0.4        0.6                  0.8               1                1.2                1.4               1.6              1.8
                                                                                     Capital-labor ratio




                                                                                           49
                                                                      Figure 11: Welfare effects of Nash subsidies                                                % change


                                                                                                                                                                             2
 WA
                                                                                                                                                      ME
                                                                MT                        ND                                                        NH                       1.5
                                                                                                    MN                                             VT
 OR                                                   ID                                                              MI
                                                                                                                WI                     NY CTMA                               1
                                                                                          SD                                                RI
                                                                      WY                                                            PA NJ                                    0.5
                                                                                                      IA
                                                                                          NE                                   OH     MDDE
                                             NV            UT                                                    IL IN            WV                                         0
                                                                            CO                                                      VA
CA                                                                                         KS               MO          KY                                                   -0.5
                                                                                                                                           NC
                                                                                                                        TN
                                                                                                                                                                             -1
                                                      AZ                                   OK               AR                       SC
                                                                           NM
                                                                                                                                   GA                                        -1.5
                                                                                                                 MS     AL
                                                                                                                LA                                                           -2
                                                                                          TX
                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                                                             -2.5


                                                                                                                                                                             -3




                                                                            Figure 12: Nash subsidies w/ and w/o federal subsidies
                                             14                                                                                                              CA




                                                                                                                                                        TX
                                             13

                                                                                                                                                  WA
                                                                                                                                           FL
                                             12                                                                                             AZOR LA
     Nash subsidy w/o federal subsidy in %




                                                                                                                                  MI MN
                                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                                WI    CO

                                             11                                                                                  IA
                                                                                                                                MA
                                                                                                                             ALUT
                                                                                                                            OK
                                                                                                                   OH     ME
                                                                                                                    NY CT
                                                                                                                      VA
                                                                                                              PA GA
                                                                                                                  KS
                                             10                                                              IN
                                                                                                                 MO
                                                                                                            AR
                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                                      ID
                                              9                                                     MS SD
                                                                                                   NE
                                                                                                 SC
                                                                                                VT
                                                                                               KY
                                                                                                ND

                                              8                                      NJ

                                                                                     DE
                                                                           NH  NV
                                              7                             MD WY
                                                                    RINM
                                                                    WV
                                                       MT
                                                      TN
                                              6



                                              5
                                                  5             6                7             8            9          10             11               12         13
                                                                                      Nash subsidy w/ federal subsidy in %




                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                            Figure 13: Welfare change w/ and w/o federal subsidies
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MT




                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                                       ID


                                 Localwelfare change w/o federal subsidy in %                                                                                                RI

                                                                                5                                                                                 NMNH



                                                                                                                                              VT
                                                                                                                                                    MS
                                                                                                                                                    AR
                                                                                                                                                     NE
                                                                                4                                                            FL MN
                                                                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                                                               SD
                                                                                                                                               CA NV
                                                                                                                              OK        TN
                                                                                                                             GA
                                                                                                                           AL KSWI
                                                                                                                          ME     COND
                                                                                                                        SC
                                                                                                                              AZ
                                                                                3                                   NJ
                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                                                       IL
                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                   WV        WA
                                                                                                               NY
                                                                                                                MI MA
                                                                                                               KY
                                                                                                               MD MO
                                                                                                               CT
                                                                                                            VA IA
                                                                                                       IN     TX     OR
                                                                                2

                                                                                            NC




                                                                                1
                                                                                     LA     WY

                                                                                    DE
                                                                                    -3    -2.5          -2          -1.5           -1        -0.5         0            0.5         1        1.5        2
                                                                                                                    Local welfare change w/ federal subsidy in %




                                                                                                                      Figure 14: Cooperative redistribution
                                                                   1.8




                                                                   1.6
Cooperative income per-capita relative to IL




                                                                   1.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                           WY

                                                                                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                   1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                       LA

                                                                                                                                                                NCOR
                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                    IA
                                                                                                                                                 INWA
                                                                                                                                              CT
                                                                                                                                             KY
                                                                                                                                             MO  VA
                                                                                                                                              AZMD
                                                                                                                                              NV
                                                                                1                                                      COND
                                                                                                                                         ILNJWV
                                                                                                                                          MA
                                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                                         OH
                                                                                                                                        NY
                                                                                                                                 MECA
                                                                                                                                   WI
                                                                                                                                   KS
                                                                                                                                    SCPA
                                                                                                                                     TN
                                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                                                SDGA
                                                                                                                            MN
                                                                                                                           OKFL
                                                                                                                    ARNE
                                                                                                                    MS
                                                                                                               NH NM
                                                                                                            IDVT
                                                                                                       RI
                                                                                            MT
                                                                   0.8




                                                                   0.6




                                                                   0.4
                                                                      0.4                        0.6                0.8                 1                 1.2                1.4            1.6            1.8
                                                                                                                           Initial income per-capita relative to IL




                                                                                                                                             51
                                                                                         Figure 15: Cooperative subsidies, Nash subsidies, and factual subsidies

                                                                       12




Factual subsidy (labels) and scaled Nash subsidy (lines) in %
                                                                       10




                                                                       8




                                                                       6




                                                                       4             NM

                                                                                                            VT

                                                                                                                                                                                 OK
                                                                       2

                                                                                                                  SC
                                                                                                                                             IN              NY                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MI
                                                                                 RI WV          NJ KY                 NE IL                                              CT
                                                                                                                                                                           ME     AL
                                                                                                                        MS                        PA MO KS OH                            MA IA          NC FL AZOR        TX CA
                                                                                           MD WY                                  ID                   GA                              UT
                                                                       0    TNMT         NH NV    DE           ND                      SDAR                         VA                     WI         MN CO             WA
                                                                                    5           10               15                   20             25              30                35             40           45
                                                                                                                                       Nash subsidy rank




                                                                                                    Figure 16: Factual subsidy costs vs. Nash subsidy costs


                                                                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                       4                                                                                             TX

                                                                                                                                                           OH
                                                                                                                                                          NC             MI
             Log of subsidy costs in Nash equilibrium (in billion $)




                                                                                                                                                          PA IL             IN
                                                                                                                                 WI                                        NY
                                                                                                                      WA                    GA   FL
                                                                                                                      MN
                                                                                                                       VA                  OR MO MA
                                                                                                                                                  IA AL LA
                                                                       2                                                                    AZ  CTKY NJ
                                                                                                                        TN                                 SC
                                                                                               CO                                           KS
                                                                                                    AR                    UT                                        OK
                                                                                                                                       MS
                                                                                                                                 MD
                                                                                                                                       NE
                                                                                                                                       ME
                                                                                        NH           NV
                                                                       0           SD DE                         ID                    WV

                                                                                               ND                           RI
                                                                                                                                              VT

                                                                                                                                            NM
                                                                                          WY
                                                                       -2   MT




                                                                       -4




                                                                       -6



                                                                                    -6                    -4                           -2                       0                           2                  4
                                                                                                         Log of subsidy costs in factual equilibrium (in billion $)




                                                                                                                                              52
                                                                                          Figure 17: Fitted optimal subsidies
                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                    NM


                                     3.5

                                                                                                                                                                VT


                                      3
Optimal subsidies in %




                                     2.5                                                                                               OK




                                      2



                                     1.5

                                                                                          SC

                                                                                   LA
                                      1                                       NY
                                                                              IN

                                                                        MI
                                                                   WV
                                                                   ME
                                                                  AL
                                     0.5                  KY
                                                             RI
                                                            NJ
                                                         CT
                                                        CA
                                                        ILNE
                                                          IA
                                                       MA
                                                      TX
                                                      FL
                                                    KS
                                                    MS
                                                    AZ
                                                   NC
                                                  OH
                                                   PA
                                               WY ID
                                                 MO
                                                UT
                                                OR
                                                MD
                                              GA
                                             ND
                                            NV
                                            VA
                                            WI
                                            TN
                                            MN
                                            WA
                                           NH
                                           CO
                                           AR
                                      0    DE
                                            MT
                                           SD
                                           0              0.5                  1                    1.5               2              2.5                 3                3.5            4
                                                                                                      Factual subsidies in %




                                                                                              Appendix Figure 1: Trade costs
                                     -2


                                                   WI
                                                         IN
                                     -3                                       OH
                                                                        MO    MI                                CA
                                                                                                          TX

                                                                                   IA               PA
                                                                                          MN
                                     -4                                                   TN                      NC
                                                                                               KY                  NY
                                                                                                               GANJ
         Log export shares from IL




                                                                                                                KS      SC VA
                                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                                             CO AL     MA
                                     -5                                                                                     AR LA           CT WA
                                                                                                                 NE           MS            AZ OR


                                                                                                                                             NHOK
                                                                                                                                            MD
                                     -6                                                                                          WV                 UT


                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                              NV
                                                                                                                                ND
                                                                                                                                                              DE ID      ME
                                     -7                                                                                                                  RI
                                                                                                                                                                          NM
                                                                                                                                                               WY

                                                                                                                                                                                         VT
                                     -8


                                                                                                                                                                    MT

                                     -9
                                          0.3           0.4             0.5             0.6           0.7             0.8        0.9           1              1.1             1.2        1.3
                                                                                               Log iceberg trade costs from IL




                                                                                                                 53
                                                                        Appendix Figure 2: Predicted trade costs from IL
                                       4



                                                                                                                  VT
                                      3.5


                                                                                                                  NM
                                                                                                                                 ME
                                                                                                                                           MT              ID
                                       3                                                         DE
                                                                                                      WY

                                                                                                                      RI
Iceberg trade cost




                                                                                                                                      UT
                                                                               OK                                                                                     NV     OR
                                                                                                                      NH                                                     WA
                                                                                            MD                   CT                                  AZ
                                                                                      SD                               MA
                                      2.5
                                                                         WV
                                                                                AL     LA FL            ND
                                                                               MS                      CO
                                                                    AR                   VA
                                                                                      SC
                                                                                        NC                  NY
                                                              KS NE           GA
                                                                                                      NJ                                                                    CA
                                                                                                       TX
                                       2                                                   PA
                                                            KY
                                                             TN         MN
                                                       IA
                                                                  MI
                                                                   OH
                                                 MO

                                      1.5         IN
                                                       WI




                                       1
                                            0    200               400              600          800                  1000            1200                1400       1600        1800
                                                                                Distance between state capitals in miles




                                                                               Appendix Figure 3: Relative amenities
                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                 CA

                                                                                                                                                                     OH
                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                       0                                                                                                                      IL
                                                                                                                                                       WIINMI
                                                                                                                                                         NY            TX
                                                                                                                                               NJ
                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                                                                  FL GA NC
                                                                                                                                                MNTN
                                                                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                                                           SCVA
                                                                                                                                              MO
                                      -1                                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                          KY WA
                                                                                                                                   MS    IA
                                                                                                             RI                 MD
       Log amenities relative to IL




                                                                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                                           NH     OK
                                                                                                                                     AZ
                                                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                                              NE CO
                                                                                                                                  LA
                                      -2
                                                                                                                ME
                                                                                                             IDWV
                                                                                            VT
                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                      SD     NV
                                      -3
                                                                                           ND

                                                                               MT NM

                                      -4




                                      -5


                                                        WY

                                      -6
                                            -6         -5                     -4                 -3                         -2                  -1               0                    1
                                                                              Log manufacturing employment relative to IL




                                                                                                        54
                                         Table 1: Optimal subsidies
                optimal subsidy                                       Δ welfare
          subsidy (%)    subsidy ($bn)   own (%)       own ($bn)      other (%)   other ($bn)   national (%)
AL           10.8            13.7          2.6            1.1           -0.16         -2.4         -0.05
AZ           11.9            12.1          3.8            1.1           -0.15         -2.7         -0.07
AR            9.6             6.8          2.0           0.5            -0.08         -1.0         -0.02
CA           12.2            91.8          4.6           10.2           -1.18        -21.9         -0.47
CO           11.5             8.2          3.4           0.7            -0.09         -1.7         -0.04
CT           10.5            10.8          2.4           0.8            -0.15         -1.9         -0.05
DE            8.2             1.8          1.3           0.1            -0.03         -0.3         -0.01
FL           11.7            20.0          3.6           1.8            -0.22         -4.1         -0.09
GA            9.9            18.6          2.2           1.4            -0.23         -3.1         -0.07
ID            9.2             1.5          1.7           0.1            -0.02         -0.2          0.00
IL            8.9            27.9          1.6           1.7            -0.28         -4.0         -0.10
IN            9.5            26.8          1.7           1.6            -0.29         -4.1         -0.12
IA           11.1            14.8          3.0           1.2            -0.16         -2.9         -0.08
KS           10.1             8.4          2.3           0.6            -0.10         -1.4         -0.03
KY            8.6             9.9          1.4           0.6            -0.11         -1.4         -0.04
LA           12.2            14.2          3.7           1.3            -0.20         -3.3         -0.11
ME           10.8             3.0          2.5            0.2           -0.04         -0.5         -0.01
MD            7.3             4.3          0.9           0.2            -0.05         -0.5         -0.01
MA           11.0            17.0          2.9           1.4            -0.21         -3.2         -0.07
MI           10.9            33.5          2.7           2.7            -0.39         -6.3         -0.16
MN           11.3            17.5          3.3           1.6            -0.20         -3.4         -0.07
MS            9.0             5.2          1.6           0.3            -0.07         -0.7         -0.01
MO            9.9            15.2          2.2           1.1            -0.17         -2.6         -0.06
MT            6.0             0.2          0.6           0.0            0.00          0.0           0.00
NE            9.0             3.5          1.6           0.2            -0.04         -0.5         -0.01
NV            7.8             1.9          1.1           0.1            -0.03         -0.2          0.00
NH            7.2             1.8          0.9           0.1            -0.02         -0.2          0.00
NJ            7.9            11.3          1.1           0.6            -0.13         -1.4         -0.04
NM            6.9             0.4          0.2           0.0            0.00          0.0           0.00
NY           10.0            26.2          2.0           1.7            -0.29         -4.2         -0.11
NC           11.1            37.0          3.1           3.3            -0.47         -7.7         -0.23
ND            8.9             1.0          1.6           0.1            -0.01         -0.1          0.00
OH            9.8            36.7          2.2           2.7            -0.42         -6.3         -0.16
OK           10.8             6.5          1.8            0.4           -0.07         -1.0         -0.03
OR           12.0            15.9          4.0            1.6           -0.24         -3.7         -0.11
PA            9.5            28.9          1.9            2.0           -0.31         -4.6         -0.12
RI            6.7             0.9          0.7            0.0           -0.01         -0.1          0.00
SC            8.8             9.5          1.2           0.5            -0.10         -1.3         -0.04
SD            9.4             1.5          1.9           0.1            -0.02         -0.2          0.00
TN            5.8             8.4          0.6           0.3            -0.07         -0.7         -0.01
TX           11.9            69.8          4.2           7.4            -0.85        -16.9         -0.49
UT           11.1             6.5          3.0           0.5            -0.08         -1.2         -0.02
VT            8.7             0.7          0.7           0.0            -0.01         -0.1          0.00
VA           10.3            15.7          2.5           1.2            -0.20         -2.9         -0.08
WA           12.2            20.9          4.3           2.1            -0.29         -5.0         -0.14
WV            6.8             1.6          0.7           0.1            -0.02         -0.2         -0.01
WI           10.9            26.0          3.0           2.2            -0.30         -5.0         -0.11
WY            7.8             0.3          1.1           0.0            0.00          0.0           0.00
Average       9.6            14.9          2.2           1.2            -0.18         -2.9         -0.07
            Table 2: Sensitivity checks for optimal subsidies

                    Panel A: Sensitivity wrt. sigma
                   subsidy                  Δ welfare
         σ           avg        own            other         national
        0.80         9.6         2.2            -0.2           -0.1
        1.00         9.6         2.2            -0.2           -0.1
        1.20         9.6         2.2            -0.2           -0.1
        1.40         9.7         2.1            -0.2           -0.1
        1.60         9.7         2.1            -0.2           -0.1

                    Panel B: Sensitivity wrt. epsilon
                   subsidy                   Δ welfare
          ε          avg         own           other         national
        4.00         13.0         6.7           -0.7           -0.3
        4.50         11.0         3.5           -0.3           -0.1
        5.00          9.6         2.2           -0.2           -0.1
        5.50          8.6         1.5           -0.1            0.0
        6.00          7.8         1.1           -0.1            0.0

                      Panel C: Sensitivity wrt. phi
                   subsidy                   Δ welfare
         φ           avg         own           other         national
        0.33        16.4         15.7           -1.5           -0.6
        0.29        12.5          5.0           -0.4           -0.2
        0.25         9.6          2.2           -0.2           -0.1
        0.22         7.4          1.0           -0.1            0.0
        0.20         5.6          0.5            0.0            0.0

                Panel D: Sensitivity wrt. intial subsidies
state        subsidy                             state               subsidy
        min          max                                      min              max
AL      10.6         10.8                         NE           8.7              9.1
AZ      11.7         12.0                         NV           7.4              7.8
AR       9.3          9.6                         NH           6.9              7.2
CA      12.2         12.3                         NJ           7.7               8
CO      11.2         11.5                         NM           6.9              7.2
CT      10.2         10.5                         NY           9.9             10.1
DE       7.8          8.2                         NC          10.9             11.1
FL      11.5         11.8                         ND           8.6              8.9
GA       9.6          9.9                         OH           9.6              9.8
ID       8.9          9.3                         OK          10.7              11
IL       8.7          8.9                         OR          11.8              12
IN       9.3          9.5                         PA           9.3              9.5
IA      10.9         11.1                          RI          6.4              6.7
KS       9.9         10.2                         SC           8.6              8.9
KY       8.4          8.7                         SD            9               9.4
LA      12.1         12.3                         TN           5.6              5.8
ME      10.5         10.8                         TX          11.9              12
MD       7.0          7.3                         UT          10.8             11.1
MA      10.7         11.0                         VT           8.7               9
MI      10.8         10.9                         VA           10              10.3
MN      11.0         11.3                         WA           12              12.2
MS       8.7          9.1                         WV           6.5              6.8
MO       9.7          9.9                         WI          10.6             10.9
MT       5.7          6.0                         WY           7.5              7.9
                                Table 3: Nash subsidies
                  Nash subsidy                             Δ welfare
          subsidy (%)    subsidy ($bn)        local (%)   local ($bn)   national (%)
AL           10.3              8.7              -1.2         -0.5           -1.3
AZ           11.3              7.6              -1.1         -0.3           -1.3
AR            9.0              4.4              -0.4         -0.1           -1.3
CA           12.4             65.7              -0.6         -1.3           -1.3
CO           10.8              5.2              -1.0         -0.2           -1.3
CT            9.9              6.8              -1.8         -0.6           -1.3
DE            7.4              1.1              -3.1         -0.2           -1.3
FL           11.3             12.9              -0.6         -0.3           -1.3
GA            9.4             12.1              -1.1         -0.7           -1.3
ID            8.5              1.0               1.1          0.1           -1.3
IL            8.5             18.8              -1.4         -1.5           -1.3
IN            9.1             17.7              -2.1         -2.1           -1.3
IA           10.5              9.3              -1.8         -0.8           -1.3
KS            9.5              5.4              -1.1         -0.3           -1.3
KY            8.0              6.4              -1.8         -0.7           -1.3
LA           11.7              8.7              -3.0         -1.0           -1.3
ME           10.1              1.8              -1.3         -0.1           -1.3
MD            6.7              2.7              -1.8         -0.4           -1.3
MA           10.4             10.8              -1.6         -0.8           -1.3
MI           10.6            22.1               -1.8         -1.7           -1.3
MN           10.8            11.3               -0.4         -0.2           -1.3
MS            8.4              3.3              -0.4         -0.1           -1.3
MO            9.4              9.7              -1.7         -0.8           -1.3
MT            5.4              0.1               2.3          0.0           -1.3
NE            8.3              2.2              -0.3          0.0           -1.3
NV            6.9              1.2              -0.3          0.0           -1.3
NH            6.5              1.2               0.4          0.0           -1.3
NJ            7.4              7.3              -1.6         -0.8           -1.3
NM            6.2              0.2               0.3          0.0           -1.3
NY            9.6             17.2              -1.8         -1.6           -1.3
NC           10.8             24.2              -2.4         -2.6           -1.3
ND            8.1              0.6              -0.9          0.0           -1.3
OH            9.5             24.9              -1.6         -2.0           -1.3
OK           10.2              4.2              -1.2         -0.2           -1.3
OR           11.5             10.0              -1.5         -0.6           -1.3
PA            9.1             19.4              -1.6         -1.7           -1.3
RI            6.1              0.6               0.7          0.0           -1.3
SC            8.2              6.1              -1.4         -0.5           -1.3
SD            8.6              0.9              -0.5          0.0           -1.3
TN            5.4              5.6              -0.8         -0.4           -1.3
TX           12.0             47.8              -1.9         -3.3           -1.3
UT           10.4              4.1              -0.5         -0.1           -1.3
VT            8.1              0.5              -0.6          0.0           -1.3
VA            9.8             10.0              -2.0         -1.0           -1.3
WA           11.7             13.2              -1.1         -0.6           -1.3
WV            6.1              1.0              -1.6         -0.2           -1.3
WI           10.4             17.1              -1.0         -0.7           -1.3
WY            7.0              0.2              -2.5          0.0           -1.3
Average       9.1              9.9              -1.1         -0.6           -1.3
        Table 4: Sensitivity checks for Nash subsidies

                    Sensitivity wrt. sigma
                    subsidy              Δ welfare
          σ           avg.          local       national
         0.80         9.1            -1.1         -1.3
         1.00         9.1            -1.1         -1.3
         1.20         9.1            -1.1         -1.3
         1.40         9.1            -1.1         -1.3
         1.60         9.1            -1.1         -1.3

                    Sensitivity wrt. epsilon
                     subsidy              Δ welfare
           ε           avg.          local       national
         4.00         11.7            -2.8         -3.2
         4.50         10.2            -1.7         -2.0
         5.00          9.1            -1.1         -1.3
         5.50          8.2            -0.8         -1.0
         6.00          7.5            -0.6         -0.7

                      Sensitivity wrt. phi
                     subsidy             Δ welfare
          φ            avg.         local       national
         0.33          14.9          -4.5         -4.9
         0.29          11.7          -2.2         -2.5
         0.25           9.1          -1.1         -1.3
         0.22           7.0          -0.6         -0.8
         0.20           5.3          -0.3         -0.4

                Sensitivity wrt. intial subsidies
state    min           max           state          min     max
 AL      10.0          10.4           NE             8.0     8.4
 AZ      11.1          11.4           NV             6.6     7.1
 AR       8.6           9.0           NH             6.2     6.6
 CA      12.4          12.5            NJ            7.1     7.5
 CO      10.5          10.9           NM             6.2     6.5
 CT       9.6          10.0           NY             9.4     9.8
 DE       7.1           7.5           NC            10.6    10.9
  FL     11.1          11.3           ND             7.8     8.2
 GA       9.1           9.5           OH             9.3     9.6
  ID      8.2           8.6           OK            10.0    10.4
  IL      8.3           8.6           OR            11.2    11.6
  IN      8.9           9.2           PA             8.9     9.2
  IA     10.3          10.6            RI            5.8     6.2
 KS       9.2           9.6            SC            8.0     8.4
 KY       7.8           8.1           SD             8.3     8.7
 LA      11.5          11.8           TN             5.1     5.4
 ME       9.8          10.2            TX           11.9    12.0
 MD       6.4           6.8           UT            10.1    10.5
 MA      10.2          10.5           VT             8.0     8.4
 MI      10.4          10.7           VA             9.5     9.8
 MN      10.5          10.8           WA            11.5    11.8
 MS       8.1           8.5           WV             5.9     6.2
 MO       9.1           9.4           WI            10.2    10.5
 MT       5.2           5.5           WY             6.7     7.1
                                 Table 5: Cooperative subsidies
                   Δ welfare w/ transfer                           Δ welfare w/o transfers
 State   national (%)    local (%)     local ($bn)       national (%)     local (%)     local ($bn)
AL           0.5             4.8            1.9              0.00           -0.07          -0.03
AZ           0.5            -2.3           -0.7              0.00            0.06           0.02
AR           0.5            11.7            2.7              0.00            0.05           0.01
CA           0.5             3.5            7.8              0.00            0.03           0.06
CO           0.5             1.2            0.3              0.00            0.20           0.04
CT           0.5            -1.8           -0.6              0.00           -0.06          -0.02
DE           0.5           -16.9           -1.3              0.00            0.19           0.01
FL           0.5             7.1            3.6              0.00            0.01           0.01
GA           0.5             4.0            2.5              0.00            0.08           0.05
ID           0.5           19.5             1.1              0.00           0.13           0.01
IL           0.5            0.0            0.0               0.00           0.01           0.01
IN           0.5            -3.8           -3.7              0.00           -0.20          -0.19
IA           0.5            -4.6           -1.9              0.00           0.04           0.02
KS           0.5            3.4            0.9               0.00           0.01           0.00
KY           0.5            -1.8           -0.7              0.00           -0.02          -0.01
LA           0.5           -15.8           -5.4              0.00           -0.32          -0.11
ME           0.5            4.6            0.4               0.00           -0.12          -0.01
MD           0.5            -3.0           -0.7              0.00           0.13           0.03
MA           0.5             0.1            0.1              0.00           -0.02          -0.01
MI           0.5            -0.3           -0.3              0.00           -0.16          -0.16
MN           0.5             7.7            3.6              0.00            0.20           0.09
MS           0.5            11.7            2.3              0.00           -0.04          -0.01
MO           0.5            -1.5           -0.7              0.00            0.06           0.03
MT           0.5            29.8            0.4              0.00            0.10           0.00
NE           0.5            10.1            1.3              0.00            0.00           0.00
NV           0.5            -1.7           -0.2              0.00            0.14           0.01
NH           0.5            17.1            1.6              0.00           -0.04           0.00
NJ           0.5            -0.5           -0.3              0.00           -0.05          -0.03
NM           0.5            13.6            0.3              0.00           -0.56          -0.01
NY           0.5             0.6            0.5              0.00           -0.23          -0.20
NC           0.5            -8.9           -9.3              0.00            0.10           0.10
ND           0.5             0.5            0.0              0.00            0.22           0.01
OH           0.5             0.3            0.3              0.00            0.01           0.02
OK           0.5            7.9            1.5               0.00           -0.84          -0.16
OR           0.5            -9.8           -3.8              0.00           0.26           0.10
PA           0.5            1.4            1.5               0.00           0.05           0.05
RI           0.5           21.3            1.1               0.00           -0.10          -0.01
SC           0.5             2.4            0.9              0.00           -0.21          -0.08
SD           0.5             5.6            0.3              0.00            0.21           0.01
TN           0.5             2.3            1.3              0.00            0.07           0.04
TX           0.5            -7.7          -13.5              0.00            0.02           0.03
UT           0.5             5.2            0.9              0.00            0.14           0.03
VT           0.5            18.4            0.5              0.00           -0.88          -0.03
VA           0.5            -3.7           -1.8              0.00            0.18           0.09
WA           0.5            -4.7           -2.3              0.00            0.29           0.14
WV           0.5            -1.4           -0.1              0.00            0.00           0.00
WI           0.5             3.8            2.9              0.00            0.17           0.13
WY           0.5           -18.7           -0.2              0.00           0.19           0.00
Mean         0.5            2.3            -0.1              0.00           -0.01          0.00
Table 6: Sensitivity checks for cooperative subsidies

               Sensitivity wrt. sigma
               subsidy              Δ welfare
    σ            avg.          local       national
   0.80          0.0            2.7           0.5
   1.00          0.6            2.9           0.5
   1.20          0.0            2.3           0.5
   1.40          0.0            2.2           0.5
   1.60          0.0            2.0           0.5

              Sensitivity wrt. epsilon
               subsidy              Δ welfare
     ε           avg.          local       national
   4.00          0.0            3.6           0.8
   4.50          0.0            2.8           0.6
   5.00          0.0            2.3           0.5
   5.50          0.0            2.0           0.5
   6.00          0.0            1.8           0.4

                Sensitivity wrt. phi
               subsidy             Δ welfare
    φ            avg.         local       national
   0.33          0.0           2.9           0.8
   0.29          0.0           2.5           0.6
   0.25          0.0           2.3           0.5
   0.22          0.0           2.1           0.5
   0.20          0.9           2.4           0.4
              Table 7: Local welfare weights
   State   Weight (%)                 State    Weight (%)
IN           0.54                MS              0.05
NY           0.52                GA              0.05
CA           0.41                KS              0.05
OK           0.40                RI              0.04
SC           0.38                AZ              0.04
MI           0.37                ME              0.03
IL           0.29                MD              0.03
TX           0.20                TN              0.03
NJ           0.20                OR              0.02
NM           0.19                WI              0.02
OH           0.17                UT              0.02
PA           0.16                ID              0.01
VT           0.15                MN              0.01
AL           0.14                VA              0.01
KY           0.12                WA              0.01
LA           0.11                NV              0.00
NC           0.10                AR              0.00
FL           0.10                MT              0.00
MA           0.09                NH              0.00
IA           0.08                ND              0.00
CT           0.08                CO              0.00
MO           0.06                SD              0.00
WV           0.05                DE              0.00
NE           0.05                WY              0.00
