                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOARD BEHAVIOR AND COMMODITY BUBBLES

                                           Harrison Hong
                                           Áureo de Paula
                                            Vishal Singh

                                        Working Paper 20974
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20974


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We thank seminar participants at HKUST, New York University, PUC-Rio and Yale University for
helpful comments. We are also grateful to Manuel Arellano, Orazio Attanasio, Richard Blundell, Marcelo
Fernandes, Bo Honoré, Guy Laroque, Valerie Lechene and Elie Tamer for useful conversations. de
Paula gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council through Starting
Grant 338187 and the Economic and Social Research Council through the ESRC Centre for Microdata
Methods and Practice grant RES-589-28-0001. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Harrison Hong, Áureo de Paula, and Vishal Singh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Hoard Behavior and Commodity Bubbles
Harrison Hong, Áureo de Paula, and Vishal Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 20974
February 2015
JEL No. G0

                                           ABSTRACT

Hoarding by large speculators is often blamed for contributing to commodity market panics and
bubbles. Using supermarket scanner data on US household purchases during the 2008 Rice Bubble,
we show that hoarding is in fact more systemic, affecting even households who have no resale
motive. Export bans led to a spike in prices worldwide in the first half of 2008, which spilled over
into US markets. Anticipating shortages, US households with previous purchases of rice, especially
those of Asian ethnicity, nearly doubled their buying around the peak of the bubble. We document
transmission mechanisms through over-extrapolation from high prices and contagion, as many
households bought rice for the first and last time during the bubble.


Harrison Hong                                    Vishal Singh
Department of Economics                          New York University
Princeton University                             vsingh@stern.nyu.edu
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu

Áureo de Paula
University College London
a.paula@ucl.ac.uk
1.       Introduction

Hoarding of commodities by large speculators, defined as the accumulation of inventories
during times of high prices, has long been blamed for creating artificial shortages, commodity
market panics, and price bubbles.1 In 362-63 A.D., the Roman emperor Julian accused
wealthy merchants of manipulating grain markets and creating famine in Antioch, “where
everything is plenty, everything is dear” (Gráda (2009)). In Shakespeare’s play about Roman
general Coriolanus, written around 1605-1608 and thought to be based on the Midland
Revolts in England around that time, patrician households hoarding grain was a central
character in creating shortages and political instability. The Bengali Famine of 1943-1944,
one of the worst in history, was attributed to the hoarding of grain producers and merchants
(see Sen (1983)).
       During the recent episode of high global commodity prices from 2003-2009, preceding
the Financial Crisis, many also blamed speculators manipulating markets. Summarizing the
speculator or financialization hypothesis, George Soros said on April 17, 2008 at the Center
for European Policy Studies, “You have a generalized commodity bubble due to commodities
having become an asset class that institutions use to an increasing extent.”
       However, in the recent episode and as in previous episodes throughout history, the evi-
dence pointing to large speculators affecting these markets is decidedly mixed.2 A number of
economists point to the lack of an accumulation of inventory or hoarding with rising prices
as evidence that speculators were not driving up commodity markets and that movements in
commodity prices were driven by fundamentals such as the emergence of China and India.3
   1
     In traditional storage models of commodity pricing (see, e.g., Scheinkman and Schechtman (1983),
Deaton and Laroque (1992)), high prices are typically correlated with low inventories. Samuelson (1965),
who examined commodity futures pricing with demand and supply shocks that are slowly mean-reverting,
also pointed out that high spot prices with low inventory indicate a stock out and low subsequent prices as
supply and demand adjusts in the longer term. The accumulation of inventories in the midst of rising prices,
or hoarding, is a necessary condition of a bubble.
   2
     See Gráda (2009) for an extensive review of evidence from earlier historical episodes.
   3
     There is a large body of work on the extent to which speculators played a role in the commodity bubble
(see, e.g., Kilian and Murphy (2014), Hamilton (2009), Tang and Xiong (2010), Singleton (2013)) and more
generally on the relationship between inventory and commodity prices (see, e.g., Gorton, Hayashi, and
Rouwenhorst (2012), Fama and French (1987)).


                                                     1
       Rather than focusing on the role of speculators who hoard for resale, we show instead
that hoarding is in fact more systemic, affecting households who have no resale motive.
There have long been reports of stockpiling by households worried about high prices leading
to market panics.4 While there is recognition that such “precautionary demand” by average
households may play a role in exacerbating shocks, systematic empirical analysis is lacking
due to limited data on household purchases during times of significant commodity market
stress.
       To take a first step in filling this gap, we take advantage of the strength of the 2008 Rice
Crisis (Dawe, Slayton, et al. (2010)), which temporarily spilled over into US markets and
where we have plentiful data on household purchases. This happened even as the US is a
net exporter of rice and there was no apparent production shock. Rice, a staple for billions
in Asia and in developing countries more generally, is government-controlled and typically
uncorrelated with other commodity prices. But against the backdrop of high commodity
prices, the Indian government, worried about its food security, banned rice exports in late
2007, thereby triggering quid pro quo bans by other exporting countries and subsequently
astronomical prices for importing countries like the Philippines by the first quarter of 2008
(Slayton (2009)). The price of rice jumped several hundred percent, also spilling over into
the US, from the end of 2007 until June 2008, when new supply was found from Japan via
an agreement with the United States and the market panic ended.
       To study household hoard behavior during this episode, we use the Kilt’s Center Nielsen
Supermarket Scanner data, with coverage of more than one hundred thousand households’
supermarket purchases of goods over the period of 2007-2009. The data also provide key
demographic information about households. In addition, we utilize their Store Level Pric-
   4
    Indeed, even fairly developed countries such as South Korea and China continue to witness minor episodes
of hoarding and market panics around foods such as onions and pork every few years when there is a bad shock
to supply. In the winter of 2010, South Korea had a kimchee crisis where the government had to intervene
to stop cabbage rustlers. Following the Japanese nuclear disaster in 2011, there was a run on iodized salt
in China, Japan’s neighbor, with rumors that salt might help with potential contamination effects. In the
Spring of 2014, there was a lime panic in Mexico where even drug gangs hoarded lime. Brazilian inflation
during most of the 1980’s and early 1990’s witnessed some poorer households hoarding durable goods such
as bricks as a store of money.


                                                     2
ing Data with coverage of 20,000 supermarkets and mass retailers around the country to
measure the price for rice that each household faced at different locations and points in
time. The conjunction of these two databases will allow us to better understand what drives
the propensity to hoard. Rather than examining a few big traders who are hoarding large
quantities, our analysis points to widespread hoarding by households of small quantities as
perhaps contributing to artificially high prices.
   Just as in developing countries, there was media coverage during the months of April
and May of 2008 of a run on rice in supermarkets across the United States. A number of
the large stores such as Walmart, Costco and Sam’s Club even instituted rationing over this
period. Indeed, anecdotal evidence suggest that just such hoard behavior was at work during
these two months. For instance, 50-pound bags of long-grain rice were selling for $32 to $38
in New York City’s Chinatown groceries in the week around May 1, 2008, which was an
increase of about 35 percent over a month previous. “Though federal officials say there is no
rice shortage in the United States, Mr. Chiu, like a trader betting on the price of crude oil,
said he had decided to stock up, buying 100 pounds of rice in anticipation that price would
jump again. ‘I think it might go up to $50,’ he said. ‘I still got some at home, but just in
case I got some more.” ’ (“A Run on Rice in Asian Communities”, New York Times, May 1,
2008)
   We begin by establishing key facts to support our use of the Global Rice Crisis as an
exogenous shock to available supply and expectations and thereby study the spillover effects
on US markets and households. During the months before the end of 2007 when India
instituted the ban and after June 2008 when Japan was allowed to sell its supply, the price
of rice did not increase much in comparison to oil prices and other commodity prices. But
during the period of the Rice Crisis, the price of rice soared by several hundred percent over
a few months, a much higher rate than even oil or other types of food over this period. Using
the Nielsen Store Pricing data, we establish that these higher prices during this period were
also passed through to higher store prices in the United States starting at around March


                                               3
2008, which then precipitated the run in the months of April and May.
    To motivate our empirical specifications, we develop a partial-equilibrium hoarding model
for risk-averse households. Hoarding demand increases with the expected future price (con-
trolling for current price). Household hoarding for future personal consumption is forward-
looking and optimizing, given a set of subjective expectations about the path of future prices,
which was over-extrapolative in the case of the Rice Bubble.5 Rice is easy to store, thus it is
easy to understand why lower-income households for whom rice is a staple might panic and
hoard if prices were rising as quickly as they did during early 2008. What is interesting in
our context is that most of the households are fairly rich, which makes our findings regarding
hoard behavior more surprising.6
    Our main dependent variables of interest are the quantities bought by households each
month and the number of rice transactions or scans each month on rice and rice-related
products. We regress these dependent variables of interest on our key independent variables
of interest, which are dummy variables for April and May of 2008, along with control variables
including month dummies (to control for seasonality), the current price of rice faced by
different households, household fixed effects, and our lagged dependent variables. So we
are measuring whether or not households bought abnormal quantities of rice during these
months, adjusting for a variety of household characteristics as well as the price of rice that
households face. The dummy variables for April and May 2008 are picking up time-varying
hoarding demand common across households, driven by both higher expectations about the
path of future prices and household preferences against being stocked out on rice.
    One advantage of our setup in studying the purchase decisions of atomistic households
compared to the literature which models aggregate inventory is that we can rule out reverse
causality in our regression specifications since households are small (Deaton and Muellbauer
   5
     The behavioral finance literature provides evidence on how investors’ expectations are over-extrapolative
(see, e.g., Shiller (2005), Barberis and Thaler (2003) and Hirshleifer (2001)).
   6
     The fact that there was such a strong hoarding response among US households points to the importance
of tastes-die-hard preferences that are very persistent (Bronnenberg, Dubé, and Gentzkow (2010), Atkin
(2013).)



                                                      4
(1988) and Nevo (2010)). Consistent with there being a run on rice during these two months,
we find that households with previous purchases of rice dramatically increased their quan-
tities purchased and frequency of their transactions during the months of April and May of
2008. The effects are very robust and statistically significant. The typical household in our
sample purchased around 13 ounces of rice per month in April and May during years other
than 2008. They significantly increased their rice purchases (by around 70%) during April
and May 2008 depending on the specification. We get larger economic magnitudes for our
estimates the more controls we add.
   Moreover, the bans that led to an increase in domestic rice prices in the US can be
viewed as generating exogenous shocks to price and expectations, measured using the April
and May 2008 month dummies on the right hand side of the regressions of interest. As such,
we then implement a two-stage least squares (TSLS) version of our ordinary least squares
(OLS) hoarding regressions by instrumenting for the price of rice that a household faces with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) international rice price index. Our TSLS estimates
are very similar to our OLS estimates of the hoarding effect.
   We then test to see if these households subsequently cut back their rice purchases after
rice prices fell in late May and June of 2008 as news of supply from Japan hit the markets.
Indeed, when we augment the baseline specification and include a dummy for July and
August 2008, we find strong evidence that households bought less rice in July and August
2008, relative to benchmarks from other years, consistent with them having hoarded and
built a buffer stock and then drawing down their inventory in subsequent months. There is a
chance that some of these stocks might have been re-sold, but there is little evidence of that
in anecdotal accounts and all the panelists in our database are households, not businesses.
   One natural auxiliary implication of household hoarding is that households who consume
more rice or have more inelastic demand for rice would pay the most attention to the price
of rice and worry most about it rising and hence engage in more hoard behavior. Consistent
with this prediction, we find that Asian households, for whom rice is a staple, actually began


                                              5
their hoarding earlier, in March 2008. By April and May of 2008, their purchases had risen
by 100% to 150% relative to their usual levels before the Rice Crisis. They also as a result
significantly drew down their buffers in July of 2008.
   An important signal and possible trigger for runs, that is often discussed in the literature,
is high and rapidly rising prices, which alert households to the potential for inflation. In
particular, we have current price controls on the right-hand side to capture normal downward-
sloping consumption demand curves over our sample period, most of which are non-bubble
environments. Indeed, the coefficient on price is negative, except during the months of April
and May 2008, the peak of the bubble, when the coefficient turns significantly positive,
consistent with the interpretation in which high prices lead to higher expected future prices
and hoarding. We also implement a TSLS version of this price-month interaction hoarding
regression using global rice price and global rice price interacted with a Rice Crisis dummy
for the months of March, April and May 2008 as the two instruments and obtain similar
results as our OLS specifications.
   We have access to store-level Nielsen data that allows us to create a rice price index
for different counties. Consistent with the month-price interactions regressions, we find
significant dispersion in the trend of rice prices in the months preceding the hoarding episode.
We find that counties where the price increases were the highest had the most household
hoarding.
   Finally, we establish that hoarding was also contagious as many households herded in
buying rice for the first and indeed only time during this period. “We don’t even eat that
much rice,” one Asian-American woman who didn’t want to be identified as a hoarder said.
“But I read about it in the newspaper and decided to buy some.” (“A Run on Rice in Asian
Communities”, New York Times, May 1, 2008). We use a duration model using our household
panel data to estimate the time until a household’s first purchase of rice given that they have
not purchased in the past. We find that households who had never bought rice before were
significantly more like to have their first and only purchase in April or May of 2008. This


                                               6
is a surprising result since households who never have bought rice before presumably would
not be attentive to past price changes. The fact that they bought for the first and only time
suggests that hoarding is contagious and that they followed the actions of others or similarly
listened to media reports.
     In other words, hoarding is far more systemic in the economy, emanating not just from
speculators engaged in resale but from hoard behavior among households during times of
market stress. We view our contribution as establishing the determinants of hoard behavior
and determining a lower bound on the effects of hoard behavior. Our findings will be relevant
to developing countries’ commodity markets, where if anything, the hoarding effects we are
measuring are likely to be much larger. After all, in the US there are many other food
options besides rice, but such options are more limited in poorer countries.
     Our paper proceeds as follows. We describe our data in Section 2. We establish some
key facts regarding the 2008 Global Rice Crisis that sets up our empirical design in Section
3. We describe our empirical strategies and findings in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5.



2.     Data

Our data comes from the AC Nielsen’s Homescan Consumer Panel. The panel has over
100,000 demographically balanced U.S. households, who use hand-held scanners to record
every bar-coded grocery item purchased. The data runs for six years (2004-09) and records
of every purchase made at Universal Product Code (UPC) level. There is also detailed
demographic information. Figure 1 plots the distributions of the various demographics of
the Nielsen Panel. The mean age of the household is 50 years. Median household income is
around $48,000 dollars. There are on average 2.6 members in the household. Most of the
sample has some college education. Consumers in the panel stay on for an average of three
years, and there are approximately 18,000 households with five or more years of purchase
histories.



                                              7
   We have geographic identifiers about our households. We then take only a panel in
which households appear for all 3 years from 2007 to 2009 (though not necessarily in all
months). Each household must have made at least one purchase in the rice category. There
are 1,187,057 monthly observations for the roughly 44,000 households in our sample that had
any consumption of rice between 2007 and 2009. Figure 2 reports the summary statistics of
our panel. In each year, we have around 12,000 white households, 2,000 black households,
600 Asian households and 700 or so other ethnic groups. We also report the breakdown
of the fraction of Asians and non-Asians living in the top decile of zip codes in terms of
Asian population (which we term “Asian zip codes”). These top zip codes are displayed on
the map in Figure 3. Figure 4 then reports average and median quantity (by ounce) of rice
purchased by Asians and non-Asians living in Asian and non-Asian zip codes. The median
quantity bought in each year is around 69 ounces for non-Asians in non-Asian zip codes and
80 ounces for non-Asians in Asian zip codes. For Asians, the analogous numbers are around
360 ounces and 450 ounces, respectively. The average quantity is around 135 ounces for
non-Asians in non-Asian zip codes and 170 ounces for non-Asians in Asian zip codes. The
analogous numbers for Asians are around 600 ounces and 770 ounces, respectively.
   In addition to the Household Consumer Panel, we also have access to store level data on
pricing of their products, which we use to create price level aggregates for rice, aggregated
across all types and all size bags of rice. The average price is an aggregate weighed by the
sales of all the products sold in each each week and county, averaged to produce a monthly
average price-level per bag. So households in different locations and times are assumed to
face the price averages calculated from the sales in that location and time. An alternative
price-level variable could be obtained from the Household Consumer Panel as the unit value
defined as the ratio between expenditures on rice and quantity purchased. The store data
nevertheless allow us to impute prices even for those households that did not buy any rice in
a given month. In addition, previous studies document that, whereas quantity information
is usually accurately recorded in the Household Consumer Panel, prices paid are much less


                                             8
precise (see Einav, Leibtag, and Nevo (2010)). Our results are robust to the use of alternative
price-level aggregates, such as the average price for a 32-ounce package or the average price
for an 80-ounce package in the county.



3.      Background on the 2008 Global Rice Crisis

As described expertly in Dawe, Slayton, et al. (2010) and Slayton (2009), the 2008 Global
Rice Crisis was one of the most dramatic food events in the developing world. Rice is the
main food staple for billions in Asia and is government controlled and typically uncorrelated
with other commodity prices. But a politically motivated ban on rice exports by India in
late 2007 led to high prices for importing countries like the Philipines by the first quarter of
2008. The price of rice jumped several hundred percent until June 2008, when new supply
was found from Japan via an agreement with the United States and the market panic ended.
Specific details can be found in the references, but government ineptitude and corruption
seemed to have also played a role in the 2008 Rice Bubble.
     For our study, we want to establish two facts. The first is that there was an idiosyncratic
shock to rice emanating from Asia that was disconnected from global worries about energy
prices at the same time. To see this, we plot in Figure 5 global rice prices from the IMF
for a series of agricultural commodities: rice, barley, corn and wheat. The black line in each
of the panels is the price of crude oil and the colored line is the agricultural commodity in
question. First consider barley, corn and wheat. The prices of these three big commodities
track the price of oil fairly well. The price of oil took off in 2005, peaked in late 2008, crashed
in 2009 during the financial crisis and then rebounded with the recovery in 2010. It is easy
to see even visually that the prices of these three commodities track this series of dramatic
movements very well.
     In contrast, notice that the price of rice does not track the price of oil. When the price of
oil took off in 2005, the price of rice was actually very flat. It then spiked in late 2007 and in



                                                 9
the first half of 2008 because of these aforementioned politically motivated export bans on
rice and crashed before the price of oil when news of new supply from Japan led to a decline
in late May 2008. The supply of rice from Japan has traditionally been withheld from world
markets through a trade agreement between the US and Japan that mandates that Japan
buy US rice. But the Japanese do not like US rice and keep it to feed animals. As such,
there was a surplus of rice sitting in warehouses. The US had to make an exception to allow
this rice to be sold on world markets and when news leaked that they would do so in late
May 2008, the price of rice immediately fell. Moreover, when the price of oil recovers after
the financial crisis, the price of rice did not track it as again the price of rice was determined
through government interventions. To some extent, coverage of the Rice Crisis got lost in
the shadows of the generalized energy price crisis.
   To see a bit more closely how the price of rice and the Global Rice Crisis is distinct from
other higher food prices during this period, we show in Figure 6 a more detailed comparison
between the price of rice versus a food price index, both of which come from the IMF. We
can see a similar scenario as in Figure 5 where the price of rice actually rose from $400 US
per metric ton at the end of 2007 to over $ 1,000 US per metric ton at the beginning of
May 2008. This 2.5-fold jump dwarfs the food price index increases, which track the price of
crude oil. Notice that the price of rice already fell from $ 1,000 US to $ 800 US per metric
ton when the price of food reached its peak at the end of 2008. Again, we can see that the
price of rice has remained at around $ 500 US to $ 600 US per metric ton ever since, while
the price of food has recovered after the financial crisis and reached even newer highs. US
long-grain rice prices roughly also doubled during the same period before dropping 30% after
the Japanese news leaked.
   The second fact we wish to establish is that this shock emanating from Asia was passed
through to the US. As the anecdotes from newspapers suggest, the 2.5-fold jump in the price
of rice from the end of 2007 to the middle of 2008 was translated into the street price that
people see in their supermarkets, though not by as high a factor since rice in supermarkets


                                               10
gets refined along the way. The anecdotal evidence from the New York Times reports indicate
a jump of at least 35% in a short span of time. Figure 7 shows a search volume index on
Google Trends for “Rice Prices.” There is a spike in search volume interest in April and May
of 2008, consistent with wider interest among media and households over this same period.
     We can use our store-level sales data to get a more precise measure of the store price of
rice in the United States over this period. In Figure 8, we plot the price-level aggregate for
the various size bags of rice. Notice that the price of rice was flat for most of 2007. Then
from the end of 2007, we see the price of rice jumps just as in world markets, described
above, with the biggest increases for bigger bags. For instance, the largest bags see a rise of
nearly 75% over a short period of time. For the smallest bags, the price increase was around
30%. Prices, however, do uniformly flatten out after May of 2008, but they do not fall as
they do in world markets. Most of the dramatic increases occurred from the end of 2007 to
May 2008. The flattening out was no doubt related to the decline in global raw rice prices
reported above.
     In Figure 8, we also report sales volume in the US for the largest and smallest bags of
rice. We see a jump in both around April and May 2008, but with a much bigger jump for
the bigger bag. Notice also that there was a dip in sales subsequent to these spikes, which we
will later try to identify as the drawing down of inventory accumulated in April and May of
2008. The fact that the biggest bag was subjected to the biggest price increase is a tell-tale
symptom of hoarding in that the accumulation of inventory is best done with big bags as
there are discounts with size. We will try to directly measure hoarding using the consumer
panel data in the next section.



4.      Hypothesis Development and Empirical Design

To motivate our regression specifications, we consider the following static hoarding problem
for a household. We assume that the risk-free rate is zero and each household simply maxi-



                                              11
mizes expected utility over the consumption of a good (i.e., rice) tomorrow. b is the household
budget for the good to be consumed.7 Each household can choose a level of hoarding or in-
ventory I by purchasing the good at p0 , the price of the good today. The household faces
an uncertain p1 for the good tomorrow. The quantity of the good the household can afford
at time 1 is q1 = (b − Ip0 )/p1 . We assume p1 is uniformly distributed between µ and µ (i.e,
p1 ∼ U [µ, µ]). Each household’s expectation of the price tomorrow is then E[p1 ] = (µ+µ)/2.8
We further express the upper bound µ as µ = µ + αp0 . So the household’s expectation of
the price at t = 1 can potentially be affected by the price at t = 0 when α is non-zero.
       The household problem is then


                                      MaxI E[u(I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )]                                       (1)


subject to the constraints that I ≥ 0 and the budget constraint Ip0 ≤ b. The first-order
condition w.r.t. I is given by (assuming an interior solution which occurs for µ  p0 ):


                              E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I ∗ + (b − I ∗ p0 )/p1 )] = 0,                           (2)

where I ∗ is the optimal hoarding level.
       Otherwise, when µ is sufficiently low, for example, I ∗ = 0. This first-order condition
then gives I ∗ = g(µ, p0 ) as an implicit function of two key parameters of interest µ, which
controls the expected price appreciation of the good, and p0 the price of the good today.
       We can then derive some key comparative statics using this implicit function to motivate
our regression specifications. For simplicity, assume initially that α = 0 (so that µ = µ) and
that p0 < µ = µ.
   7
      We assume that the budget b is invariant to prices. One may fear that the budget would be reduced
in face of increases in current prices or expected future prices. We do not observe this in the data (in fact,
monthly expenditures on rice increase during the crisis) and hence abstract away from this possibility for
simplicity.
    8
      The possibility of stock-outs in the second period can be accomodated by setting p1 = ∞ with positive
probability. In this case, a higher probability of stock-outs acts on hoarding like an increase expected price
in the second period. We abstract from this as we do not have information on stock-outs in our data.



                                                     12
Proposition 1. Hoarding I ∗ increases with the expected price at time 1, E[p1 ].

Proof: First note that since E[p1 ] = (µ + µ)/2 and Var[p1 ] = (µ − µ)2 /12, we can write
             p                             p
µ = E[p1 ] + 3Var[p1 ] and µ = E[p1 ] − 3Var[p1 ]. For a given inventory level I, by
Leibniz’s Rule,

        ∂E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ]
                                                = (1 − p0 /µ)u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ)/(µ − µ)
                       ∂E[p1 ]                                                                       (3)
                                                 − (1 − p0 /µ)u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ)/(µ − µ).


If µ > p0 ≥ µ, the first term in the expression above is positive and (1 − p0 /µ)u0 (I + (b −
Ip0 )/µ)/(µ − µ) < 0. Consequently, this difference is positive. On the other hand, if p0 ≤ µ,
(1 − p0 /x)u0 (I + (w − Ip0 )/x)/(µ − µ) is decreasing in x (for x > p0 ). Hence the difference
is also positive. Then by the Implicit Function Theorem,

                       ∂I ∗    ∂E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ]/∂E[p1 ]
                            =−                                                   >0                  (4)
                       ∂µ        E[(1 − p0 /p1 )2 u00 (I ∗ + (b − I ∗ p0 )/p1 )]

                  00
if p0 < µ since u (·) < 0. QED
   The second comparative static of the optimal hoarding rule is with respect to price p0 .

                                  00
Proposition 2. Assuming u (x) is bounded for high x and limx→0 u0 (x) = ∞, I ∗ decreases
with the price at time 0, p0 , for sufficiently low b.

Proof: For a given inventory level I, notice that

                                                            µ
         ∂E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ]                        u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )
                                                     Z          h
                                                 =                  −
                          ∂p0                           µ                     p1 (µ − µ)
                                                                                                     (5)
                                                    (1 − p0 /p1 )u00 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )I i
                                                  −                                          dp1 .
                                                                 p1 (µ − µ)

Whereas the first term in the integrand above is always negative, the second term is only
negative for p1 ∈ [µ, p0 ). To establish that the above expression is negative, consider then
the integral between p0 and µ.

                                                   13
   If |u00 (x)| < k if x ∈ [p0 , ∞) and noticing that I ≤ b/p0 for feasible I, we have that
−(1 − p0 /p1 )u00 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )I < kb/p0 as long as p1 ≥ p0 . Furthermore, since −u0 (I +
(b − Ip0 )/p1 ) is decreasing in p1 , we also have that −u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ) < −u0 (b/p0 ) as long
as p1 ≥ p0 . Hence,

                  µ
                       u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ) + (1 − p0 /p1 )u00 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )I i
              Z       h
                          −                                                              dp1
               p0                                p1 (µ − µ)
                                                                                                    (6)
              −u0 (b) + kb/p0
            ≤                  (ln µ − ln p0 )
                  (µ − µ)

Because −u0 (b) + kb/p0 is increasing in b and limx→0 u0 (x) = ∞, we can find b such that
−u0 (b) + kb/p0 < 0. Given that ln µ − ln p0 > 0, the expression in (6) is negative for b = b
(or, in fact, b ≤ b). This establishes that ∂E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I ∗ + (b − I ∗ p0 )/p1 ]/∂p0 is negative
if b ≤ b.
   By the Implicit Function Theorem, provided b ≤ b,

                          ∂I ∗    ∂E[(1 − p0 /p1 )u0 (I ∗ + (b − I ∗ p0 )/p1 ]/∂p0
                               =−                                                  <0               (7)
                          ∂p0      E[(1 − p0 /p1 )2 u00 (I ∗ + (b − I ∗ p0 )/p1 )]

                                      00
if p0 < µ since u0 (·) > 0 and u (·) < 0. QED
   Notice that in this analysis, we have not made any assumptions about the correlation
between p0 and µ (i.e., α = 0). Nevertheless, anecdotal evidence given in the Introduction
as well as a literature in behavioral finance cited above suggest that higher p0 is correlated
with higher expected value for p1 as households are likely to be over-extrapolative (see, e.g.,
Shiller (2000)) (i.e., α > 0). In this instance, the conclusion of Proposition 2 need not hold
as the effects from Proposition 1 can dominate. We can establish that when price increase
expectations are sufficiently high and initial prices sufficiently low, an increase in the initial
prices can lead to an increase in hoarding:

Proposition 3. Assuming α ≥ ln(µ/µ) = ln[(µ + αp0 )/µ], I ∗ increases with the price at
time 0, p0 for sufficiently low p0 .


                                                      14
Proof: The result is once again established using the Implicit Function Theorem. To apply
this result, the numerator in equation (7) is now

                   µ
                               u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ) + (1 − p0 /p1 )u00 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )I i
              Z        h
                           −                                                                      dp1
               µ                                         p1 (µ − µ)
            +α(1 − p0 /µ)u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ)/(µ − µ)
            Z µ 0
                 u (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ) − u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )
          ≥                                                      dp1 (≡ A)
              µ                       p1 (µ − µ)
               Z µ
                                 u00 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 )I
            −      (1 − p0 /p1 )                           dp1 −αp0 u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ)/µ(µ − µ)
                µ                         p 1 (µ − µ)          |                {z               }
            |                         {z                     }                 (≡C)
                                           (≡B)


                                 00
Since µ ≥ p1 and u (·) < 0, u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/µ) − u0 (I + (b − Ip0 )/p1 ≥ 0 and A > 0.
As p0 → 0, the integrand in (B) converges to u00 (I + b/p1 )I/p1 (µ − µ) < 0 and (minus)
the integral converges to a positive value: B > 0. Finally, as p0 → 0, (C) converges to 0.
Consequently, as p0 → 0 the bound above (= A + B + C) is positive. Since the denominator
in equation (7) remains negative, the Implicit Function Theorem gives that ∂I ∗ /∂p0 > 0.
QED.
       We will examine this demand curve using standard linear regression models (see, e.g.,
Deaton and Muellbauer (1988) and Nevo (2010)). Our estimates can be seen as linear
approximations to the demand function obtained above. In particular, we estimate the
following regression specification for each household i in month t as


  Ii,t = a0 + a1 × BubbleP eriodDummyt + γ1 × pi,t + γ2 × HouseholdCharacteristics (8)


Linearizing the economic model, a change in expectations ∆µ around the Bubble Period
corresponds to a change in inventory ∆I ∗ = ∂g(µ̃, p0 )/∂µ × ∆µ (controlling for price p0
and other household characteristics), where µ̃ is an intermediary value determined by the
change in µ.9 The Bubble Period Dummy hence captures the variation in the expectations
   9
     All the hoarding effects are driven by both expectations or changes in expectations and curvature of the
utility function. Separating these out requires specific assumptions about the utility function.


                                                             15
of household beliefs µ, coinciding with the months around the peak of the Rice Bubble in
May of 2008 (from Proposition 2, ∂g(µ̃, p0 )/∂µ > 0). The coefficient γ1 on pi,t controls for
price and captures the usual downward sloping demand curve considerations with normal
consumption patterns, so we expect it to be negative. We also introduce a set of household
characteristics, i.e., income and size, to soak up variation associated with these normal
demand considerations. In some of our specifications we also include household fixed effects
and lagged purchases.
       One advantage of our setup in studying the purchase decisions of atomistic households
compared to the literature that models aggregate inventory is that we can rule out reverse
causality in our regression specifications since households are small. Moreover, the exogenous
price shock from the export bans which led to an increase in domestic rice prices in the US
can be viewed as an instrument in generating exogenous shocks to price and expectations
on the right-hand side.



5.       Results

5.1.       Household Propensity to Hoard

5.1.1.      Baseline Hoarding Effect: OLS

We begin our empirical analysis by estimating the hoarding effect for the typical household
in our panel. Our dependent variable of interest is household i’s purchases of rice in month
t, Yi,t , where purchases are measured in two ways. The first is quantity, measured in ounces
of rice using UPC codes 13 and 19 and including all rice bags but not instant rice. The
second is frequency of transactions in a month, which is how many times the rice UPCs were
scanned.10
       We focus our empirical analysis on the sub-sample that revealed some minimal rise con-
  10
    We have also considered a third measure which is expenditures per month or price times quantity of
purchases that month. The results are largely similar to our first measure, quantities, so we do not report
these results but they are available from the authors.


                                                    16
sumption in 2007 (defined as at least 12 ounces of rice during 2007) and see what their
hoarding propensities look like in 2008. To get a sense of the magnitudes of this baseline
sample, we report summary statistics for our panel in Table 1. We have roughly 700,000
monthly observations. The typical household bought around 12.6 ounces of rice per month
and the standard deviation is 62 ounces.11 The monthly frequency is the number of trans-
actions per month, which is .18. The standard deviation is .46. The average price-level
aggregate of rice bought in this sample is $ 3.50 US. Household income is on average around
$ 58,640 US and there are 2.68 persons per household.
       For non-Asians, the mean rice quantity purchased monthly is 11 ounces and the standard
deviation is 53.79 ounces. The monthly frequency is .18 and the standard deviation is .46.12
The average price of rice faced by non-Asians is $ 3.48 US. The household income is $ 57,910
US and the household size is 2.67 persons.
       For Asians, the mean quantity of rice bought each month is 51.33 ounces and the standard
deviation is 163.8 ounces. The mean number of transactions per month is .23 and the
standard deviation is .53 purchases.13 The average price of rice faced by Asians is $ 4.36 US.
Their household income is $ 77,330 US and the household size is 2.92 persons.
       Notice that the Asian sample clearly buys much more rice and has higher monthly fre-
quency. The rice they buy is also more expensive, reflecting differences in the quality of rice
bought. Their household income is also significantly higher than the non-Asian sample.
       Our baseline regression specification then is


                     Yi,t = a0 + a1 M ar08 + a2 Apr08 + a3 M ay08 + γXi,t + i,t                         (9)
  11
      The monthly expenditure implied by this quantity is around 60 cents with a standard deviation of
roughly 2 dollars. Since expenditures on rice make up a relatively low share of a household’s total budget,
one may be tempted to conclude that rice is a good of little importance to the household. Of course, rice
is a staple in many cultures, possibly not easily substitutable, and expenditures on rice may not reflect its
overall value for the household. (An extreme illustration of this point is the “paradox of value”. Whereas
water is vital for human beings, diamonds are not. Nevertheless, the cost of water is much lower than the
cost of a diamond. Of course, early economists explain this discrepancy by pointing out that it is not the
total “utility” of a good that matters, but the “utility” of a marginal unit of that good.)
   12
      The monthly expenditure is 60 cents and the standard deviation is 1.76 dollars.
   13
      The mean dollars spent per month is 2 dollars and the standard deviation is 8 dollars.


                                                     17
Our coefficients of interest are in front of M ar08, Apr08 and M ay08, the dummy variables for
March 2008, April 2008 and May 2008. As mentioned previously, these coefficients capture
any variation in the expectations of future prices driving increases in the inventory behavior
of households around the Rice Crisis. The vector Xi,t contains our rice price-level aggregate,
household income and household size. (Whereas price varies in time and across individuals,
household income and size are only measured at the beginning of the survey.) In various
specifications, we also include additional controls under Xi,t such as household fixed effects
and our lagged outcome variable Yi,t−1 . We include March 2008 in our specification to check
for the possibility that hoarding might have started a bit earlier. Our expectation is that
the hoard behavior is concentrated in April and May 2008, but in some of the specifications
below, there is a potential for hoard behavior to begin a bit earlier since some of the reported
panics overseas in the Philipines, for instance, began in mid-March.
    The results of our estimation are reported in Table 2, Panel A. The calculation of the
predicted values and implied economic significance are in Table 2, Panel B. We start with
quantity purchased each month in columns (1)-(3). In column (1), we find that the coefficient
in front of March 2008 is insignificant but the coefficients in front of both April 2008 and
May 2008 are significant, both statistically and economically. That is, the hoarding of rice
begins in April and not March, during which there was already panic about rice in Asian
countries. The coefficient on price is positive and significant, which might reflect differences
in the quality of rice purchased across different households.14 Recall from the summary
statistics in Table 1 that Asians bought more rice and the average price of rice bought was
also higher. Household income has a negative coefficient. Richer households, all other factors
equal, purchase less rice.15 Households with more persons purchase more rice.
    In column (2), we introduce household fixed effects and we obtain very similar coefficients
  14
     Reported standard errors are robust standard errors. We have also computed standard errors clustered
at the household level and our conclusions are not affected.
  15
     We also estimated specifications where household income is interacted with the month dummies, but
the estimated coefficients are not statistically significant at usual significance levels. Hence, even though our
estimates indicate that rice is an inferior good, the hoarding behavior does not appear to be explained by
wealth differences.


                                                       18
for our March, April and May 2008 dummies. The coefficient on price, however, changes
signs from positive to negative and is statistically significant. The household fixed effects
likely absorbed unobserved heterogeneity (i.e. households who eat rice prefer expensive rice)
and the negative coefficient in front of price reflects normal demand curve considerations
and is also consistent with our Proposition 2. Notice that our sample period is 2007-2009.
So most of the sample with which we are measuring this coefficient are normal non-bubble
markets. But one might expect, as we demonstrate below, that the sign on this coefficient
in front of price flips during the bubble months of April and May 2008.
   In column (3), we introduce the lagged outcome variable as an additional control in
addition to household fixed effects and we get stronger results. Again, notice that the sign
on rice prices becomes even more negative. Also the coefficient on Yt−1 is also negative. That
is, households who in the previous month bought a lot of rice are less likely to buy rice this
month. This is consistent with inventory and buffering to reduce costs of going to the store.
It is also potentially consistent with hoarding effects and the de-stocking of inventory. We
will come back to these interpretations in Table 3.
   But continuing in Table 2, we calculate the predicted values from these three regression
specifications in column (1)-(3) of Panel B. From Panel B, column (1), we note that in an
April that is not in 2008, the mean amount of rice purchased is 13 ounces. In April 2008,
it is 19.7 ounces, which is a 51% increase. For May, the analogous figures are 12.6 ounces
and 16.5 ounces, which amounts to a 30% increase. Now the economic significance for April
2008 and for May 2008 as we move across the three regression specifications, to columns
(2) and (3) are similarly large. Looking at column (3), the Arellano-Bond specification, the
increase is around 9 ounces for April and May 2008 or nearly 70% of the baseline purchases
in non-Bubble periods..
   In columns (4)-(6) of Panel A, we have as the dependent variable the number of rice
transactions in a month. In column (4), we find that the coefficients in front of April and
May 2008 are both positive and statistically significant. The coefficient on price is negative.


                                              19
Interestingly, we find that the coefficient on household income is now positive and so is the
coefficient on household size. As before, as we move across the baseline specification in
column (3) to the one with household fixed effects in column (4) and household fixed effects
plus lagged dependent variable in column (5), we see the coefficients in front of March, April
and May 2008 remain largely similar.
      Turning to Panel B columns (4)-(6), we find that the implied economic magnitudes are
a 17% increase of the frequency of transactions in April 2008 and an 8% increase in May
2008. In column (5), when we introduce household fixed effects, we get similar increases in
frequency of transactions for April 2008 and May 2008, respectively. When we introduce
the lagged outcome variable as a right-hand side variable in Column (6), the economic
magnitudes rise further to 21% using the Arellano-Bond estimation technique.
      Intuitively, the precautionary demand for rice would lead households with lower invento-
ries at the onset of the crisis to purchase more aggressively during the months when rapid
price increases. We do not observe inventories, but we have also estimated specifications
where the March, April and May 2008 dummies are interacted with the number of months
since the household last purchased rice. (Presumably, households that have not recently
bought rice have lower inventories at their disposal than otherwise.) The estimated coeffi-
cients are positive and statistically significant at the usual levels. As expected, households
who last bought rice longer ago purchase more during the crisis months than those who have
bought more recently.16


5.1.2.      Baseline Hoarding Effect: Instrumental Variables Regressions

To address potential endogeneity concerns for our price variable, we also estimate instru-
mental variable regression versions of our main specifications instrumenting our rice price
variable. Possible sources of endogeneity for our price variable are omitted variables (e.g.,
prices of substitute or complementary goods which we do not include in our specification)
 16
      We omit these results for brevity. They are available from the authors.



                                                      20
and potential measurement error in our price-level aggregate as a measure of prices faced
by the consumers in our sample. In Table 3, we re-estimate this baseline hoarding effect of
Table 2 using TSLS and Fixed Effects Instrumental Variables (FE IV) regressions where we
instrument for the price that each household faces with the international price of rice (Int
Rice Pr). The international price series comes from the IMF and is in hundreds of USD
per ton. In Panel A, we report the first-stage regression of the price each household faces
on the other covariates from the OLS and Int Rice Pr. The coefficient in front of Int Rice
Pr is 0.283, which is significant at the 1% level. The pairwise correlation of the price of
rice with international rice prices is 0.1842. The F-statistic in the first stage is 66,288.7 and
the Minimum Eigenvalue Statistic is 66,768.3, well above the usual critical values for the
hypothesis of weak instruments. The model is exactly identified, so no over-identification
tests were performed.
   Panel A then shows the TSLS and FE IV estimates. Notice that the coefficients from the
TSLS estimates are very similar to the OLS counterparts in Panel A of Table 2. Moreover,
the predicted values from Panel B are also very similar. If anything, the TSLS estimates
are slightly larger. For April 2008, we see an increase of 55% relative to April of a non-2008
year in quantity purchased in contrast to the 51% figure from Table 2. For May 2008, the
increase is around 35% compared to 30% from Table 2. A similar set of conclusions hold for
monthly frequency.


5.1.3.   Drawing Down Inventory

In Table 4, we extend our baseline regression specification to measure whether households
then de-stock or draw down their inventory of rice in the months subsequent to the panic
months of April and May 2008. We do this by augmenting our baseline specification by
adding dummies for the months of June, July and August 2008.


 Yi,t = a0 +a1 M ar08+a2 Apr08+a3 M ay08+a4 Jun08+a5 Jul08+a6 Aug08+γXi,t +i,t (10)



                                               21
   We start with Panel A of Table 4 and the coefficient estimates for quantity. The co-
efficients for March, April and May of 2008 in column (1) are similar to those in Panel A
of Table 2. We see that the coefficients for June, July and August 2008 are all negative
and statistically significant. In other words, households only cut back on their purchases
after the news of untapped supply from Japan. In column (2), we get similar results using
household fixed effects, though the coefficient on June 2008, while still negative, is no longer
statistically significant. In column (3), when we add lagged purchases, we see that the coef-
ficient in June 2008 is now actually positive but not very big economically. So there is still
some hoarding in June 2008 under the Arellano-Bond specification. The coefficients in front
of July and August 2008 are now subsumed by Yt−1 , reflecting the fact that households are
who bought the most cut their purchases.
   In columns (1)-(3) of Panel B, we see that the economic effects of cutting back are smaller
than the initial hoarding effect when comparing the absolute differences. In other words,
the hoarding effect is not entirely unwound in the few months subsequent to the peak of the
Rice Bubble.
   In columns (4)-(6) of Panel A for monthly frequency, we get very similar answers as we
do with quantity. Households in July and August of 2008 have fewer transactions. But
again from columns (4)-(6) of Panel B, the economic significance is smaller than the initial
hoarding effect.


5.1.4.   Censored Regression Specifications

To study the effect of the crisis on the extensive and intensive margins (i.e., the probability
of purchasing rice and the quantity of rice purchased given that some rice is bought), we
also run a censored regression model for our extended specification. In Table 5, we re-run
our baseline regression specification in Equation (9) as a Tobit and using the semiparametric
censored-regression model with fixed-effects from Honoré (1992). The analogous coefficient
estimates are reported in Panel A. Again, we see significant hoarding effects for the months


                                              22
of April and May 2008 followed by drawdowns in June, July and August. In the Tobit
specification, we also see significant coefficients for June 2008 pointing to a drawdown but
again the coefficients for June are typically smaller than those for July and August 2008.
Allowing for fixed effects as in Honoré (1992), the coefficients remain comparable to, if not
larger than, the ones in the Tobit specification. As with our OLS estimates, we obtain a
positive sign for the coefficient on price, which becomes negative once we allow for fixed-
effects.
       In Panel B, we report the predicted values for the expected purchased conditional on
there being any purchase and the probability of purchase based on our Tobit specification.17
We see a significant increase in both the amount bought conditional on buying and also
the probability of buying for April and May 2008 followed then by a drawdown in July and
August of 2008. From column (1), in an April not in the year 2008, the mean ounces of
rice purchased is 106.7. But in April 2008, it is 111.6 ounces. The probability of a positive
purchase in April not in 2008 is .153 but in April 2008, it is .182 or nearly 3 percentage points
higher. In July and August 2008, we see a scaling back of around 5 ounces conditional on
purchase and a drop in the probability of purchase of around 2.8 percentage points.
       For monthly frequency, we also draw very similar conclusions from the censored regression
results. There is both a significant effect conditional on a transaction or expenditures and
also a rise in the probabilities of transaction and expenditures. The magnitudes are consistent
across our various specifications.


5.2.        Preferences and Propensity to Hoard: Asian versus non-Asian

            Households

Up to this point, we have focused on establishing the hoarding effect for the average house-
hold. One natural auxiliary implication of household hoarding is that households who con-
sume more rice or have more inelastic demand for rice would pay the most attention to the
  17
       Marginal effects for the semiparametric estimates can be obtained as in Honoré (2008).


                                                      23
price of rice and worry the most about it rising and hence engage in more hoard behavior.
From our Table 1 of summary statistics, Asian households consume significantly more rice
than non-Asians as rice is a preferred staple of the Asian diet. As such, we can test to see if
hoarding effects are stronger for Asians compared to non-Asians.
   To do this, we augment our baseline regression specification in Equation (9) by interacting
our month dummies with a dummy variable for an Asian Household.


     Yi,t = a0 + a1 M ar08 + a2 Apr08 + a3 M ay08 + a4 Asian + a5 M ar08 × Asian+
                                                                                             (11)
        a6 Apr08 × Asian + a7 M ay08 × Asian + γXi,t + i,t


The control variables Xi,t are the same as in earlier specifications. The coefficients of interest
are those in front of the interaction terms.
   Starting with columns (1)-(3) of Panel A of Table 6, where the dependent variable is quan-
tity, we see that the coefficients in front of the interaction terms are all positive. Consistent
with this prediction, we find that Asian households, for whom rice is a staple, actually began
their hoarding earlier, in March 2008, though only the regression specification in column (3)
with Arellano-Bond estimates are statistically significant. The evidence of an earlier hoard-
ing effect for Asians in March is small economically. But by April and May, the coefficients
are very large and significant.
   Turning to columns (1)-(3) of Panel B for the predicted values from these set of estimates,
we see from column (1) that for non-Asians, the mean ounces of rice bought in April and
May that are not in 2008 is around 11 ounces. Their quantities bought rises to around 13
to 16 ounces. This is around a 30% to 40% increase. But for Asians, their base non-2008
purchases for April and May are around 49 ounces and this magnitude roughly doubles in
April and May of 2008. The differences between Asians and non-Asians are similarly stark
as we move across the columns and add further controls.
   In columns (4)-(6) of Panel A, we obtain similar conclusions when using monthly fre-
quency as when we use quantity. From Panel B, the absolute difference for non-Asians in


                                               24
monthly frequency between April and May (non-2008) versus April and May 2008 are around
.01 to .03. These differences for Asians are around .06 to .09, or three to six times larger.
Regardless of how we slice the data, we find a differentially stronger Asian hoarding effect.
The most natural interpretation is that Asian preferences for rice make their demand more
inelastic than non-Asians and hence the propensity to hoard higher.


5.2.1.      Rice Placebos: Noodles, Dumplings and Spaghetti

We finish off our baseline analysis by checking to see if there was a similar hoarding effect
in rice substitutes such as noodles, dumplings and spaghetti.18 It is not clear that these
are necessarily great substitutes for rice. Indeed, from a taste perspective for Asians, there
might be no great substitutes. To the extent that there is a big enough substitution and a
big enough run on rice, perhaps there might be spillovers into rice substitutes. But Figure
9 indicates that there is no such spill-over when we consider noodles and dumplings or
spaghetti. In fact, aggregate sales of either category do not exhibit any abnormal increase
around April 2008 when compared to similar periods in 2007 and 2009. We have also
run analogous regressions for noodles and dumplings and for spaghetti as for rice and find
no consistent evidence of hoarding coefficients for April and May 2008 (if anything, those
coefficients tend to be negative).


5.3.       Transmission Mechanism I: Intensity of Past Price Increases

           Across Counties and Hoarding

An important signal and possible trigger for hoarding, that is often discussed in the liter-
ature, is rapidly rising prices, which alert households to the potential for inflation. In our
empirical analysis, we have price controls to deal with the usual downward-sloping consump-
tion demand. But in an extended specification, we can interact pi,t with the Bubble Period
Dummy to see how the slope of the demand curve changes in these months. If the trans-
 18
      Noodles and dumplings are a single category in our dataset.


                                                     25
mission mechanism is through prices so that higher p0 comes with higher µ, then we can
actually see greater purchases with higher prices using the logic of our Propositions 1 and 3.
   This is indeed what we see in Table 7, where we estimate the following specification:


                   Yi,t = a0 + a1 M ar08 + a2 Apr08 + a3 M ay08 + a4 pi,t +

                      a5 pi,t × M ar08 + a6 pi,t × Apr08 + a7 pi,t × M ay08+              (12)

                      γXi,t + i,t


   In column (1) of Panel A, we see that the coefficient in front of the interactions of price
with April and May 2008 are positive. Notice that the coefficient in front of price is negative
in columns (2) and (3) with the household fixed effects and Arellano-Bond specification. But
again the coefficient in front of the interaction of price with April 2008 is positive in these
two specifications. To a lesser degree, the same results hold for the coefficient in front of
price and May 08. The same conclusion applies for the other monthly frequency.
   In Table 8, we implement the TSLS version of this regression. To do this, we first group
together the months of March, April and May 2008 into a single dummy variable March-May
2008 that equals one in these two months and zero otherwise. Given our earlier analysis, we
know that the sign will be positive on this new dummy variable interacted with Price in the
OLS. This is displayed in column (3) of Table 8. We now have two variables which we will
need to instrument for in the TSLS Price and Price interacted with March-May 2008. We
will then use as instruments the IMF global rice price index and this price index interacted
with March-May 2008.
   The first-stage regressions are displayed in the first two columns of Table 8. In the
first column, we see that the international price of rice attracts a positive coefficient of
.284 and is highly significant. In the second column, we see that the international price of
rice interacted with March-May 2008 comes in with a coefficient of .101. The first-stage
regressions are highly significant and above the usual values of weak instruments.
   The second-stage regressions are shown in the remaining columns. The key variable of

                                              26
interest is price interacted with March-May 2008. The coefficients are all positive and highly
significant in Panel A for both of our dependent variables of interest. Moreover, the implied
economic effects in Panel B are close to or in some cases stronger then the OLS results.


5.4.    Transmission Mechanism II: Contagious Hoarding and First

        Time Rice Buyers

Finally, we establish that contagion was also another important transmission mechanism as
many households appear to have herded in buying rice for the first time during this period.
As indicated by one Asian-American woman interviewed during the period of interest, “[w]e
don’t even eat that much rice, (. . . ) [b]ut I read about it in the newspaper and decided
to buy some” (“A Run on Rice in Asian Communities”, New York Times, May 1, 2008).
To capture the likelihood that someone first buys rice during the period of interest, we
estimate a simple discrete time duration model using all the data, including those that had
not purchased any rice in 2007 (which we exclude in the previous regressions). That is,
we estimate a duration model using our household panel data to measure the time until a
household’s first purchase of rice given that they have not purchased in the past. According
to this model, the probability that someone purchases rice in month t is then given by:


                                P r(Ti = t) = hit Πt−1
                                                   k=1 (1 − hik )                         (13)


where hit = P r(Ti = t|Ti ≥ t; Xit ) is the hazard rate for buying rice for the first time. hit
is modeled as a linear probability model (LPM) and as a logit. The results are reported in
Table 9. In the first column, using LPM, we find that households who had never bought rice
before were significantly more like to have their first purchase in April or May of 2008. In
the second column, using the logit, we find similar results.
   In columns (3) and (4), we estimate the same duration models but with interactions to
account for Asian versus non-Asian households. Whereas Asian households are more likely


                                               27
to buy rice for the first time in any month if they hadn’t yet done so in our panel, we find
no evidence that Asian households who did not consume rice until the crisis months were
also more likely to be first-time buyers of rice.
       To investigate whether households were also more likely to stop buying rice during the
crisis months, we also run a similar duration model for the month of last purchase in our
panel. In the next four columns of the table, the dependent variable is the time until the last
purchase by a given household. What stands out is that April and May 2008 attract positive
coefficients for last purchase, though only April 2008 is statistically significant. Interestingly,
many of those who purchased rice for the last time in April and May 2008 actually did buy
rice for the first time between March and May 2008. In fact, once we remove those who
first bought rice between March and May 2008 and last purchased rice in May or earlier,
the positive spike in April and May for the hazard of a last purchase disappears. This is
visually illustrated in Figure 10, which plots the coefficients for the LPM basic specification
of our duration models “with” and “without” those who bought for the first time in March
2008 or later and for the last time in May 2008 or earlier. This indicates that the increase in
the hazard of a first purchase during April and May 2008 is mostly due to individuals who
didn’t buy rice after May 2008 again.19
       These findings are surprising since these households who never ate rice before presumably
would not be attentive to past price changes. The fact that they bought for the first time
then suggests that hoarding is contagious and they followed the actions of others or similarly
listened to media reports (as indicated in the New York Times interview quoted above).
  19
     We further investigate the purchasing behavior of those who purchase rice only on the crisis months.
Whereas on average those households purchase larger amounts of rice than those who also bought in other
periods, the quantity distribution is fairly similar across the two groups up to very high percentiles (i.e., up
to the 95th percentile). The proportion of Asians is also slightly lower among those buying only during the
crisis, but not appreciably so (2.9% versus 3.4% among those buying also in non-crisis months). The average
income and household size are also comparable across the two groups ($ 57,400 US versus $ 59,700 US and
2.5 versus 2.7 household member in crisis-only buyers versus non-crisis-also buyers, respectively).




                                                      28
6.    Conclusion

The dramatic increase in commodity prices from 2003 to 2009 led to tremendous debate, as
often happens during times of market stress, on hoarding by large speculators destabilizing
markets. We show instead that hoarding is more systemic, affecting even households with
no resale motive. Using panel data from supermarket purchases by US households during
the 2008 Rice Bubble, an under-studied but nonetheless significant event in global markets,
we find that households nearly doubled their purchases near the peak of the bubble and
we document transmission mechanisms through extrapolation from past price increases and
contagion as many households bought rice for the first time. Future work might use the
same setting to focus on other psychological triggers of hoarding and to estimate the effect
of hoarding on prices through the development of an equilibrium model of hoarding and
pricing.



References

Atkin, D., 2013, “Trade, Tastes and Nutrition in India,” The American Economic Review,
  103(5), 1629–1663.

Barberis, N., and R. Thaler, 2003, “A survey of behavioral finance,” Handbook of the Eco-
  nomics of Finance, 1, 1053–1128.

Bronnenberg, B. J., J.-P. H. Dubé, and M. Gentzkow, 2010, “The evolution of brand prefer-
  ences: Evidence from consumer migration,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Dawe, D., T. Slayton, et al., 2010, “The world rice market crisis of 2007-2008,” in The rice
  crisis: markets, policies and food security. London, Earthsan and FAO, pp. 15–29.

Deaton, A., and G. Laroque, 1992, “On the behaviour of commodity prices,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 59(1), 1–23.

                                            29
Deaton, A., and J. Muellbauer, 1988, Economics and consumer behavior. Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, Cambridge.

Einav, L., E. Leibtag, and A. Nevo, 2010, “Recording Discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan
  Data: Are They Present and Do They Matter?,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics,
  8, 207–239.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1987, “Commodity futures prices: Some evidence on forecast
  power, premiums, and the theory of storage,” Journal of Business, pp. 55–73.

Gorton, G. B., F. Hayashi, and K. G. Rouwenhorst, 2012, “The fundamentals of commodity
  futures returns,” Review of Finance.

Gráda, C. Ó., 2009, Famine: a short history. Princeton University Press.

Hamilton, J. D., 2009, “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08,” working
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hirshleifer, D., 2001, “Investor psychology and asset pricing,” The Journal of Finance, 56(4),
  1533–1597.

Honoré, B. E., 1992, “Trimmed Lad and Least Squares Estimation of Truncated and Censored
  Regression Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 60(3), 533–565.

       , 2008, “On Marginal Effects in Semiparametric Censored Regression Models,” Prince-
  ton University Working Paper.

Kilian, L., and D. P. Murphy, 2014, “The role of inventories and speculative trading in the
  global market for crude oil,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(3), 454–478.

Nevo, A., 2010, “Empirical models of consumer behavior,” working paper, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.




                                             30
Samuelson, P. A., 1965, “Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate randomly,” Indus-
  trial management review, 6(2), 41–49.

Scheinkman, J. A., and J. Schechtman, 1983, “A simple competitive model with production
  and storage,” The Review of Economic Studies, 50(3), 427–441.

Sen, A., 1983, Poverty and famines: an essay on entitlement and deprivation. Oxford Uni-
  versity Press.

Shiller, R. J., 2000, “Measuring Bubble Expectations and Inverstor Confidence,” The Journal
  of Psychology and Financial Markets, 1(1), 49–60.

       , 2005, Irrational exuberance. Random House LLC.

Singleton, K. J., 2013, “Investor flows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil prices,” Management
  Science, 60(2), 300–318.

Slayton, T., 2009, “Rice crisis forensics: How Asian governments carelessly set the world rice
  market on fire,” Center for Global Development working paper, 163.

Tang, K., and W. Xiong, 2010, “Index investment and financialization of commodities,”
  working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                             31
                            Figure 1: Nielsen Panel Demographics




This figure plots the distribution of demographics of the overall Nielsen Panel.




                                                 32
                                        Figure 2: Balanced Panel Summary Statistics



                                      Fi
                                       gur
                                         e2:Sampl
                                                eSi
                                                  zef
                                                    ort
                                                      heBal
                                                          ancedPanel(
                                                                    2007-
                                                                        09)
                              Whi
                                te                     Bl
                                                        ack                                             Asi
                                                                                                          an                             Ot
                                                                                                                                          her



                13K           12,
                                860

                      12,
                        401
                                      12,
                                        186                                                    Li
                                                                                                vingi
                                                                                                    nAs
                                                                                                      ianZI
                                                                                                          PCodes(
                                                                                                                TopQui
                                                                                                                     nti
                                                                                                                       leCens
                                                                                                                            us)
                12K
                                                                                                        Whi
                                                                                                          te,Bl
                                                                                                              ack,Ot
                                                                                                                   her                 Asi
                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                             80%
                                                                                                                                                73.
                                                                                                                                                  59%
                11K
                                                                                                      65.
                                                                                                        04%




                                                                                         P
                                                                                      anZI
                                                                                             60%
                10K




                                                                              an&NONAsi
                9K
                                                                                             40%
                                                                                                                  34.
                                                                                                                    96%




                                                                           nAsi
                                                                         ngi
                8K                                                                                                             26.
                                                                                                                                 41%




                                                                        vi
           ds




                                                                     % Li
 #OfHousehol




                                                                                             20%

                7K                            r
                                              ace
                                                Whi
                                                  t
                                                  e
                                                Bl
                                                 ack                                          0%
                6K                              Asi
                                                  an                                                NONAsi
                                                                                                         anZi
                                                                                                            p   Asi
                                                                                                                  anZi
                                                                                                                     pCode   NONAsi
                                                                                                                                  anZi
                                                                                                                                     p    Asi
                                                                                                                                            anZi
                                                                                                                                               pCode
                                                Ot
                                                 her

                5K



                4K



                3K



                                              1,
                                               930     1,
                                                        981   1,
                                                               913
                2K



                1K                                                                                                           756         766            731
                                                                                             649        649        597

                0K
                      2007    2008    2009    2007     2008   2009                           2007       2008      2009       2007        2008           2009




This figure plots the distribution of our Sample Size for our balanced panel.




                                                                     33
                            Figure 3: Zip Codes of Asian Panelists



                       Fi
                        gur
                          e3:ZI
                              PCodesofAsi
                                        anPanel
                                              ist
                                                sindat
                                                     a




   NumberofHousehol
                  ds
         1
         5
        10
        15
        20
        23




This figure plots the Zip Codes of Asian Panelists.




                                                34
                             Figure 4: Asian versus non-Asian Quantities of Rice Purchased



                                   Fi
                                    gur
                                      e4:Asi
                                           anvs.Non-Asi
                                                      anQuant
                                                            iti
                                                              esofRi
                                                                   cePur
                                                                       chased
                                        Aver
                                           age& Medi
                                                   anQuant
                                                         ityPur
                                                              chasedBasedonLi
                                                                            vingi
                                                                                nAsi
                                                                                   anZI
                                                                                      PcodesorNot
                                             NONAsi
                                                  anZi
                                                     p                                           Asi
                                                                                                   anZi
                                                                                                      pCode
                             Whi
                               t
                               e,Bl
                                  ack,Ot
                                       her                 As
                                                            ian                  Whi
                                                                                   t
                                                                                   e,Bl
                                                                                      ack,Ot
                                                                                           her                 Asi
                                                                                                                 an

                500                                                                                            480.
                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                      448.
                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                        400.
                                                                                                           0
                400
                                                           368.
                                                              0   374.
                                                                     0
          y
          t
    anQuani




                                                    320.
                                                       0

                300
 Medi




                200




                100                                                       80.
                                                                            0        80.
                                                                                       0         80.
                                                                                                   0
                      64.
                        0        69.
                                   0         64.
                                               0


                                                                                                               818.
                                                                                                                  6
                800                                                                                                   773.
                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                        729.
                                                                                                           2

                700
                                                           653.
                                                              1
                                                                  632.
                                                                     4
            y




                600
           t
           i




                                                    566.
                                                       3
    ageQuant




                500
 Aver




                400


                300


                200                                                       172.
                                                                             4       174.
                                                                                        2        167.
                                                                                                    5
                      136.
                         3       143.
                                    6        134.
                                                8
                100
                      2007       2008        2009   2007   2008   2009    2007       2008        2009   2007   2008   2009




This figure plots the quantities of rice purchased by Asian versus non-Asians in our balanced panel.




                                                                     35
                                   Figure 5: Commodity Prices




This figure plots the time-series of rice prices versus a food price index.




                                                  36
                          Figure 6: Price of Rice against Food Price Index




This figure plots the time-series of various agricultural and non-agricultural commodity prices against the

price of oil in black.




                                                    37
                             Figure 7: Google Search Volume for Rice




This figure plots the Google Trends Search Volume Index for Rice. The index is normalized at 100 for the

period of peak interest.




                                                  38
                        Figure 8: Price of Rice in US Stores, other size bags




This figure plots the prices of various size bags and volume of sales for the largest and smallest bags.




                                                     39
    Figure 9: Rice Substitutes: Weekly Quantities of Noodles and Dumplings and Spaghetti




This figure plots the quantities purchased of noodles and dumplings and spaghetti over the 2007-2009 period.




                                                    40
                              Figure 10: First and Last Rice Purchases




This figure plots the coefficients on the LPM hazard model for first and last purchases of rice with and

without the sample of individuals who first bought rice in March 2008 or later and last purchased rice in

May 2008 or earlier.




                                                   41
Table 1: Summary Statistics. Dependent variables of interest include Quantity, the number of
ounces of rice purchased each month, Monthly Frequency, the number of transactions each month,
and Expenditure, the total spending on rice each month. Independent variables of interest include
Price, the average price paid each month by household, HH Income, household income and House-
hold Size, the number of persons in household. Summarty statistics are broken down by Asian
versus non-Asian households.

            Variable                     Obs     Mean        Std. Dev.   Min    Max
            All Observations
            Quantity (oz)             699,913        12.60       62.45      0   9,920
            Quantity (oz) (if >0)     111,187        79.34      138.77      4   9,920
            Monthly Frequency         699,913         0.18        0.46      0      13
            Price (USD)               807,965         3.51        1.41   0.09   24.34
            HH Income (USD ’000)      841,284        58.64       34.57      3     220
            Household Size            841,284         2.68        1.36      1       9

            Non Asian
            Quantity (oz)             672,279        11.01       53.79      0   9,920
            Quantity (oz) (if >0)     105,909        69.90      119.37      4   9,920
            Monthly Frequency         672,279         0.18        0.46      0      13
            Price (USD)               776,506         3.48        1.39   0.09   24.34
            HH Income (USD ’000)      809,352        57.91       34.15      3     220
            Household Size            809,352         2.67        1.36      1       9
            Asian
            Quantity (oz)              27,634     51.33         163.80      0   4,160
            Quantity (oz) (if >0)       5,278    268.73         286.53      4   4,160
            Monthly Frequency          27,634      0.23           0.53      0       8
            Price (USD)                31,459      4.36           1.52   0.09   12.32
            HH Income (USD ’000)       31,932     77.33          39.51      3     220
            Household Size             31,932      2.92           1.27      1       8




                                                42
Table 2: Baseline OLS Specification Measuring Hoarding Effect. The dependent variables of interest
are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression specification is given in
Equation (9). The key independent variables of interest are March, April and May 2008 month
dummies, with April and May 2008 being the peak of global rice prices. Control variables vary
across columns. Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B the predicted values. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

       PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                           Quantity (oz)                               Monthly Frequency
                    (OLS)       (FE)     (AB)                      (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)
       March 2008  -1.070 † -2.793 ∗∗    0.120                    -0.023 ∗∗ -0.033 ∗∗ -0.021 ∗∗
                         ( 0.558 )    ( 0.530 )     ( 0.625 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                 ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
       April 2008        7.322        6.252         9.261         0.032         0.027         0.040
                         ( 0.794 )    ( 0.750 )     ( 0.600 )     ( 0.005 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                 ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
       May 2008          3.794        4.279         8.547         0.014         0.019         0.040
                         ( 0.639 )    ( 0.596 )     ( 0.606 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                 ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
       Price (USD)       1.684        -1.928        -4.609        -0.003        -0.027        -0.049
                         ( 0.059 )    ( 0.142 )     ( 0.320 )     ( 0.000 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.002 )
                                 ∗∗                                        ∗∗
       HH Inc. (’000)   -0.015                                    0.000
                         ( 0.002 )                                ( 0.000 )
                                 ∗∗                                        ∗∗
       HH Size           3.083                                    0.020
                         ( 0.084 )                                ( 0.000 )
                                                             ∗∗                                        ∗∗
       Y(t-1)                                       -0.052                                    -0.021
                                                    ( 0.001 )                                 ( 0.001 )
       Month FE           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES           YES
       HH FE               NO          YES           YES            NO           YES           YES
       Obs.              672,094      672,094       626,867       672,094       672,094       626,867


       PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                            Quantity (oz)                              Monthly Frequency
                     (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)                     (OLS)      (FE)     (AB)
       Mar (not ’08) 14.604                                         0.206
       Mar (’08)     12.595                                         0.185
       Abs Diff      -2.009    -2.793     0.120                    -0.021    -0.033   -0.021

       Apr (not ’08)      13.056                                   0.189
       Apr (’08)          19.742                                   0.223
       Abs Diff            6.686       6.252         9.261         0.034         0.027         0.040

       May (not ’08)      12.641                                   0.184
       May (’08)          16.512                                   0.198
       Abs Diff            3.871       4.279         8.547         0.014         0.019         0.040




                                                    43
Table 3: Basic IV Specification Measuring Hoarding Effect. The dependent variables of interest
are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression specification is given in
Equation (9). The key independent variables of interest are March, April and May 2008 month
dummies, with April and May 2008 being the peak of global rice prices. Control variables vary
across columns. The price of rice is instrumented by international rice prices (obtained from the
IMF). The first column presents the first stage estimates for the TSLS. The pairwise correlation
of the price of rice with international rice prices is 0.1842. The F-statistic in the first stage is
66,288.7 and the Minimum Eigenvalue Statistic is 66,768.3, well above the usual critical values for
the hypothesis of weak instruments. The model is exactly identified so no overidentification tests
were performed. Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B the predicted values. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                        Rice Price (USD)                  Quantity (oz)            Monthly Frequency
                           (First Stage)                (TSLS)   (FE IV)            (TSLS)   (FE IV)
March 2008                   -1.109 ∗∗                 -3.281 ∗∗ -3.661 ∗∗         -0.046 ∗∗ -0.048 ∗∗
                                     ( 0.011 )         ( 0.572 )     ( 0.532 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                             ∗∗                 ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
April 2008                          -1.959             5.959         5.690         0.018         0.017
                                     ( 0.014 )         ( 0.797 )     ( 0.527 )     ( 0.005 )     ( 0.004 )
                                             ∗∗                 ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
May 2008                            -1.553             4.459         4.450         0.021         0.022
                                     ( 0.015 )         ( 0.643 )     ( 0.524 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                                                ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Price (USD)                                            -2.986        -3.631        -0.052        -0.057
                                                       ( 0.180 )     ( 0.187 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.001 )
                                             ∗∗                 ∗∗                          ∗∗
HH Inc. (’000)                      0.006              0.014                       0.000
                                     ( 0.000 )         ( 0.003 )                   ( 0.000 )
                                             ∗∗                 ∗∗                          ∗∗
HH Size                             -0.036             2.875                       0.018
                                     ( 0.001 )         ( 0.083 )                   ( 0.000 )
                                             ∗∗
Int Rice Pr (’00 USD/Ton)           0.283
                                     ( 0.001 )
Month FE                             YES                YES           YES           YES           YES
HH FE                                 NO                 NO           YES            NO           YES
Obs.                                672,094            672,094       672,094       672,094       672,094


PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                                                         Quantity (oz)             Monthly Frequency
                                                        (OLS)     (FE)             (OLS)       (FE)
Mar (not ’08)                                           14.239                       0.202
Mar (’08)                                               12.627                       0.186
Abs Diff                                                -1.611   -3.661             -0.017    -0.048

Apr (not ’08)                                           12.679                      0.185
Apr (’08)                                               19.773                      0.223
Abs Diff                                                7.094         5.690         0.038         0.017

May (not ’08)                                           12.221                      0.179
May (’08)                                               16.547                      0.198
Abs Diff                                                4.326         4.450         0.019         0.022




                                                  44
Table 4: Extended OLS Specification Measuring Hoarding and De-Stocking Effects. The dependent
variables of interest are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression
specification is given in Equation (10). The key independent variables of interest are March, April
and May, June, July and August 2008 month dummies, with April and May 2008 being the peak
of rice prices. Control variables vary across columns. Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B
the predicted values. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at
5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

      PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                           Quantity (oz)                                 Monthly Frequency
                    (OLS)       (FE)     (AB)                        (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)
      March 2008   -1.045 †   -2.756 ∗∗  0.474                      -0.022 ∗∗ -0.032 ∗∗ -0.020 ∗∗
                         ( 0.558 )      ( 0.531 )      ( 0.633 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
      April 2008         7.338          6.271         9.006         0.033         0.027         0.040
                         ( 0.794 )      ( 0.750 )      ( 0.602 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
      May 2008           3.786          4.255         7.708         0.014         0.018         0.039
                         ( 0.639 )      ( 0.595 )      ( 0.580 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗                           ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
      June 2008          -1.542          -0.228       2.768         -0.021        -0.012        0.011
                         ( 0.561 )      ( 0.528 )      ( 0.581 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗                          ∗∗            ∗∗
      July 2008          -3.573         -1.494          0.852       -0.031        -0.017         0.006
                         ( 0.428 )      ( 0.386 )      ( 0.597 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.003 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗                          ∗∗            ∗∗
      August 2008        -3.748         -1.264          0.327       -0.033        -0.017         0.005
                         ( 0.440 )      ( 0.421 )      ( 0.621 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             †             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
      Price (USD)        1.738          -1.831        -4.710        -0.003        -0.025        -0.050
                         ( 0.059 )      ( 0.147 )      ( 0.326 )    ( 0.000 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.002 )
                                   ∗∗                                        ∗∗
      HH Inc. (’000)    -0.0151                                     0.000
                         ( 0.002 )                                  ( 0.000 )
                                  ∗∗                                         ∗∗
      HH Size            3.084                                      0.020
                         ( 0.084 )                                  ( 0.000 )
                                                               ∗∗                                        ∗∗
      Y(t-1)                                          -0.052                                    -0.021
                                                       ( 0.001 )                                ( 0.001 )
      Month FE            YES            YES           YES           YES           YES           YES
      HH FE                NO            YES           YES            NO           YES           YES
      Obs.               672,094        672,094       626,867       672,094       672,094       626,867


      PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                           Quantity (oz)                                 Monthly Frequency
                    (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)                        (OLS)      (FE)     (AB)
      Mar (not ’08) 14.608                                            0.206
      Mar (’08)     12.594                                            0.185
      Abs Diff      -2.013    -2.756     0.474                       -0.021    -0.032   -0.020
      Apr (not ’08)       13.061                                     0.189
      Apr (’08)           19.742                                     0.223
      Abs Diff             6.681         6.271          9.006        0.034         0.027         0.040
      May (not ’08)       12.646                                     0.184
      May (’08)           16.511                                     0.198
      Abs Diff             3.865         4.255          7.708        0.014         0.018         0.039
      Jun (not ’08)       11.914                                     0.169
      Jun (’08)           10.881                                     0.148
      Abs Diff            -1.033         -0.228         2.768        -0.022        -0.012        0.011
      Jul (not ’08)       11.855                                     0.173
      Jul (’08)            9.164                                     0.141
      Abs Diff            -2.691         -1.494         0.852        -0.032        -0.017        0.006
      Aug (not ’08)       12.387                                     0.185
      Aug (’08)            9.723                                     0.150
      Abs Diff            -2.664         -1.264         0.327        -0.035        -0.017        0.005

                                                      45
  Table 5: Tobit Specification Measuring Hoarding and De-Stocking Effects. The dependent variables
  of interest are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression specification
  given in Equation (10) ran as a censored regression. The key independent variables of interest are
  March, April and May, June, July and August 2008 month dummies, with April and May 2008
  being the peak of rice prices. Control variables vary across columns. Panel A presents the estimates
  for a Tobit model (columns (1) and (3)) and for the semi-parametric censored regression with fixed-
  effects as in Honoré (1992) and Panel B the predicted values from the Tobit specification. Standard
  errors in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                                      Quantity (oz)                            Monthly Frequency
                                   (Tobit)                     (Honoré)             (Tobit)                    (Honoré)
March 2008                       -15.730 ∗∗                   -15.759 ∗∗           -0.163 ∗∗                   -0.169 ∗∗
                                  ( 2.601 )                    ( 3.249 )                ( 0.023 )              ( 0.021 )
                                           ∗∗                           ∗∗                      ∗∗                      ∗∗
April 2008                        24.660                      44.911                    0.149                  0.144
                                  ( 2.789 )                    ( 7.404 )                ( 0.023 )              ( 0.021 )
                                           ∗∗                           ∗∗                       ∗                      ∗∗
May 2008                          10.790                      28.195                    0.0531                 0.109
                                  ( 2.615 )                    ( 4.329 )                ( 0.023 )              ( 0.022 )
                                            ∗∗                                                   ∗∗                     ∗∗
June 2008                        -17.780                       -1.569               -0.171                     -0.076
                                  ( 2.892 )                    ( 3.530 )                ( 0.025 )              ( 0.022 )
                                            ∗∗                          ∗∗                       ∗∗                     ∗∗
July 2008                        -28.810                      -11.537               -0.247                     -0.113
                                  ( 2.823 )                    ( 2.851 )                ( 0.025 )              ( 0.021 )
                                            ∗∗                          ∗∗                       ∗∗                     ∗∗
August 2008                      -28.240                      -9.043                -0.242                     -0.106
                                  ( 2.794 )                    ( 2.936 )                ( 0.024 )              ( 0.021 )
                                           ∗∗                           ∗∗                       ∗∗                     ∗∗
Price (USD)                       1.824                       -11.147               -0.0234                    -0.140
                                  ( 0.612 )                    ( 1.000 )                ( 0.006 )              ( 0.006 )
                                           ∗∗                                                     ∗∗
HH Income (USD ’000)              -0.110                                           -0.00112
                                  ( 0.024 )                                             ( 0.000 )
                                           ∗∗                                                   ∗∗
HH Size                           15.090                                                0.116
                                  ( 0.829 )                                             ( 0.006 )
Month FE                             YES                        YES                      YES                     YES
HH FE                                NO                         YES                      NO                      YES
Obs.                                       672,094                                          672,094

PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                                       Quantity (oz)                                  Monthly Frequency
                         E(Y |Y > 0)     P r(Y > 0)                          E(Y |Y > 0) P r(Y > 0)
March (not 2008)           108.809           0.165                              1.047         0.183
March (2008)               105.508           0.146                              1.016         0.163
Absolute Difference         -3.301          -0.019                             -0.031        -0.020

April (not 2008)           106.721               0.153                          1.026                 0.170
April (2008)               111.585               0.182                          1.059                 0.192
Absolute Difference         4.864                0.029                          0.033                 0.022

May (not 2008)             106.040               0.149                          1.019                 0.166
May (2008)                 108.185               0.161                          1.030                 0.173
Absolute Difference         2.144                0.013                          0.011                 0.007

June (not 2008)            104.405               0.139                          1.001                  0.154
June (2008)                101.218               0.122                          0.967                  0.134
Absolute Difference         -3.187              -0.018                         -0.034                 -0.021

July (not 2008)            104.635               0.141                          1.005                  0.157
July (2008)                99.540                0.113                          0.956                  0.127
Absolute Difference         -5.095              -0.028                         -0.049                 -0.030

August (not 2008)          105.894               0.148                          1.019                  0.166
August (2008)              100.843               0.120                          0.969                  0.135
Absolute Difference         -5.052              -0.028                         -0.050                 -0.031

                                                         46
Table 6: OLS Specification Measuring Hoarding Effect Interacted with Asian versus non-Asian
Households. The dependent variables of interest are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in
Table 1. The regression specification is given in Equation (11). The key independent variables of
interest are March, April and May 2008 month dummies, with April and May 2008 being the peak
of global rice prices, interacted with dummy variable for Asian household. Control variables vary
across columns. Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B the predicted values. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

     PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                            Quantity (oz)                                 Monthly Frequency
                     (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)                        (OLS)     (FE)     (AB)
     Asian          36.85 ∗∗                                         -0.024 ∗∗
                          ( 0.969 )                                  ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗                           ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Mar ’08             -1.405         -2.819          -0.991       0.047         -0.033        -0.022
                          ( 0.517 )     ( 0.503 )       ( 0.639 )    ( 0.003 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                                                ∗∗
     Mar ’08 x Asian       0.143         0.385         10.86          0.013         0.011         0.018
                          ( 5.343 )     ( 4.862 )       ( 2.601 )    ( 0.021 )     ( 0.020 )     ( 0.020 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Apr ’08             5.101          4.213          5.868         0.030         0.024         0.037
                          ( 0.627 )     ( 0.594 )       ( 0.614 )    ( 0.005 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Apr ’08 x Asian     49.48          49.97          62.81         0.060         0.060         0.070
                         ( 12.162 )     ( 11.604 )      ( 2.504 )    ( 0.025 )     ( 0.022 )     ( 0.019 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     May ’08             2.754          3.137          5.657         0.013         0.017         0.037
                          ( 0.535 )     ( 0.499 )       ( 0.623 )    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )     ( 0.004 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗             ∗∗            ∗∗
     May ’08 x Asian     27.34          28.05          45.96         0.044         0.045         0.060
                          ( 8.873 )     ( 8.465 )       ( 2.600 )    ( 0.024 )     ( 0.021 )     ( 0.020 )
                                  ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Price (USD)         1.032          -1.944         -4.528        -0.004        -0.027        -0.049
                          ( 0.055 )     ( 0.142 )       ( 0.320 )    ( 0.000 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.002 )
                                   ∗∗                                         ∗∗
     HH Inc. ( ’000)    -0.0349                                      0.000
                          ( 0.002 )                                  ( 0.000 )
                                  ∗∗                                          ∗∗
     HH Size             2.926                                       0.020
                          ( 0.083 )                                  ( 0.000 )
                                                                ∗∗                                        ∗∗
     Y(t-1)                                            -0.053                                    -0.021
                                                        ( 0.001 )                                ( 0.001 )
     Month FE              YES           YES            YES           YES           YES           YES
     HH FE                  NO           YES            YES            NO           YES           YES
     Obs.                 672,094       672,094        626,867       672,094       672,094       626,867

     PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                            Quantity (oz)                                 Monthly Frequency
     Asian           (OLS)      (FE)      (AB)                        (OLS)      (FE)     (AB)
     March (not ’08) 50.846                                            0.248
     March (’08)     48.993                                            0.240
     Abs Diff        -1.853    -2.434     9.869                       -0.008    -0.022   -0.004
     April (not ’08)      49.318                                      0.231
     April (’08)          103.562                                     0.322
     Abs Diff             54.243         54.183         68.678        0.091         0.084         0.107
     May (not ’08)        48.883                                      0.226
     May (’08)            79.168                                      0.282
     Abs Diff             30.285         31.187         51.617        0.056         0.062         0.097
     non-Asian
     March (not ’08)      13.021                                      0.204
     March (’08)          11.044                                      0.183
     Abs Diff             -1.978         -2.819         -0.991        -0.021        -0.033        -0.022
     April (not ’08)      11.471                                      0.187
     April (’08)          16.181                                      0.218
     Abs Diff             4.710          4.213           5.868        0.031         0.024         0.037
     May (not ’08)        11.052                                      0.182
     May (’08)            13.848                                      0.194
     Abs Diff             2.796          3.137        47 5.657        0.012         0.017         0.037
Table 7: Month-Price Interactions. The dependent variables of interest are Quantity and Monthly
Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression specification is given in Equation (12). The key
independent variables of interest are March, April and May 2008 month dummies, with April and
May 2008 being the peak of global rice prices, interacted with Price. Control variables vary across
columns. Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B the predicted values. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

     PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
                         Quantity (oz)                                 Monthly Frequency
                   (OLS)      (FE)     (AB)                        (OLS)       (FE)       (AB)
     Mar08       -2.707 ∗∗ -2.431 ∗∗ -2.791 ∗                    -0.0407 ∗∗ -0.0350 ∗∗ -0.0269 ∗∗
                        ( 1.005 )    ( 0.908 )     ( 1.419 )      ( 0.009 )    ( 0.008 )     ( 0.010 )
                                                            ∗             ∗
     Mar08 × Price       0.537        -0.132       0.935          0.006         0.001         0.002
                        ( 0.341 )    ( 0.304 )     ( 0.425 )      ( 0.003 )    ( 0.002 )     ( 0.003 )
     Apr08              -0.749        -0.887        -1.210        -0.002        0.001         0.014
                        ( 1.651 )    ( 1.535 )     ( 1.345 )      ( 0.010 )    ( 0.009 )     ( 0.010 )
                                ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Apr08 × Price     2.552         2.258         3.274         0.0108        0.008         0.008
                        ( 0.583 )    ( 0.537 )     ( 0.377 )      ( 0.003 )    ( 0.003 )     ( 0.003 )
                                †             †             †              ∗                          ∗
     May08              2.257        2.138         2.463         -0.007         -0.002       0.021
                        ( 1.360 )    ( 1.232 )     ( 1.352 )      ( 0.009 )    ( 0.008 )     ( 0.010 )
                                                            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗
     May08 × Price       0.447        0.618        1.714         0.006         0.006         0.005
                        ( 0.406 )    ( 0.380 )     ( 0.344 )      ( 0.002 )    ( 0.002 )     ( 0.003 )
                                ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
     Price (USD)       1.589         -1.984        -4.701        -0.004        -0.027        -0.049
                        ( 0.059 )    ( 0.143 )     ( 0.321 )      ( 0.000 )    ( 0.001 )     ( 0.002 )
                                ∗∗                                        ∗∗
     HH Inc (’000)     -0.015                                    0.000
                        ( 0.002 )                                 ( 0.000 )
                                ∗∗                                        ∗∗
     HH Size           3.083                                     0.020
                        ( 0.084 )                                 ( 0.000 )
                                                            ∗∗                                        ∗∗
     Y(t-1)                                        -0.052                                    -0.021
                                                   ( 0.001 )                                 ( 0.001 )
     Month FE            YES          YES           YES            YES          YES           YES
     HH FE                NO          YES           YES             NO          YES           YES
     Obs.               672,094      672,094       626,867        672,094      672,094       626,867


     PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                          Quantity (oz)                                Monthly Frequency
                  (OLS)       (FE)       (AB)                     (OLS)       (FE)      (AB)
     Mar (not 08) 14.596                                           0.206
     Mar (08)     12.591                                           0.185
     Abs Diff      -2.005    -2.820     -0.034                    -0.021     -0.033    -0.021

     Apr (not 08)       13.049                                     0.189
     Apr (08)           19.723                                     0.223
     Abs Diff           6.674         6.196         9.059          0.034        0.026         0.040

     May (not 08)       12.633                                     0.184
     May (08)           16.509                                     0.198
     Abs Diff           3.876         4.273         8.385          0.014        0.018         0.039




                                                    48
   Table 8: Price-Months Interaction IV Specification Measuring Hoarding Effect. The dependent
   variables of interest are Quantity and Monthly Frequency, defined in Table 1. The regression
   specification is given in Equation (9). The key independent variables of interest are a dummy
   variable for March, April or May 2008 and the interaction of this dummy variable with prices.
   Control variables vary across columns. The price of rice is instrumented by international rice prices
   (obtained from the IMF) and the interaction of this variable with the dummy for March, April
   or May 2008. The first two columns present the first stage estimates for the TSLS. The pairwise
   correlation of the price of rice with international rice prices is 0.1842. The Minimum Eigenvalue
   Statistic for the first stage is 3,073.45, well above the usual critical values for the hypothesis of
   weak instruments. The model is exactly identified so no overidentification tests were performed.
   Panel A presents the estimates and Panel B the predicted values. Standard errors in parentheses.
   Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

PANEL A. Coefficient Estimates.
               Rice Pr      Rice Pr ×                                 Quantity (oz)                       Monthly Frequency
                (USD)       Mar-May
             (First Stage) (First Stage)                 (OLS)           (TSLS)        (FE IV)         (OLS)        (TSLS)        (FE IV)
Pr × Mar-May                                            1.241 ∗∗        24.888 ∗∗      25.613 ∗∗      0.008 ∗∗      0.191 ∗∗      0.196 ∗∗
                                                        ( 0.269 )        ( 2.336 )      ( 1.909 )     ( 0.002 )     ( 0.016 )     ( 0.014 )
                             ∗∗               ∗∗                                  ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Mar-May ’08         0.189             2.291              -0.637        -77.161         -79.734        -0.019        -0.613        -0.631
                     ( 0.037 )        ( 0.031 )         ( 0.804 )        ( 7.390 )      ( 6.115 )     ( 0.006 )     ( 0.052 )     ( 0.044 )
                                                                 ∗∗              ∗∗              ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Price (USD)                                             1.589           -3.008         -3.651         -0.004        -0.052        -0.057
                                                        ( 0.059 )        ( 0.180 )      ( 0.190 )     ( 0.000 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.001 )
HH Inc. (’000)      0.006 ∗∗          0.001   ∗∗
                                                        -0.015   ∗∗
                                                                         -0.000                       -0.000   ∗∗
                                                                                                                     -0.000
                      0.000           ( 0.000 )         ( 0.002 )        ( 0.003 )                    ( 0.000 )     ( 0.000 )
HH Size             -0.036 ∗∗        -0.003   ∗∗
                                                        3.083    ∗∗
                                                                        2.952    ∗∗
                                                                                                      0.020    ∗∗
                                                                                                                    0.018    ∗∗
                     ( 0.001 )        ( 0.000 )         ( 0.084 )        ( 0.084 )                    ( 0.000 )     ( 0.000 )
Int Rice Pr
                             ∗∗
(’00 USD/Ton)       0.284         0.021 ×10−2      ∗∗
                     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.002 ×10−2 )
Int Rice Pr ×
                             ∗∗               ∗∗
Mar-May ’08         -0.192            0.101
                     ( 0.004 )        ( 0.003 )
Month FE                                                 YES             YES             YES           YES           YES           YES
HH FE                                                     NO              NO             YES            NO            NO           YES
Obs.                                                    672,094         672,094         672,094       672,094       672,094       672,094


PANEL B. Predicted Values.
                                                                      Quantity (oz)                        Monthly Frequency
                                                         (OLS)          (TSLS)                         (OLS)    (TSLS)
Mar (not ’08)                                            13.235          14.266                         0.197    0.202
Mar (’08)                                                15.380          12.362                         0.205    0.184
Abs Diff                                                  2.145          -1.903                         0.008    -0.019

Apr (not ’08)                                            14.366          14.206                        0.197         0.194
Apr (’08)                                                17.029          16.437                        0.206         0.202
Abs Diff                                                 2.663            2.231                        0.009         0.008

May (not ’08)                                            12.679          10.670                        0.185         0.170
May (’08)                                                16.407          19.514                        0.195         0.216
Abs Diff                                                 3.729            8.845                        0.010         0.046




                                                        49
   Table 9: Discrete Time Duration Until First and Last Rice Purchase. The model is estimated by
   maximum likelihood using Equation (13). The monthly hazard rate for first time purchase of rice is
   modelled as a linear probability model in columns (1) and (3) and as a logit model in columns (2)
   and (4). The sample also includes households that did not make any purchases in 2007. Standard
   errors are given in parenthesis. For the logit hazard we also provide Average Partial effects in
   brackets for each variable. Significance levels : † at 10%, ∗ at 5%, and ∗∗ at 1%.

                                               Coefficient Estimates
                                     First Purchase                                           Last Purchase
                    (LPM)         (LOGIT)     (LPM)      (LOGIT)     (LPM)                 (LOGIT)     (LPM)           (LOGIT)
Asian                                         0.021 ∗∗    0.185 ∗∗                                    -0.004 ∗∗         -0.074 ∗
                                                ( 0.004 )      ( 0.031 )                                 ( 0.001 )     ( 0.029 )
                                                               [ 0.022 ]                                               [ -0.004 ]
                             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Mar ’08            -0.017         -0.169        -0.017         -0.168        -0.010        -0.344        -0.010        -0.337
                    ( 0.003 )     ( 0.035 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.035 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.044 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.045 )
                                  [ -0.017 ]                   [ -0.016 ]                  [ -0.010 ]                  [ -0.014 ]
Mar ’08 × Asian                                  -0.001         0.003                                     -0.003        -0.224
                                                ( 0.019 )      ( 0.173 )                                 ( 0.005 )     ( 0.231 )
                                                               [ -0.018 ]                                              [ -0.020 ]
                            ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Apr ’08             0.017         0.156         0.016          0.152         0.005         0.131         0.005         0.136
                    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.035 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.036 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.039 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.040 )
                                  [ 0.016 ]                    [ 0.016 ]                   [ 0.005 ]                   [ 0.007 ]
Apr ’08 × Asian                                  0.023          0.156                                     -0.004        -0.152
                                                ( 0.023 )      ( 0.164 )                                 ( 0.006 )     ( 0.185 )
                                                               [ 0.040 ]                                               [ -0.001 ]
                            ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗             ∗∗                          †                           †
May ’08             0.019         0.195         0.018          0.185          0.003         0.073         0.003         0.069
                    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.039 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.040 )     ( 0.002 )     ( 0.039 )     ( 0.002 )     ( 0.039 )
                                  [ 0.020 ]                    [ 0.020 ]                   [ 0.003 ]                   [ 0.003 ]
                                                         †              †
May ’08 × Asian                                 0.044          0.326                                      0.005         0.097
                                                ( 0.026 )      ( 0.177 )                                 ( 0.007 )     ( 0.165 )
                                                               [ 0.071 ]                                               [ 0.008 ]
                             ∗             ∗             †              †             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Jun ’08             -0.008        -0.097        -0.007         -0.092        -0.010        -0.296        -0.010        -0.289
                    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.047 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.047 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.044 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.045 )
                                  [ -0.010 ]                   [ -0.009 ]                  [ -0.010 ]                  [ -0.012 ]
Jun ’08 × Asian                                  -0.017         -0.140                                    -0.005        -0.257
                                                ( 0.021 )      ( 0.259 )                                 ( 0.005 )     ( 0.231 )
                                                               [ -0.025 ]                                              [ -0.019 ]
                             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Jul ’08            -0.015         -0.187        -0.015         -0.194        -0.018        -0.509        -0.018        -0.512
                    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.050 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.051 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.045 )     ( 0.001 )     ( 0.045 )
                                  [ -0.019 ]                   [ -0.018 ]                  [ -0.018 ]                  [ -0.020 ]
Jul ’08 × Asian                                  0.017          0.252                                     0.004         0.095
                                                ( 0.025 )      ( 0.244 )                                 ( 0.006 )     ( 0.205 )
                                                               [ 0.007 ]                                               [ -0.015 ]
                             ∗             ∗             ∗              ∗             ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Aug ’08             -0.010        -0.114        -0.010         -0.111        -0.026        -0.580        -0.025        -0.572
                    ( 0.004 )     ( 0.050 )     ( 0.004 )      ( 0.050 )     ( 0.002 )     ( 0.041 )     ( 0.002 )     ( 0.041 )
                                  [ -0.012 ]                   [ -0.011 ]                  [ -0.026 ]                  [ -0.022 ]
Aug ’08 × Asian                                  -0.013         -0.096                                    -0.006        -0.274
                                                ( 0.025 )      ( 0.277 )                                 ( 0.006 )     ( 0.221 )
                                                               [ -0.023 ]                                              [ -0.026 ]
Month Dummies        YES           YES           YES            YES           YES           YES           YES           YES
N of HHs            364,803       364,803       364,803        364,803       837,862       837,862       837,862       837,862




                                                          50
