                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION AND REMITTANCES:
                  EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                           Thomas Joseph
                                            Yaw Nyarko
                                           Shing-Yi Wang

                                        Working Paper 20986
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20986


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We are extremely grateful to the teams at UAE Exchange and the UAE Ministry of Labor for their
assistance in accessing the data sets and for answering our questions. This paper has benefited from
conversations with or comments from Santosh Anagol, Rachel Heath, Rob Jensen, Melanie Khamis,
Adriana Kugler, Annemie Maertens, Laura Schechter, Mark Rosenzweig, Dean Yang and various
seminar participants. Afshan Aman, Victor Archavski, Patrick Dejearnette and Minkwang Jang provided
excellent research assistance. The authors acknowledge financial support from the New York University
in Abu Dhabi Research Institute, and the Center for Technology and Economic Development. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20986.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Thomas Joseph, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Asymmetric Information and Remittances: Evidence from Matched Administrative Data
Thomas Joseph, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20986
February 2015
JEL No. F22,F24,J60,O15,O53

                                                ABSTRACT

Using new data matching remittances and monthly payroll disbursals, we demonstrate how fluctuations
in migrants' earnings in the United Arab Emirates affect their remittances. We consider three types
of income fluctuations that are observable by families at home: seasonalities, weather shocks and a
labor reform. Remittances move with all of these income changes. Remittances do not move with an
individual's growth in earnings over time. The slope of the relationship between earnings and time
in the UAE varies across individuals and is not easy to observe by families. Thus, a key characteristic
that drives remittance behavior is the observability of income rather than other features of these fluctuations.
The results are consistent with a private information model where remittances are viewed by the migrant
worker as payments to their families in an income-sharing contract.


Thomas Joseph                                          Shing-Yi Wang
IIM Udaipur                                            The Wharton School
India                                                  University of Pennsylvania
thomas.joseph@iimu.ac.in                               3620 Locust Walk
                                                       Philadelphia, PA 19104
Yaw Nyarko                                             and NBER
Department of Economics                                was@wharton.upenn.edu
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
yaw.nyarko@nyu.edu
1       Introduction

The number of international migrants has been growing over time. Estimates from the United Nations
suggest that the number has increased from 154 million in 1990 to over 230 million in 2013 (UN News
2013). The majority of international migrants originate from developing countries, and remittances
to developing countries, valued at $325 billion in 2009, has exceeded foreign development aid and
is approaching the magnitudes of foreign direct investment. International remittances may play an
important role in the economic growth of poor countries. At a micro level, temporary migrants remit
a substantial portion of their income to their families at home, and remittances have been shown to
improve the economic outcomes of receiving households (Yang and Martinez 2005, Yang 2008).
        While migrants make substantial financial transfers to their families at home, the geographic
separation inherent in international migration corresponds with substantial information asymmetries
in the economic choices and outcomes of both sides.1 Theoretical models of intra-household resource
allocation emphasize the potential for different preferences among household members but have gen-
erally assumed perfect information (Chiappori 1988, Manser and Brown 1980, McElroy and Horney
1981, Lundberg and Pollack 1993). However, an emerging empirical literature suggests that asymmet-
ric information within households over assets and income can affect the allocation of resources. Our
paper contributes to the new literature that emphasizes the importance of asymmetric information in
intrahousehold outcomes. Using new high frequency data on earnings and remittances of migrants, we
examine whether private information that migrants have about their own earnings fluctuations affects
their remittance patterns.
        The prior empirical literature on asymmetric information and household behavior falls into two
categories: laboratory experiments and field experiments. In a laboratory setting bringing in husbands
and wives, Ashraf (2009) shows that Filipino men deposit the experimental transfer to their own
accounts when that decision is private and commit to consumption when the decision is public. Ambler
(2014) shows that Salvadorian migrants in Washington, DC remit a smaller share of a windfall given
in the lab experiment when the total amount of the windfall is not revealed to the recipient. In a lab
experiment in Kenya, Jakiela and Ozier (2012) find that women are willing to reduce their expected
earnings to keep their income hidden from relatives. In addition to the lab experiments, there is one
related field experiment on asymmetric information. Goldberg (2010) runs public and private lotteries
    1
    Seshan and Zubrickas (2014) interview both male migrants and their wives at home and find evidence that husbands
working in Qatar underreport their earnings by about 20% to their wives at home in India. De Weerdt, Genicot and
Mesnard (2014) find substantial information asymmetries over assets in family networks and that the discrepancies are
positively correlated with physical distance.




                                                         2
and finds that winners of public lotteries spend 35% more than winners of private lotteries in the
period immediately after the lottery.
       The experimental settings offer the ability to cleanly manipulate the flow of information to house-
hold members. However, the evidence that exploits randomized variation in information generated
in lab settings and in field experiments is limited to looking at small, one-time windfalls. One key
contribution of our study is that we examine real-world variation in earned income. This distinction
may be important as standard models of consumption smoothing suggest that individuals should re-
spond differently to income fluctuations that are anticipated versus unanticipated and those that are
permanent versus transitory.2 By moving beyond windfalls, our paper contributes to our understand-
ing of whether models of private information are relevant in explaining how remittances respond to
variation in earned income. Also, because we exploit several income fluctuations that exhibit different
characteristics, we can separate out whether the other characteristics of income fluctuations (transi-
tory versus permanent and anticipated versus unanticipated) matter in addition to the observability
of income (public versus private).3
       We are able to take a new approach to examining motivations to remit because we have access
to a unique data set that offers high frequency records that include millions of remittance transactions
of migrants in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Our main data are administrative records from
a financial firm in the UAE that offers remittance services to individuals and payroll processing
services to firms. We are able to match the remittance transactions data with administrative data
on monthly earnings disbursals for hundreds of thousands of migrant workers from 2009 to 2012.
To our knowledge, this is the only high frequency analysis of the relationship between earnings and
remittances. Furthermore, our analysis may be subject to less measurement error and recall bias than
other studies because we exploit records of actual remittance transactions and payroll payments rather
than survey data. This is potentially quite important; as Kapur and Akee (2012) document using two
independent sources of data on remittances into Indian bank accounts, actual remittance deposits are
twice the self-reported amounts.4
       This paper contributes to the growing literature on the economic drivers of the remittance be-
havior of migrants (Dustmann and Mestres 2010, Lucas and Stark 1985, Rapoport and Docquier 2006,
Yang and Choi 2007, Yang 2008, Yang 2011). We develop a new framework of asymmetric informa-
   2
     A good overview of models of the permanent income hypothesis is presented by Japelli and Pistaferri (2010).
   3
     We characterize income fluctuations as public if they are easy to verify or observe by family members at home. This
verification may involve asking other individuals working in the UAE about aggregate trends that are experienced by
almost all migrants in the UAE.
   4
     See also Grigorian, Melkonyan and Shonkwiler (2008).




                                                           3
tion between migrants and their families at home where remittances are treated as a payment on an
income-sharing contract that applies to the observable income of migrants. In this model, remittances
should move with income differently depending on whether the income fluctuation is observable by
the family at home or not. In contrast, the observability of income should not matter under models of
pure altruism towards families at home, or in standard exchange models where remittances are used to
buy services such as taking care of assets and relatives or repayments of loans that financed migration.
      In our empirical work, we begin by documenting whether month-to-month fluctuations in income
correspond with changes in remittances. Our results show that overall remittances move positively
with fluctuations in an individual’s income. If we assume that these month-to-month fluctuations in
income are exogenous, then the estimates suggest an income elasticity of remittances of around 0.33.
Next, we examine four specific types of income fluctuations that vary in characteristics of ease of
observability by family at home, whether they are anticipated or unanticipated and whether they are
transitory or permanent. This allows us to determine whether the relationship between remittances
and income depends on specific characteristics of the income.
      First, we show that remittances move positively with seasonalities in earnings, which are public,
anticipated and transitory. We find that Ramadan has a particularly large and negative impact on
both earnings and remittances. Next, we examine the impact of weather shocks on earnings and
remittances. We examine rainfall and heat shocks, measured as the deviation of precipitation and
heat from the mean levels in each city and month, respectively. This follows in a large literature that
uses weather shocks as a source of exogenous variation in income (Kazianga and Udry 2006, Jacoby
and Skoufias 1998, Paxson 1992, Wolpin 1982). We find that both earnings and remittances fall with
this public, unanticipated, transitory shock. To further separate the effects of the attributes of income
fluctuations, we use a labor reform that increased the earnings of workers to examine the impact of an
unanticipated, permanent shock on the remittance behavior of migrants. Because this is an aggregate
shock, we characterize this as public. We find that both income and remittances move positively with
this type of income change as well.
      There is one type of income fluctuation for which we find that remittances move in an opposite
direction from earnings: length of stay in the country. Migrants’ earnings increase on average over
their time in the UAE, while the average remittances decline.5 This does not appear to be driven
by selection in the types of individual who choose to stay in or leave the UAE. Rather, the evidence
suggests that this pattern is driven by a story of hidden income where the evolution of earnings over
    5
      Our result that migrants’ income increases over their experience in the UAE is consistent with the results in the
literature on the assimilation of immigrants (Borjas 1994, LaLonde and Topel 1997).



                                                          4
time may not be fully known by families at home.
     We provide evidence to support the idea that the individual gradient between time in the country
and earnings is private information. Migrants with identical characteristics upon arrival can experience
a positive or negative evolution in their earnings over time in the UAE; employers learn about the
ability of workers and pay them differently according to their productivity. We examine two groups
of migrants who appear similar at the time of their arrival in the UAE but differ in their subsequent
evolution of their earnings over time in the UAE. Workers whose salaries increase over time remit
a constant amount (or slightly less) over time. This is consistent with the idea that they hide their
additional earnings over time from their families. In contrast, workers whose salaries decrease over
time and do not have incentive to hide their long-run earnings trend remit less over time. We also
look at variation in the share of co-workers that are from the same home district to examine whether
the private information effect is mitigated when there are co-workers who might know and report your
earnings status to your family at home.
     By exploiting anticipated versus unanticipated and transitory versus permanent income fluctua-
tions, this paper also contributes to the empirical literature that tests models of consumption smooth-
ing (Paxson 1993, Chaudhuri and Paxson 1993, Jacoby and Skoufias 1998, Japelli and Pistaferri 2010,
Khandker 2012). The predictions of models of consumption smoothing suggest that individuals are
able to adjust saving and smooth consumption differently based on the type of change in income.
To our knowledge, we are the first paper to test whether migrants smooth remittances over various
types of income fluctuations. Smoothing remittances over anticipated changes to income would sug-
gest that remittances are treated as migrants’ own consumption. In contrast, adjusting remittances
to transitory shocks but not to permanent ones would suggest remittances are treated by migrants as
saving. The separation between whether remittances are saving and investment or current consump-
tion is particularly relevant for the broader question of how remittance flows affect economic growth
in developing countries.


2    Background on Migrants in the UAE

Following the discovery of oil in the area, the United Arab Emirates was established in 1971 as a
federation of seven Emirates: Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ajman, Umm-al-Quwain, Ras al-Khaimah,
al-Fujairah. The subsequent rapid economic growth of the UAE was accompanied by a large inflow of
foreign workers. Recent statistics indicate that foreign workers constitute approximately 89% of the
total population and 96% of the total labor force in the UAE (Forstenlechner and Rutledge 2011).


                                                   5
      Foreign workers enter the UAE on two to three year work visas that are tied with their work con-
tracts with a specific employer.6 An employer can fire migrant workers at any time, which corresponds
with an almost immediate revocation of the work visa.7 Migrant workers can terminate an existing
contract with an employer in two ways. First, they can return to their home countries at any time.
However, there are stipulations on how long they must stay in the home country (usually six months)
before returning to the UAE on a new work visa. Workers who leave before fulfilling a contract must
pay for their own airfare home while the cost is borne by the firm if the worker quits at the end of
the contract. Second, workers can change to a new employer prior to the end of the contract without
leaving the UAE only if they had written approval from their current employer. Prior to 2011, written
approval was still needed if a worker wanted to change employers after completing a contract. After
2011, a new labor reform allowed workers the ability to switch employers at the end of their contract
without written permission from the initial employer.
      Workers enter the UAE on contracts that specify their minimum hours and the accompanying
earnings for those hours. Despite these long-term contracts that specify minimum earnings, we demon-
strate that most migrants experience substantial month-to-month fluctuations in wages (almost always
above the amount stipulated in the contract) that is largely reflective of variation in hours worked,
including overtime. Most contracts also include in-kind benefits, such as food and housing in labor
camps. Other benefits include employer-provided health insurance, which is mandated by law.
      The majority of migrant workers live in dormitory-like housing in labor camps. Given that several
migrants share a single room, saving money in their living quarters in order to bring cash or other
valuables back physically may not be a very secure option. According to data from the 2011 World
Bank Global Findex survey of a randomly selected, nationally representative sample of about 1,000
individuals in the UAE, 78% did not save in a financial institution in the past 12 months. Given
that this sample includes UAE citizens as well as migrants, this is likely to be an overestimate of the
number of migrants who use financial institutions in the UAE to store savings. Thus, migrants are
unlikely to save the earnings up over time in the UAE to bring cash and valuables physically back
with them when they return to their home country either permanently or for a visit.
      Migration to the UAE is almost always considered temporary as there is no pathway for foreign
workers to attain citizenship following years of legal residence. Furthermore, while foreign women can
achieve citizenship through marriage, foreign men cannot and the vast majority of foreign workers are
  6
   Standard work visas were three years in length prior to 2011, and two years in length subsequently.
  7
   Staying past the expiration of the work visa can lead to imprisonment. However, migrant workers are allowed to
appeal unjust treatment by employers, such as withholding wages, in court.




                                                       6
male.8 The income requirements for workers to bring their spouses and families prevent most migrant
workers from living with their families in the UAE.
      It is illegal for firms or recruiting agencies to charge migrant workers fees for receiving a job
assignment in the UAE. Recruiting agencies are supposed to receive their commissions only from firms
in the UAE. While it is difficult to know the share of workers who pay recruitment fees and the average
costs, informal interviews by Human Rights Watch (2009) indicate that almost all construction workers
paid manpower firms in their home countries amounts ranging from USD$1,800 to USD$4,100 for a
job assignment.


3     Conceptual Framework

This section presents a simple framework where remittances are the result of an income-sharing con-
tract between households and migrants. Migrants have some private information about their income
realizations in the host country. The model that we present here will have predictions that are unique
from the standard existing models of remittances, including models of altruism and exchange. Ap-
pendix Section A adapts and presents simple versions of the models where remittances are motivated
primarily by altruism or exchange to demonstrate that the key predictions of the model of asymmetric
information cannot be explained by these other models.


3.1    Remittances as Payments in Income-Sharing Contracts under Asymmetric
       Information

Migrants in the host country earn income, y, which is comprised of two components, yo and yh , that
vary in how difficult it is for family members at home to verify. While migrants move to the UAE
based on a job offer with an expectation of y, the actual income received month-to-month is subject to
shocks that can be either positive or negative. Each income component has its own shock over time,
denoted by µo and µh . Each of these components of income has its own cost for the family at home
to verify, co and ch , where ch > co ≥ 0. In other words, it is much more costly to verify fluctuations in
the hidden component of income, yh , than in the observable component of income, yo , and this cost,
ch , can be infinite (so it can be impossible to verify this type of income).
      The migrant promises to remit a fixed proportion, τ , of his income to families at home. Financing
international migration can be expensive and remittances may be payments on the contract where
   8
     Intermarriage with Emirati nationals is legal but not encouraged. The government established the Marriage Fund in
1992, granting 70,000 dirham (19,064 USD) to Emirati couples at the time of marriage with an additional 40,000 dirham
(10,890 USD) to the groom if they do not divorce in the first year.


                                                          7
families help finance the costs of migration. Alternatively, τ may not be part of an explicit contract
based on financing migration but a social norm for income sharing. With each remittance transfer
sent, the migrant provides a report on his income realization where the claim by the migrant is denoted
by ỹ. Given their receipt of τ ỹ, households at home can choose whether to incur the costs, ch and
co , to verify either of the components of income. If households find that ỹ < y, they can inflict a
punishment on the migrant, denoted by m(y, ỹ). Punishments may include divorce or eviction from
networks at home. Given that there is no path to citizenship for migrants in the UAE, almost all
migrants anticipate that they must return to their home countries eventually and may want to have
the advantages of their social networks when they return.
      The utility of the migrant is increasing in his earnings, y, and decreasing in the amount he remits,
τ ỹ, the severity of punishment and the probability that his family discovers that y > ỹ. Thus, the
migrant faces a tradeoff between lying about his income in order to keep more of the income for himself
and the risk of being caught lying and punished. The household’s utility is increasing in the amount of
remittances received, τ ỹ, and makes a decision regarding whether or not to pay the costs for verifying
the accuracy of the migrant’s income report, ỹ.
      We do not make additional assumptions on the utility functions of the migrants or the house-
holds. It would be possible to directly incorporate other existing models of remittances, including
the exchange motive or partial (though not pure) altruism. However, the current framework produces
testable implications without further assumptions. The model of asymmetric information implies that
remittances should tend to move with a migrant’s overall income, y. As shown in Appendix Section
A, this prediction is also consistent with the models of altruism and exchange. However, the model
of asymmetric information is unique in predicting that whether the income fluctuation is easy for the
households at home to observe (or verify) matters for remittances. We should see remittances moving
with income fluctuations that are more public or observable. In contrast, remittances may move less
or not move at all with positive income changes that can be hidden from the family at home. At
the same time, migrants have more incentive to truthfully reveal private information about negative
fluctuations in income than about positive fluctuations.


3.2    Summary of Empirical Predictions

We examine four types of income fluctuations, three of which are observable by households at home and
one that is not. Seasonalities are predictable, observable and transitory. Weather shocks, including
rainfall and extreme heat, offer a type of income shock that is unanticipated and transitory. For a



                                                    8
permanent, unanticipated and observable shock to income, we examine a labor reform that shifted up
workers’ earnings to a new, higher level.9
       We consider the idea that the returns to time in the UAE may be a private unanticipated and
permanent change to migrants’ income in the UAE. Unlike the other income fluctuations, this one
varies at the individual level and reflects firm learning about the individual productivity of the worker.
Thus, it may be difficult for families at home to know if this gradient is positive, negative or zero for
a specific migrant. While some migrants experience a positive permanent change, others experience
a negative one. The private information model of remittances suggests that migrants will not reveal
positive returns to time to their families at home but do have incentive to share information about the
unobserved component of income if they experience negative returns to time in the UAE. Whether the
returns to time are positive or negative should only have asymmetric effects under the model where
migrants have private information.
       Furthermore, we test a prediction of the model that heterogeneity across individuals in the
observability of an income fluctuation should matter for remittances. We look at variation across
workers in the number of co-workers who are from the same home district or home state. Having
more co-workers from the same area may suggest that it is less difficult or costly for the migrant’s
household to verify how he is performing at a firm over time in the UAE, including whether the worker
is promoted or demoted or how many overtime hours a person is working. Co-workers may also be
able to provide additional information about how much a person is earning over time by observing
their spending patterns in the UAE.
       The different income fluctuations allow us to provide evidence in favor of a model of asymmet-
ric information and to reject models of pure altruism or standard exchange models. In contrast to
observability, remittances move with income regardless of other characteristics, in particular the pre-
dictability and the permanence of the income fluctuation. The results on transitory versus permanent
and anticipated versus unanticipated income fluctuations also shed light on a model of altruism with
consumption smoothing. If remittances finance the consumption of family members at home and the
migrant wants to smooth their consumption, then we would expect remittances to be smoothed over
anticipated income fluctuations and move with unanticipated shocks.10
   9
      While we consider this a type of permanent income shock, it can only last as long as workers stay in the UAE and it
is important to note that workers cannot stay in the UAE forever. However, workers can continue to re-sign multi-year
contracts and remain working in the UAE for decades. The vast majority of workers remain in the UAE after their first
multi-year contract expires.
   10
      This is discussed in greater detail in Appendix Section A.




                                                           9
4        Data

4.1       Payroll and Remittances Data

The data are from a financial company based in the UAE whose primary operations involve remittance
and foreign exchange services. The firm is a very large player in this market, accounting for the
majority of the total remittance flows out of the UAE and approximately 5% of total global remittance
flows in 2010. In addition to funds transfer and exchange, the firm also offers payroll disbursal services
in the UAE. Approximately 10-15% of the migrant labor force receive their earnings from this firm.
         We obtained remittances transactions from the firm over the period from January 2009 to October
2012. Transactions can occur at any frequency, but in order to combine the transactions data with
the salary, we aggregate transactions to a monthly level. The firm offers many types of transactions
for remittances, including Western Union, Xpress Money, Associate Branch Transfer, Demand Draft.
These options vary in their speed of delivery and locations for pickup in the home countries. The
cost of remittance depends on the type but the cheapest options are about USD$4.50 per transaction.
Among the months in which remittances are observed to occur through this firm, the median and
mode number of remittances transactions for each individual per month is one.
         The firm also shared their records on payroll disbursals for the period from January 2009 to
October 2012. The entire sample of employees receiving wage payments from the payroll firm include
427,265 unique individuals working in 20,366 firms. In the UAE, salaries are stipulated by law to be
paid out on a monthly basis.11 There are on average 17.6 monthly salary observations per worker. A
key advantage of the data is that they represent the actual income payment transferred to workers.
However, the observed earnings may not be representative of total compensation for several reasons.
First, workers receive substantial in-kind benefits, including housing and food. This is not a major
concern for the analysis in the paper because the value of in-kind benefits is very unlikely to change
month-to-month over a worker’s contract with an employer; thus, we can remove the impact of in-kind
benefits with individual fixed effects. Furthermore, the payments in-kind cannot be transferred abroad
by the recipient like earnings can. Second, workers may supplement earnings in their primary jobs
with informal work. This is unlikely to be as common in the UAE as in other contexts because it is
illegal for migrant workers to receive compensation for work outside of the employer associated with
their visas. In addition, migrant workers do not have a lot of free time; we estimate that the migrants
in our data are working about 60 hours per week for their employer.12
    11
     Less than 5% of observations have multiple payments made to an individual in a month. We aggregate those numbers
into the total earned in that month.
  12
     This estimate is based on the assumption that any earnings received above the contract earnings are the result of


                                                         10
      One disadvantage of the data is that the amount of information available for each worker is very
limited. The salary disbursal information is connected to an employee data set that contains a few
individual characteristics including nationality, age, and gender. We do not observe hours worked in
each month so we cannot calculate wage rates. We have no information about marital status or the
economic situation of their families at home.
      The details on merging the remittance transactions data and the payroll disbursals data are
provided in Appendix B. We use two key identifiers to link these two types of data. The first is a
customer registration number that can appear in both data sets and is generated by the financial firm.
For salary disbursals and transactions that are not linked using the customer registration number, we
use another identifier called the labor card id number. This number is provided to migrant workers
by the government and is unique to each worker-contract.


4.2    Ministry of Labor Administrative Data

In addition to the data set containing administrative records on payroll disbursals and remittance
transactions, we also make use of data on migrant workers from the UAE Ministry of Labor (MOL).
The MOL data contains detailed information on the terms of the labor contracts signed between
migrant workers and firms in the UAE. Thus, we have information on the exact month in which the
workers’ jobs begin. We use this information to construct the amount of time that the migrant has
been in the UAE. The MOL data also has individual characteristics that are not available in the other
data set, including religion, education, and the salary and hours terms of the contract.
      Another advantage of the MOL data is that it offers an individual identifier, called a person
code, that is constant over time in addition to the labor card identifier which changes each time an
individual signs a new contract. While the labor card identifier available in the financial transactions
data would allow us to link panel observations of individuals within labor contracts, this person code
allows us to link the panel observations in the payroll and remittance data across labor contracts. In
other words, we use the person identifier to link individuals that sign additional contracts with the
same firm after their initial two or three year contract expires and to link individuals who switch firms
(if both firms use the the private company providing the data for payroll processing).
      We merge together the payroll and remittances data with the data from the Ministry of Labor
using the labor card identification number.13 We are able to match just over 80% of the observations in
overtime hours and the legally mandated overtime rate is between 1.25 to 1.5 times the standard hourly wage. This does
not include substantial commute times as workers are often transported by bus from labor camps in more remote areas
to cities to work.
  13
     See Appendix B for more details on matching the Ministry of Labor data to the financial transactions data from the



                                                          11
the payroll data with the MOL data.14 The reason that we are unable to match all of the observations
is largely driven by the fact that the MOL does not have jurisdiction over all migrant workers in the
UAE. Domestic workers and any workers in free-zone areas of the UAE fall under the jurisdiction of
the Ministry of the Interior rather than the Ministry of Labor. Comparing the MOL data that we
received to UN population figures for migrant workers in the UAE in 2012 suggests that the MOL
data covers approximately 80% of all migrant workers in the country.


4.3    Summary Statistics

Column 1 of Table 1 displays the summary statistics for the full sample of the remittance transactions.
The complete remittances sample includes over 34 million individual-month observations. The average
amount remitted in a month is 2668 dirham (USD $726) and India represents the destination for slightly
over half of the occurrences of remittances.15
      Column 2 of Table 1 presents characteristics of the workers for which we have salary data.
Workers in this sample earn an average of 1433 dirham (USD $390) per month. About one-half of the
sample reports being of Indian nationality. Over 99% of the employee sample are male. The average
worker is around 35 years old. The data contained written information on workers’ occupations, which
were coded using the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system by at least two research
assistants.16 We then categorize outdoor occupations as construction, grounds maintenance, and
farming. The remainder, including jobs in manufacturing and service, are categorized as indoor
occupations. About half of the sample works in jobs that are likely to be outdoors, mainly construction.
      Time in the UAE (in months divided by 10) is a time-varying variable, calculated using the
first job that the worker had in the UAE based on data from the Ministry of Labor. There are two
demographic variables available in the MOL that are not available in the financial firm data. We have
information on religion and education for those salary observations that merge successfully with the
MOL data. About a third of migrants report being Muslim and about 40% have high education, which
private firm.
  14
     See Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2 in Naidu, Nyarko and Wang (2014) for a comparison of the distribution of types
of individuals that merge successfully between the MOL data and the payroll data. The earnings distributions of the
unmatched MOL data and the data that matches into the payroll data is extremely similar for the lower end with some
differences at the upper end of the earnings distribution suggesting that the payroll data is more oriented towards the
median and lower end of the salary distribution of migrants and under-represents migrants at the high end of the earnings
distribution.
  15
     Nominal earnings and remittances are converted to real terms using the monthly consumer price index published by
the UAE National Bureau of Statistics. These numbers are in 2007 dirham.
  16
     If the two research assistants coded the written entry differently, we had another round of coding done independently
by a third research assistant. In many cases, the written description was empty or too ambiguous to be coded. For
example, a job description of “Worker” did not receive an SOC code. We thank Mengxing Lin, Marton Pono, and Cheng
Xu for assistance in this coding.



                                                           12
we define as higher than intermediate education, which is some secondary school education without
having completed the secondary school degree.
        Panel D presents the coefficient of variation for earnings and remittances within the duration of
a work contract.17 The coefficient of variation for monthly earnings disbursed to migrant workers is
around 0.3. This indicates a substantial amount of month-to-month variation in earnings on each work
contract. Thus, it is not the case that these workers are paid the same amount each month despite
being on long-term work contracts. Our conversations with people in the UAE suggest that this
variation is at least partially driven by monthly variation in hours worked and includes higher wages
for overtime. There is also substantial month-to-month variation in the amount remitted. In fact,
the coefficient of variation on remittances is even higher than on earnings. This provides some initial
evidence that workers are not smoothing the amount remitted in response to income fluctuations.
        The characteristics of individual-months in the sample that are successfully merged with both
remittance and earnings information are in column 3 of Table 1. This is the main sample used in
the analysis in the paper. The final merged sample that includes all of the demographic variables in
addition to remittances and salaries includes 553,647 observations. The average amount remitted per
month in the merged sample is much smaller than the average amount in the full remittances sample.18
The average salary in the merged sample is higher than in the full payroll sample by about 120 dirham
(33 USD) per month.19 The summary statistics suggest that on average migrants are remitting about
85% of their monthly income. This is reasonable given that food and lodging is provided by employers
for many migrant workers. The characteristics of individuals in the merged sample are fairly similar
to the full payroll sample along all of the observation characteristics. The merged sample has slightly
more outdoor workers and their time in the UAE is slightly lower than in the sample with earnings
only.
        Analysis with the merged sample of positive observations of both remittances and salary requires
the assumption that months in which observations of either salary or remittance information (or both)
are missing are similar to observations in which we observe both sets of information. This may be
true for several reasons. First, they may be remitting through the company in our data but do not
  17
     Unlike the other panels of the table, Panel D includes one observation per worker contract.
  18
     Panel B of Appendix Figure A.1 shows the kernel densities of log monthly remittances for observations that merge
with the salary data as compared with observations that do not merge with the salary data. The figure shows that the
unmerged observations tend to be more extreme.
  19
     Panel A of Appendix Figure A.1 shows the distribution of log monthly earnings in the merged sample and in the
unmerged payroll sample. While the distributions are fairly similar, the sample of merged observations is slightly shifted
to the right. This suggests that individuals that use UAExchange for remittances have slightly higher earnings than
other individuals employed in firms that use UAExchange for payroll processing.




                                                           13
provide their customer registration number at the time of the transaction.20 Many observations of
remittances in the data contain neither a customer registration number nor a labor card identification
number. Second, it is possible that migrants use several firms for remittances and they are behaving
similarly but using another method of remittance in the months that we do not observe a remittance
in our data.
       However, another possibility is that when salary or remittance is not observed in a month for an
individual, this reflects the fact that the individual was not paid or did not remit. In other words, it
may be more accurate to treat some of the missing observations as zero rather than missing. This may
be particularly likely to be true for remittances where individuals may not remit every month. Informal
conversations with foreign workers in the UAE suggest that they tend to remit once per month after
receiving their paychecks, but our observed data suggest that individuals remit less frequently than
once every month.
       We construct an alternative measure of salary where we replace the measure of salary in months
for which an individual is not observed to receive a salary disbursal with zero. This is only done
for months in which the individual receives a salary in both the previous calendar month and the
consecutive calendar month. Observations are kept as missing if the entire firm does not disburse a
salary in that month (as this suggests that they may have chosen to pay salaries out through another
method that month). Similarly, we also construct an alternative measure of remittances where we
replace the value of remittances in months for which no remittance transactions are observed in the
data with zero. This is only done for months between the time in which the first and last remittance
transactions are observed in the data. This approximately doubles the total number of matched
observations relative to the sample that is matched by positive observations of remittance transactions
and salary disbursals.
       Column 4 of Table 1 shows the characteristics of the sample with unobserved observations of
salary filled in as zero. Many of the characteristics of this sample are similar to the other merged
sample in terms of age, gender, firm size, Indian nationality, religion and tenure. The average salary
for this sample is 1561 dirham per month and the average amount remitted per month is 1326 dirham.
Finally, column 5 shows the summary statistics when we assume that unobserved observations of
remittances are zero. In this scenario, migrants remit about 60% of their income.
  20
   If they forget to bring their customer registration number, they can still remit but all of the information such as
name and address will need to be provided to the agent and typed into the system by the agent and they pay lower fees
when using their customer registration number.




                                                         14
5        Relationship between Income and Remittances

5.1       Baseline Estimates

We begin by examining whether remittances vary with fluctuations in earnings. More specifically,
we estimate the relationship between the logarithm of individuals’ earnings and the logarithm of the
amount that they sent in remittances. The relationship presented here is not necessarily the causal
impact of fluctuations in earnings on remittance patterns. For example, individuals may choose to exert
more effort, work more hours and receive higher earnings in months where they want to remit more
to their families.21 The results in this section provide the statistical relationship between earnings
and remittances whereas the subsequent analyses provide better identified estimates of the causal
relationship between earnings and remittances.
         The results are presented in Table 2. All the regressions include individual fixed effects, and year
fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the individual level.22 For each estimate, we present
a parsimonious specification as well as one that allows the effects of individual characteristics (age,
Indian nationality, male and an indicator for high education) to vary by year. Panel A includes only
those person-month observations where there is both a remittance transaction and a salary disbursal.
Panel B assumes that the migrant did not earn anything in months without a salary disbursal. Panel
C shows the results with the sample where the migrant does not remit anything in months where no
remittance is observed in our data.
         Column 1 of Table 2 (Panel A) presents the fixed effects estimates of the relationship between
salary and remittances in the sample in months where either remittances or salary are not observed
are dropped. The results indicate that higher salaries of 10% correspond with 3.3% more remittances.
All of the estimates in the table are significant at the 1% level. There are almost no differences in the
estimates with and without time-varying effects of worker characteristics. Thus, in the results in the
remainder of the paper, we focus on the parsimonious specification with individual fixed effects.
         Despite the fact that workers are on fixed contracts, there is substantial variation in their earnings
month-to-month that reflects variation in the hours that they have worked. The average absolute value
of the change in earnings from the previous month for the same individual is 20%. If we assume that
the variation in a worker’s earnings is driven primarily by circumstances that are outside of the control
    21
     This may be a reasonable assumption. Our conversations with managers and workers suggest that month-to-month
variation in earnings is driven by variation in hours worked and that the firm managers have much more power over
determining who gets additional hours than the workers do.
  22
     Appendix Table A.1 includes lags and leads in earnings. The estimated coefficient on the contemporaneous month
of earnings remains the same in magnitude and significance as without the leads and lags. The coefficients on the leads
and lags are relatively small.



                                                          15
of the individual worker, then the fixed effects estimate of the relationship between log earnings and
log remittances provides the income elasticity of demand for remittances.
         Panel B displays the fixed effects estimates that correspond with the sample in which the months
where salary disbursal is not observed are treated as months in which earnings equal zero.23 The
coefficients drop substantially. Within-person changes in earnings of 10% map into 0.5% higher re-
mittances. However, the results still suggest that fluctuations in earnings month-to-month correspond
positively to changes in the remittance behavior of migrant workers.
         Panel C shows the estimates in which unobserved remittance are treated as if there were no
remittances. Here the coefficient estimates increase substantially and suggest an earnings-remittance
elasticity that is close to one; each additional percent change in earnings maps into the same percent
change in remittances. While the results indicate the magnitude of the relationship between remit-
tances and earnings depends on the assumptions made about the months in which transactions are
not observed, the sign of the relationship remains the same and significant at the 1% level.
         The results suggest that month-to-month fluctuations in earnings correspond with fairly large
changes on the amounts that migrant workers remit each period. These results are consistent with a
number of models of remittances. We present a new estimate of the income elasticity of remittances
based on high frequency, administrative data. These estimates may be of interest to policy-makers
who are interested in leveraging remittances as a mechanism of improving the well-being of households
in developing countries. It provides an estimate of how remittances would respond to policies in more
developed countries that affect the earnings of migrants.
         One limitation of our data is that we need to make some assumptions regarding the implications
of months in which we do not observe earnings or remittance transactions. It is reassuring that the
positive relationship between month-to-month variation in earnings and remittances persists across
several assumptions about months in which payroll disbursal and remittance transactions are not
observed. The remaining analyses in the paper use the sample limited to observations where both
earnings and remittances are observed.


6        Seasonalities

This section explores whether some of the fluctuations in migrants’ earnings can be explained by
seasonal variation in labor demand and whether remittances move with these seasonal, anticipated
    23
   In the regressions in Panels B and C, the explanatory variable is the logarithm of earnings plus one. The results are
almost identical if we use the inverse hyperbolic sine.




                                                          16
fluctuations in earnings. While the vast majority of workers in the UAE are on multi-year contracts,
seasonal variation in demand can affect monthly earnings through the amount of hours worked.
       Figure 1 shows the coefficients corresponding to each month in a regression with individual and
year fixed effects where the omitted category is January.24 The dotted lines give the 95% confidence
interval. The corresponding regression output is shown in Appendix Table A.2, where the odd columns
display the full sample and the even columns display the observations where the individual has earnings
observations for all 12 calendar months. While there is unlikely to be seasonal selection given that
most workers are on multi-year contracts, we look at the sample with all 12 months to address the
possibility of seasonal selection. These estimates demonstrate that there is substantial variation over
months in both earnings and remittances. Earnings dip in September and October; in those months,
earnings are about 4% lower than in January. There are smaller dips in earnings of around 1.5% in
February and June. Earnings peak in December when they are almost 2% higher than in January.
       Panel B of Figure 1 displays the monthly coefficients for remittances. While there is substantial
month-to-month variation in remittances, the seasonal pattern does mimic the pattern in earnings.
Remittances decline fairly steadily from May to September. Similar to earnings, remittances are lowest
in September.


6.1     Ramadan

The most stark seasonal pattern in earnings occurs in September and October, and remittances are
also at their lowest point in September. The most likely explanation for this result is the Muslim
holiday of Ramadan. One implication of Ramadan for worker productivity is that adult Muslims are
required to fast from dawn to sunset for 30 days.25 As stipulated in the Federal Law Number 8 of
1980, the standard work day must be reduced by 2 hours during Ramadan in the UAE. Relatedly,
many retail businesses reduce the hours that they are open. Thus, the productivity of non-fasting
workers is likely to decline during Ramadan as well.
       While the timing of Ramadan varies year-to-year following the Islamic calendar, it includes at
least part of the month of August in all four years for which we have data. Given that payment occurs
on a monthly level and reflects the actual hours worked, payment received in September corresponds
with workers’ hours in August. Thus, our specification examines the impact of Ramadan on earnings
  24
     Appendix Figure A.2 shows the average of the logarithms of earnings and remittances by month. Unlike the regression
coefficients, these estimates do not remove individual and year fixed effects. The general patterns with the large troughs
in autumn are similar to those shown in Figure 1.
  25
     For example, Schofield (2014) demonstrates that fasting during Ramadan decreases the productivity of rickshaw
workers in India.




                                                           17
and remittances in the subsequent month. Ramadan spills over into September in 2009 and 2010 and
into July for 2012.
       We focus on the impact of the timing of Ramadan on earnings and remittances. The measure for
Ramadan is lag of the number of days of Ramadan in the month (divided by 10).26 The results are
presented in Table 3. The odd columns include the full sample while the even columns are limited to
the sample of individuals for whom we have an earnings observation for each of the 12 months. Panel
A shows that 10 days of Ramadan is associated with 1.2% lower earnings in that month relative to
months without Ramadan. Restricting the sample to individuals for which we have data covering the
twelve months does not have much effect on the estimates. Interestingly, the magnitude of the impact
of Ramadan on remittances is about twice as large. All of the estimates are significant at the 1% level.
       Panel B makes use of the fact that religion is available in MOL database. We look at the
interaction of the months covered by Ramadan and an indicator for whether the worker is Muslim.
While aggregate productivity falls during Ramadan, we expect the productivity of Muslims to fall
even more due to fasting. Thus, the interaction provides an additional test of whether the drop
in earnings that we see in this time period is in fact driven by Ramadan. Ten days of Ramadan
reduces the earnings of non-Muslim workers by about 0.6%. The impact of Ramadan is much larger
among Muslims, who experience an additional 1.8% drop in earnings on top of that during the holiday
compared to their non-Muslim counterparts. Non-Muslims reduce the amount of their remittances by
around 2% during Ramadan. Muslims further reduce the amount that they remit by an additional
1.4% and this is significant at the 5% level. Workers can anticipate the earnings reductions associated
with Ramadan, but they still reduce their remittances.
       Part of the difference in the effects on remittances between Muslims and non-Muslims may stem
from differences in consumption demand either by families at home or by the workers in the UAE
rather than declines in the migrants’ income during Ramadan. To examine this concern, we also look
at heterogeneity in the effects of Ramadan by the share of migrants who are Muslim in each migrant’s
country of origin.27 Families in countries without a substantial Muslim population and who are not
Muslim themselves are unlikely to experience changes in consumption demands around the time of
Ramadan. In contrast, consumption demands may change for Muslim families observing Ramadan or
for non-Muslim families who are in countries with a sizable Muslim population.28 Among a sample
  26
     Appendix Table A.4 presents results where Ramadan is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the lag of Ramadan
overlaps with at least part of the month.
  27
     In the top three countries of origin, more than 70% of Pakistani and Bangladeshi migrant workers in the UAE are
Muslim whereas about 15% of Indians are Muslim. There are also several countries with substantial number of migrants
in the UAE where almost none of the migrants are Muslim, such as Thailand.
  28
     For example, many non-Christians in the United States celebrate Christmas and buy presents for friends and family.



                                                          18
of non-Muslim workers in the UAE, we run the following regression for individual i in month t from
origin country j:


                    yijt = α0 + α1 Rit + α2 Rit × M uslimShrOriginj + δi + δt + ijt                             (1)


where Rit is an indicator for whether the month included Ramadan at all and M uslimShrOriginj
is the total share of migrants in the UAE from the migrant’s origin country who are Muslim.29 The
coefficient on α1 gives the impact of Ramadan when none of the migrants from a country are Muslim.
Adding α1 and α2 gives the total impact of Ramadan for workers from countries where all the migrants
in the UAE are Muslim.
      The results are presented in Table 4. If remittance patterns are driven by consumption demands
by workers’ families around Ramadan rather than by the declines in migrants’ earnings, then we would
not expect to see a fall in the remittances of non-Muslim workers from countries without a substantial
Muslim population. However, the results do not support this alternative hypothesis. Remittances
fall significantly (and follow the impact of Ramadan on earnings) for both Muslim and non-Muslim
workers from countries with no Muslim migrants in the UAE.
      Another possibility is that remittances and earnings fall because Muslims are more likely to
return home to visit for this holiday. Given that the regressions drop observations of months in which
either remittances or earnings are not observed in the data, this can only be consistent with the results
if they are only paid for part of the month because many workers are returning home for part of the
month, and they remit a smaller amount because they are carrying cash home with them. To test for
the possibility that travel by migrants during Ramadan is driving the patterns observed, Appendix
Figure A.3 presents the kernel density of the logarithm of earnings in the months of Ramadan as
compared with other months. The results demonstrate that the distribution of earnings shifts slightly
to the left during the Ramadan. If the drop in earnings and remittances were explained by a sizable
fraction of workers leaving the UAE for parts of the month that correspond to Ramadan, we would
expect the distribution of earnings during Ramadan to be bimodal with a cluster of workers earning
a small fraction of their usual salary rather than a shift in the whole distribution.
      Given that information about income drops associated with Ramadan is easy to verify by families
at home, this type of income fluctuation is considered public. Thus, the fall in remittances associ-
ated with Ramadan is consistent with the model of private information. Ramadan is also perfectly
  29
     We switch to an indicator for months of Ramadan because it is difficult to interpret the interaction between two
continuous variables. Appendix Table A.4 shows the parsimonious effects of the Ramadan indicator.




                                                         19
anticipated. Under the traditional version of the permanent income hypothesis, the fact that remit-
tances move with Ramadan rejects the idea that migrants smooth remittances over anticipated income
fluctuations.


7    Weather Shocks

There is a large literature that uses rainfall shocks as exogenous shocks to income to test for con-
sumption smoothing (Paxson 1992, Wolpin 1982). In addition to looking at rainfall, we consider heat
shocks in this context. We use daily temperature data from the World Meteorological Organization for
five cities in the UAE: Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Fujairah, Ras Al-Khaimah and Sharjah. Thus, variation in
weather is across both time and geographic space. We aggregate the daily information to the monthly
level to merge into the monthly level earnings disbursal information. We calculate an average maxi-
mum temperature that averages all of the maximum daily temperatures in that city and month. We
also calculate an average precipitation per month in each city by averaging across days in the month.
     In Figure 2, the dots and the squares display the average maximum temperature in Fahrenheit
and the average precipitation in inches across the months and cities in the data, respectively. The
bands around the dots and squares provide information on the variation across cities in temperature
and rainfall in each month. The upper band indicates the maximum value for a single city in that
month and the lower band indicates the minimum value for a single city. Temperatures in the UAE
are quite high in the summer with daily maximum temperatures exceeding 100 degrees Fahrenheit
from May to September. The bands show that there is considerable variation across cities over the
sample period. Rainfall is generally fairly low in the UAE with winter being wetter and March being
the month with the greatest rainfall in the sample period. There is even more variation in rainfall
across cities than there is in temperature. While the figure provides a sense of seasonal variation in
weather outcomes, the shocks are the deviations of the weather outcome in that city and month.
     We consider whether worker productivity, and their corresponding earnings, declines when the
weather conditions are extremely hot or when it rains. These weather shocks are likely to affect
the productivity of workers who are working outside. Many migrant workers are employed in the
construction sector where productivity has been found to be negatively affected by rain and heat
(Assaf and Al-Hejji 2006).
     To estimate the impact of weather shocks on the outcomes of migrant workers, we include city
by month fixed effects. The weather measure represents the deviation of a city’s weather realization
in that month from the average weather realization experienced in that city in that month. Thus, we


                                                 20
remove the impact of seasonalities and focus on weather shocks that deviate from standard seasonal
patterns in rainfall and temperature.
     The results are presented in Table 5. The independent variable is the shock in average precipita-
tion in Panel A and the shock in average maximum temperature in Panel B. The odd columns present
the results for the full sample of workers and the even columns present the results with the interaction
of the weather shock with an indicator for whether the worker is in an outdoor occupation. Appendix
Table A.3 shows the results where the independent variables are measured in the shocks to the days of
rainfall and the days where the maximum temperature fell into various ranges. The results are similar
with measuring weather shocks in days per month rather than average units (of heat or rainfall) per
month.
     The estimates in Panel A indicate that rainfall shocks correspond with a reduction in earnings.
A standard deviation increase in precipitation corresponds with a 1% fall in earnings and a slightly
smaller response for remittances. As shown in the odd columns of Panel B, increases in the shocks
to maximum temperature also reduce earnings and remittances. A standard deviation increase in the
maximum temperature corresponds with a 4% decline in earnings and a 12% drop in remittances.
     One important concern with the latter outcome is that variation in weather may affect consump-
tion demands within the UAE directly rather than working solely through the channel of weather. For
example, in very hot temperatures, workers may prefer to pay more to eat at air-conditioned restau-
rants rather than at cheaper restaurants. The next set of results help us examine whether the impact
of weather shocks on remittances is primarily driven by how the weather shocks affect earnings in
that month. We examine heterogeneity in the impact by whether the individual is working outside in
the even columns. The negative effect of rainfall shocks on earnings is significantly larger for outdoor
work as compared with indoor work. The interaction is negative but not significant at the standard
levels for remittances. While higher temperatures lead to significantly lower earnings and remittances
for workers in indoor positions, the negative effect is significantly larger for those working outdoors.
Overall, these results support the idea that the mechanism of the weather shocks is that it reduces
the amount of time that workers can be productive outside.
     The results suggest that remittances fall in response to these types of unanticipated, transitory
income shocks. Negative weather shocks are easy for families at home to verify and are considered
public. Thus, the results are consistent with the model of asymmetric information where households
at home are willing to receive lower remittances in months with extreme heat and rain. Whether the
income fluctuation is unanticipated as with the weather shocks or anticipated as with the seasonalities
does not affect the relationship between migrants’ earnings and remittances.

                                                  21
8        Labor Mobility Reform

We exploit a labor reform that was announced in December 2010 and implemented in January 2011
to examine the impact of a positive, unanticipated, permanent income shock on remittance behavior.
Prior to the reform, workers needed written permission, called a no objection certificate (NOC), from
their existing employer to change firms at the end of their multi-year work contracts. Without written
permission from their employers to change firms, workers could not directly change firms and either
had to sign a new multi-year contract with their existing firms or leave the UAE for at least six
months. The reform removed the NOC requirement at the end of the contract but made no changes to
the terms and requirements during a contract. Thus, the reform gave workers more bargaining power
with their employers by reducing the monopsony power of their existing employers. Naidu, Nyarko
and Wang (2014) demonstrate that this reform has a very robust, positive effect on the earnings of
existing workers.
         We begin by replicating the baseline analysis of the impact of the reform on workers’ earnings
within our sample of individuals for whom we also observe remittance transactions.30 Focusing on 7
periods of data around a contract expiration for each worker, we look at outcomes before and after
the reform as well as before and after the worker’s contract expires. Because the reform only applies
to workers after their contracts expire and after the implementation of the reform, we can identify the
causal impact of the reform with this difference-in-difference approach. More specifically, we estimate
the following:


 yit = β0 + β1 P ost2011 × P ostContractExpireit + β2 P ost2011 × ContractExpireit + δi + δt + it (2)


where P ost2011 is an indicator for the calendar periods after the implementation of the reform in
January 2011, P ostContractExpireit is an indicator for the three periods after an individual’s contract
expires and ContractExpireit is an indicator for the period that a contract expires. The regressions
also include year-month fixed effects and individual fixed effects. The estimates of β1 and β2 provide
information on whether the effects of contract expiration (estimated in a 7 month window around the
expiration) after the reform are different from the effects before the reform.
         The results are presented in Table 6. The first column shows that the reform led to an increase
in earnings of about 3.5% in the month of the contract expiration and 4% in the three months after
    30
    See Naidu, Nyarko and Wang (2014) for additional details on the reform, the estimation strategy and the robustness
checks.




                                                         22
the worker’s contract expired.31 We see that remittances also increase as a result of the reform. They
increase by about 12% in the three months after the worker’s contract expires, and by 6.5% in the
month of the worker’s contract expiration. While the estimates for remittances are larger in magnitude
than for earnings, they are not significantly different from the earnings effects.
         Unlike weather shocks and seasonalities which are transitory, the labor reform led to a permanent
increase in income. The results suggest that remittances move with this type of income change, indi-
cating that whether an increase in earnings is transitory or permanent does not affect the relationship
between earnings and remittances. This income shock is likely to be public as this reform increases
the average earnings of all migrant workers following their contract expiration. This is consistent
with the model of asymmetric information where remittances are payments associated with migrants’
observable income.


9        Time in the UAE

9.1       Empirical Strategy

So far, the income fluctuations that we have examined have been shocks that are likely to be publicly
known and relatively easy for families at home to verify. We now examine how migrants’ earnings
change with their time in the UAE. The approach taken is similar to estimations of the rates of
economic assimilation of immigrants in the literature. We estimate the following equation for individual
i in year-month t:


                                yit = β0 + β1 T imeinU AEit + δi + δT + it                                          (3)


where the dependent variable is either the logarithm of earnings or remittance of person i in month t.
The variable, T imeinU AE, is the number of months (divided by 10) that individual i has been in the
UAE at period t. We are interested in the coefficient, β1 , which provides the impact of an additional
10 months of time in the country. The regressions also include individual fixed effects as well as year
fixed effects and month fixed effects. Equation 3 assumes that the relationships between time in the
UAE and earnings and between time in the UAE and remittances are log linear. We examine the
validity of this assumption in two ways. First, we change the functional forms to include a quadratic
function of time in the country. Second, to allow for full flexibility in the relationships, we estimate
    31
    The magnitude of the effect is slightly different from those reported in Naidu, Nyarko and Wang (2014) because we
restrict the sample to those for whom we also have remittance transaction information, but the direction of the effect is
the same.



                                                           23
them with an indicator variable for each month that a worker has been in the UAE.
       A common concern with this type of estimation is that the returns to assimilation in the host
country are driven by selection into who stays (Borjas 1999). We do several things to address this
concern. First, in addition to running equation 3 on the full sample of migrants, we also estimate it
with a sample of migrants who are in their first multi-year contract. Given that migrants who leave
without completing a contract must pay for their airfare home while those costs are borne by the
firm for migrants who complete the full contract, the vast majority of migrants leave after a contract
expires rather than mid-contract. Thus, this sample restriction should minimize the effects of selection.
Second, we implement a bounding exercise to estimate the maximum effect that selection can have on
the estimates in Section 11.
       One advantage of our data is that the information about time in the UAE within the firm is
based on administrative records from the MOL on workers’ first employment visas in the UAE. Unlike
analyses that utilize survey data, the issue of measurement error is unlikely to be a large concern.
While time in the host country is likely to be highly correlated with employer tenure, we separate the
effects of firm tenure and time in the UAE in Appendix Table A.5.32 For the purposes of our analysis,
however, it is not important if the returns that we capture are specifically the returns to experience
in the country rather than within the firm.


9.2     Estimates of Time in the UAE on Income and Remittances

Figure 3 presents the fully flexible coefficient estimates of each separate month of time in the UAE.
The omitted category is the first month that the worker enters the UAE. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is the logarithm of monthly earnings. The figure shows a strong positive within-individual
relationship between time in the UAE and earnings. For most workers in the sample, the typical
contract is for 36 months. Thus, it is interesting that the increase in earnings happens fairly linearly
throughout that period; this suggests that growth in individuals’ earnings occurs within the life of
a labor contract. These estimates suggest that workers with more experience in the UAE either get
higher wages or more hours within a labor contract. In contrast, Panel B indicates a strong negative
within-individual relationship between experience in the UAE and remittances. Both panels provide
visual support for the assumption of a linear relationship.
       The results corresponding to equation 3 and to the quadratic specification are presented in Panel
  32
     T enure is defined as the number of months (divided by 10) that individuals have spent at their current firm. The
ability to identify both time in the UAE and firm tenure is driven by workers who change employers and for whom both
of their employers are in the payroll processing data. Controlling for tenure does not have much effect on the relationship
between experience in the UAE and earnings or remittances.



                                                            24
A of Table 7. Panel B displays the same estimates for the sub-sample of migrants in their first labor
contract in the UAE. According to the linear specification, controlling for time-invariant characteristics
of individuals, a 10-month increase in time in the UAE corresponds with approximately 1.7% higher
earnings. The estimates are significant at the 1% level and the magnitudes are economically large.
The estimates of the quadratic relationship and in the first contract-only sample are almost identical.
        The next two columns of Table 7 display the corresponding results where the dependent variable
is the logarithm of remittances. The relationship between time in the UAE on remittances is negative.
The linear specification suggests that each additional 10 months of tenure leads to a 9.6 percentage
point decline in the amount remitted. The quadratic specification suggests a slightly smaller impact of
an additional 10 months of time in the UAE (8.3%) compared to the linear specification. The impact
of time in the UAE on remittances is slightly smaller when we limit the sample to those in their first
contract.
        The previous results have shown that remittances move in the same direction as income changes
associated with seasonalities, weather shocks and the labor reform. However, the results here are quite
different. While earnings increase over time in the UAE, average remittances decline over time. This
result is consistent only with a model where remittance payments are part of income-sharing contracts
affected by asymmetric information.


9.3      Asymmetric Behavior Based on the Earnings-Tenure Profile

We examine an additional prediction of the framework in which migrants exploit private information
about the evolution of their earnings. While on average migrants’ earnings increase over time, there
is heterogeneity in this across individuals. Migrants who experience a negative earnings-tenure profile
have less incentive to hide this information than migrants who experience a positive earnings-tenure
profile. Given the literature that documents that wages are sticky downwards, it may be surprising that
earnings fall for a substantial number of migrant workers in the UAE. First, in informal conversations
with migrant workers in labor camps, some did mention that their earnings had fallen over time. We
think this is driven by a shift in hours or wages where good workers are given more overtime or higher
wages.33 Second, this correlation is between real earnings and time and workers’ earnings which may
be partially eroded by the lack of raises to adjust for inflation. Finally, this labor market is quite
unique, so it is possible that the features of labor markets that drive nominal wage rigidity, such as
efficiency wage stories, are not relevant here.
        We examine asymmetries in the impact of changes in time in the UAE on remittances by whether
 33
      We do not observe hours worked and cannot test this idea directly.


                                                           25
the individual experienced a positive or negative earnings-time profile. In other words, we estimate:


logYit = β0 + β1 T imeinU AEit × I(N egChange)i + β2 T imeinU AEit × I(P osChange)i + γi + δT + it (4)


where we include the interaction between time in the UAE, denoted by T imeinU AE, and a time-
invariant indicator for whether the person experienced a positive or negative correlation between
time in the UAE and earnings, denoted by I(P osChange) and I(N egChange), respectively.34 More
specifically, the correlation is calculated with the full earnings sample as the within-person correlation
coefficient between all of the observations of time and earnings for individuals who had three or more
months of earnings data. We also include individual fixed effects and indicators for month and for
year. The coefficient, β1 , provides the impact of each additional 10 months of time in the UAE for
individuals for whom the correlation between time and earnings is not positive. The coefficient, β2 ,
provides the impact of each additional 10 months for individuals for whom the correlation is positive.
      The main concern with interpreting the results of this equation is that there are time-varying
unobservable differences between the two types of individuals that affect their remittance behavior
directly. For example, if individuals with a positive time-earnings profile are in white collar jobs that
allow them to bring their families to the UAE and they do so after several periods to allow themselves
to settle into their jobs, then an observed drop in remittances over time simply reflects the fact that
they remit less when their nuclear family moves to the UAE.
      We consider this by comparing individual characteristics and the initial economic behavior of
the two groups of workers in Table 8. Column 1 refers to individuals whose earnings decrease over
time and column 2 to individuals whose earnings increase over time. The first three rows refer to the
initial contract terms. While the differences in the initial terms of the contract are significant at the
5% level, the differences are economically small. For example, the difference in contract hours is 0.01
hours per day. Those whose earnings rise over time start with a contract salary that is about 4% higher
than those whose earnings fall over time. The difference in average contract length is less than one
month. The differences between the two groups in their demographic characteristics are economically
small and the difference in their initial remittance is not significant. The ex-ante similarities along
observable characteristics between the two types of workers may not be that surprising given that for
most workers in the UAE, firms (or the recruiting firms that they hire) screen workers before they
are given visas to enter the country. Thus, selection into the UAE is determined by the screening
  34
     These variables are defined by whether the raw correlation between all observations of earnings and time in the
UAE within the individual is positive or negative. The individual must have at least three observations of salary for this
correlation to be calculated.



                                                           26
process of firms in addition to the pool of applicants who apply to work in the UAE. In addition, the
rates of selection out of the UAE appear very similar for the two groups (Panel B). The probability
that a worker leaves the UAE in any given month is about 2% regardless of whether their earnings
are evolving up or down over time. Overall, the similarities between the two groups provide some
assurance for the idea that these workers are quite similar at the time that they start working in the
UAE, and that it may be unknown to the families at home whether the worker’s earnings will evolve
positively or negatively over time.
     Appendix Figure A.4 presents a histogram of the share of employees in firms with more than 10
workers with positive growth in earnings over time. The mass of the distribution is 50%. This suggests
that the positive or negative trends over time in earnings usually occur within a firm. In other words,
it is not the case that there are two types of firms, one that pays workers more over time and one
that pays them less. This provides additional support for the idea that whether a person earns more
over time or not is private information and not based on an observable characteristics like the firm at
which he is employed.
     When the dependent variable is the logarithm of earnings, by construction β1 must be negative
and β2 must be positive. This estimation provides magnitudes of the relationship between earnings
and time that are useful for evaluating the effects on remittances. The results are presented in the
first two columns of Table 9. For individuals for whom the correlation between their time in the UAE
and earnings is negative, each additional 10 months of tenure corresponds with a 10% decline in their
wages. For individuals for whom the correlation is positive, an increase in time in the UAE of 10
months maps into an average 11% increase in their wages.
     The next two columns of Table 9 provide the estimates of equation 4 with the logarithm of
remittances as the dependent variable. For individuals with a negative correlation between time and
earnings, remittances fall the longer the migrant stays in the UAE. Each additional 10 months in the
country corresponds with a decline in remittances of around 11%. This estimate is roughly similar
to the impact on earnings over time for this group. However, the relationship between remittances
and time looks quite different for individuals with a positive time-earnings profile. While time in
the UAE increases the total earnings of this group, more time spent in the UAE leads to very little
change in their remittances. An additional 10 months corresponds with 1.5% less remittances for
individuals whose earnings grow over time but this estimate is not significantly different from zero
with the inclusion of time-varying worker controls. In other words, while they earn more over time,
they remit about the same amount (or less) as the time that they spend in the UAE increases. This
implies that the share of income that is remitted declines over time.

                                                  27
        The results are consistent with the idea that migrant workers have private information about the
evolution of their earnings in the UAE, and that they share the burden with their families at home
when their long-run earnings decline. However, if their earnings evolve positively over time, they
continue to remit the same amount or less on average and do not pass along the extra earnings over
time abroad. This result is not consistent with the models of remittances as altruism or exchange.


9.4      Asymmetric Behavior Based on Home Connections

We consider the idea that individuals who have more connections to communities at home are less
able to hide growth in their earnings over time. Co-workers from the same community may have
information about how a person’s earnings evolve over time within the company and be able to report
this information to family members in the home country.
        The data include some information on the receiving location of the remittance. There is sub-
stantial variation in the type of information on the receiving location of the remittance over time,
country and over types of transactions. For many transactions, there is only country-level information
available. For migrants from India, we cleaned and coded a string variable that contained the state
that the remittance was sent.35 We then create a variable for home connections that is based on the
share of workers in the firm that are from the same state in India. To examine heterogeneity by these
home connections, we construct an indicator variable for whether a person’s connections are above
or below the median share of connections of 17%. For a different (and smaller) subset of remittance
transactions, we have a code identifying the district in which the transfer was received. Thus, we are
also able to examine whether the person’s share of co-workers from the same district is above or below
the median for this measure, 7%.
        One concern is that individuals who have more co-workers from the same home state or district are
different than individuals with few co-workers who are from the same home community. We examine
baseline characteristics of individuals who have more or fewer connections within their firm to their
home state and to their home district in columns 4 through 9 of Table 8. For most characteristics,
there is either very little statistical or economic difference between individuals with more connections
to their home state as compared with those with fewer connections. For example, while the difference
in the initial contract hours is statistically different between the two home state groups, a difference of
0.01 hours (or less than one minute) per day is economically not important. The one exception with
the home state groups is that the difference in initial remittance between the two groups is statistically
significant and not that small in magnitude at about 6%. However, it is reassuring that this difference
 35
      Migrants in the UAE are from 36 states and territories in India.


                                                            28
is not significant in the home district groups. For the home district groups, there is a sizable and
significant difference in initial contract salary. However, for both of these characteristics, the bias may
work in the opposite direction as those with fewer connections remit more in their initial remittance.
Finally, as shown in Panel B, the rates at which workers exit the UAE is similar regardless of whether
they had more or fewer connections to their home state within their firm.
     In Panel A of Table 10, we present the impact of time in the UAE on the outcomes by both
home connections and whether the individual’s earnings increase or decrease over time. Panel B
shows the same results where home connections are defined at the district level rather than at the
state level. In columns 1 and 2, the relationships between time in the UAE and earnings for positive
and negative changers are not significantly different for those with more or fewer home connections.
This is reassuring as it suggests that differences across these two groups, those with more or fewer
home connections, do not have different gradients in earnings over time.
     The results in columns 3 and 4 are particularly interesting. They show that remittances decline
significantly over time regardless of the degree of home connections for workers whose salaries decline
over time. However, as shown in column 4 of Panel A, for workers whose salaries increase over time,
remittances increase for those who have more state connections. For individuals with fewer state
connections, the magnitude of the effect is much smaller and not significantly different from zero
(Panel A colum 3). The asymmetry in behavior by connections is also present when we measure
connections at the district level in Panel B. Those who earn more over time remit significantly less
when they have fewer connections to their home within the firm (column 3) and remit an amount that
is not significantly different from zero if they have more connections. While the gap in behavior by
above or below median connections for those with a positive earnings-time gradient exists for both
measures of connections, the effect of more than median connections is positive (and significant) with
the home state measure but it is not positive and significant with the home district measure. This is
most likely explained by the fact that the thresholds for above or below median are different depending
on the measure.
     These results suggest that having more co-workers from the same area may reduce the likelihood
that migrant workers can fully hide whether they are earning more over time in the UAE. This can
occur because co-workers provide monitoring. An alternative interpretation is that having more co-
workers from the same place maintains the affinity that migrants have with their families over time.
The latter interpretation can still be consistent with the model of asymmetric information where
migrants have less incentive to exploit private information about income gains when they feel more
affinity to their home communities. These results provide additional support for the theory that the

                                                    29
best model for the remittance behavior of migrants in the UAE is one where remittances are viewed
as an income-sharing payment to families at home. Thus, they are less likely to remit upward changes
in income that can be hidden from their families at home, but they are willing to pass along negative
long-run changes in income to their families.


10     Alternative Explanations

The main alternative explanation is that the observed patterns in remittances are driven by demand
shocks experienced by households at home rather than by variation in the earnings of migrants in the
UAE. Among the income fluctuations that we consider easy to observe by households at home, this
concern is largest for the estimates exploiting seasonalities and Ramadan. As discussed previously,
it may be plausible that households at home, especially those who also observe Ramadan or are
from Muslim countries, experience a change in their demand for remittances around this holiday.
For example, if consumption drops during Ramadan for households in the sending countries, this
may explain the drop in remittances. However, the results of Table 4 that look at the remittance
behavior of non-Muslim migrants from areas without a large Muslim population do not support this
interpretation.
     Reassuringly, demand shocks by households at home cannot explain the variation in remittance
patterns using weather shocks and the labor reform in the UAE. It is very unlikely that random
deviations from standard seasonal patterns in rainfall and heat in a city and month in the UAE
are correlated with demand shocks of households at home in different sending countries. Similarly,
the identification strategy examining the effects of the labor reform use individual variation in the
expiration dates of their contracts, and it seems very unlikely that the contract expiration dates
which depend only on the start date of the contracts three years in advance are correlated with
contemporaneous demand shocks of households at home.
     A second (and related) alternative hypothesis is based on the idea that variation in the earnings
of migrants reflects their own choice in how many overtime hours to work or how much effort to exert.
In conversations with migrants in the UAE, our field work suggests that low skilled migrants do not
have much power in determining the amount of overtime that they work. Unfortunately, we cannot
observe hours worked per month or other measures of effort by the workers. This concern is most
relevant for the estimates of the returns to time in the UAE for workers whose earnings evolve up
and down over time. It is possible that workers with a positive earnings-time gradient are exerting
more effort over time while workers with a negative earnings-time gradient are exerting less effort over


                                                  30
time. The patterns in effort may be driven by different expectations for sharing with their families at
home. There may be two groups of individuals - those with sharing rules that involve a proportion of
their earnings and those who are expected to remit a fixed amount each month. Similar to predictions
of models of sharecropping where sharecroppers have less incentive to exert effort than tenants that
pay fixed rent, the former group under income sharing contracts may exert less effort and earn and
remit less while the latter group under fixed payment contracts may exert more effort because they
can keep all of the earnings from their additional effort. This alternative explanation is consistent
with the results of Table 9 but not with those of Table 10. Under the alternative story where the
results for earnings and remittances are driven by effort and different types of contracts, co-workers
from the same home area do not provide information to families at home; more co-workers from the
same home area may instead increase a worker’s affinity towards home. In this case, variation in the
number of co-workers from the same place should affect both earnings and remittances. However, this
is not consistent with Table 10, which demonstrates that having more co-workers from the same place
at home does not affect earnings but has asymmetric effects on remittances.
       Finally, it is possible that the estimates of the returns to time in the UAE reflect changes in
the consumption patterns of migrants. Over time, migrants begin to acclimate to the higher prices
for goods and services in the UAE or feel less affinity for family members at home. This mechanism
leads them to keep more of their income for their own consumption in the UAE. This is consistent
with the results of Table 7.36 Under this alternative story, the observability of income does not matter
and we should see any positive income fluctuations correspond to lower remittances the longer that a
migrant remains in the UAE. Appendix Table A.6 shows that this is not empirically true; the signs
on the interactions between time in the UAE (measured in months divided by 10 in column 1 or as
an indicator for having been in the UAE more than 21 months in column 2) and log earnings are very
small in magnitude and positive rather than negative. In other words, migrants do not remit less of
all fluctuations in their income the longer that they stay in the UAE.


11      Selection out of the Data

A key potential concern for the estimates presented in the paper is that selection of migrants out of
the sample could affect the results. We address this concern by imputing earnings and remittances of
individuals who leave the payroll sample using a method proposed by Manski (1990). The key idea
  36
     For this alternative story to be consistent with Tables 9 and 10, heterogeneity by individual type and home connections
reflects very specific, unobserved differences across individuals in their consumption demands in the UAE rather than
variation in the incentives and ability to hide income.



                                                            31
is to examine whether the results are robust to fairly extreme assumptions about the individuals who
are exiting the sample.
        We make the assumption that the earnings of individuals in the periods in which they exit the
sample would look like the 90th and the 10th percentile of their log earnings distribution. Similarly,
we constructed imputed values for remittances by assuming that if they had remained in the sample,
they would have remitted an amount equivalent to the 90th and 10th percentile of the distribution
of their log remittances. This strategy maximizes the potential impact of sample selection on the
estimates.
        The baseline estimates that use the imputed values of remittances and earnings are displayed in
Table 11. Column 1 presents the estimates where we assume that individuals who attrite from the
data set would have had earnings and remittances in the 90th percentile, and column 4 presents the
estimates were the attriters would have had earnings and remittances in the 10th percentile. The
estimates are similar to each other and just slightly larger than the baseline fixed effects estimate
presented in Table 2. The stronger assumption is that individuals who leave the data would have 10th
percentile earnings and 90th percentile remittances, or 90th percentile earnings with 10th percentile
remittances. These estimates are displayed in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Under these assumptions,
the earnings elasticity of remittances is smaller than when we ignore selection effects. However, the
economic magnitude is still substantial; a 10% increase in earnings corresponds with a 2 to 2.5%
increase in remittances. These estimates are significant at the 1% level.
        The other estimates presented in the paper are robust to addressing selection with this bounding
exercise. Addressing selection with this bounding exercise has the largest impact on the estimates
of the impact of time in the UAE on remittances. This is not surprising as those who remain in
the UAE for longer amounts of time are likely to be different from individuals that choose to exit
the country. We display the impact of time in the UAE (filled in to assume that migrant workers
stay on an additional period) on the imputed values of remittances and earnings in Panel A of Table
12. The relationship between time in the UAE and earnings remains positive and significant at the
1% level in the case of the high earnings imputations and at the 10% level in the case of the low
earnings imputations. Similarly, the relationship between time and remittances remains negative and
significant at the 1% level. After adjusting for selection, being in the UAE for an additional 10 months
corresponds with 1.6% to 3.2% lower monthly remittances.
        Panel B of Table 12 presents the impact of selection on the asymmetries in the earnings-
remittances relationship given by equation 4.37 The range of the effects of selection on these estimates
 37
      We simply forward fill the indicator for whether there is a positive correlation between earnings and time and do not


                                                             32
is fairly tight and the conclusions remain unaltered. Individuals who stay longer in the UAE remit
less if their earnings tends to decline; for each additional 10 months in the UAE, they earn 8 to 10%
less and remit 6 to 9% less. However, for individuals for whom their earnings increases over time, their
earnings increase by about 7% for each additional 10 months that they remain in the UAE but their
remittances remain constant over time.


12     Conclusion

Using new high frequency data on earnings and remittances, we investigate the impact of fluctuations
in earnings of migrant workers on their remittance behavior. Our results show that remittances move
with several types of short-run fluctuations in income, including seasonalities, which are expected, and
weather shocks, which are unexpected. They also move in the same direction as a long-run shock to
income associated with a labor reform that gave workers more bargaining power with their employers.
These results are consistent with several models, including remittances as altruism, exchange payments
or payments in an income-sharing contract under asymmetric information. The estimates of the impact
of the labor reform are not consistent with a model of altruism in which migrants attempt to smooth
consumption over time.
      While the labor reform was a public shock to the permanent income of migrants, we also examined
a change to permanent income that is privately known by the migrant. We identified that on average
earnings tend to increase steadily over time and remittances tend to fall steadily over time. This
suggests that migrants may treat fluctuations that can be hidden differently from those that are easily
observed by families at home. Furthermore, this result is driven by a particular type of asymmetric
behavior; those who earn less over time remit less but those who earn more over time remit about
the same amount. This result is only consistent with the model of asymmetric information driving
remittance payments.
      These results have several policy implications. International migration represents an important
opportunity for migrants to increase their income, and remittances are a large source of transfers for
many households in developing countries. Understanding the motivations for why migrants remit can
be important for policies that may affect the remittance behavior of migrants. It can also be important
for devising appropriate financial products for migrants. The results may be relevant in thinking about
products that give migrants more control over the assets that they remit, such as those studied in
Ashraf et al. (2014).
re-calculate this indicator based on the additional imputed month.



                                                         33
     Migrants in the UAE are remitting the majority of their earnings each month. At the same
time, their behavior reflects the idea that when given the opportunity, they prefer to keep more of the
earnings that are hidden from their families. While we show some suggestive evidence that networks of
workers from the same place in the home country may provide monitoring, more research is needed to
fully understand the complex interplay between migrants and families at home. While the data used
in our analysis only includes information on earnings, remittances and demographics of the migrants
in the UAE, the ability to combine data on the migrant’s side with high frequency information about
the families of the migrants at home would be instrumental in furthering this research agenda.




                                                  34
References
 [1] Ambler, Catherine. “Don’t tell on me: Experimental evidence of asymmetric information in
     transnational households”. Working paper, 2014.

 [2] Ashraf, Nava. “Spousal control and intra-household decision making: An experimental study in
     the philippines”. The American Economic Review, pages 1245–1277, 2009.

 [3] Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, A Martı́nez and Dean Yang. “Remittances and the problem of
     control: A field experiment among migrants from el salvador”. Review of Economics and Statistics
     (forthcoming), 2014.

 [4] Assaf, Sadi A and Sadiq Al-Hejji. “Causes of delay in large construction projects”. International
     journal of project management, 24(4): 349–357, 2006.

 [5] Borjas, George J. “The economics of immigration”. Journal of economic literature, pages 1667–
     1717, 1994.

 [6] Borjas, George J. “The economic analysis of immigration”. Handbook of labor economics, 3:
     1697–1760, 1999.

 [7] Carroll, Christopher D. “A theory of the consumption function, with and without liquidity
     constraints”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, pages 23–45, 2001.

 [8] Chaudhuri, Shubham and Christina Paxson. “Consumption smoothing and income seasonality
     in rural india”. Working paper, 1993.

 [9] Cox, Donald. “Motives for private income transfers”. The Journal of Political Economy, pages
     508–546, 1987.

[10] De Weerdt, Joachim, Garance Genicot and Alice Mesnard. “Asymmetry of information within
     family networks”. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP10125, 2014.

[11] Dustmann, Christian and Josep Mestres. “Remittances and temporary migration”. Journal of
     Development Economics, 92(1): 62–70, 2010.

[12] Forstenlechner, Ingo and Emilie Jane Rutledge. “The gcc’s “demographic imbalance”: Percep-
     tions, realities and policy options”. Middle East Policy, 18(4): 25–43, 2011.

[13] Friedman, Milton. Theory of the Consumption Function. Oxford & IBH Publishing Company,
     1957.

[14] Goldberg, Jessica. “The lesser of two evils: The roles of social pressure and impatience in con-
     sumption decisions”. Working paper, 2010.

[15] Grigorian, David A, Tigran A Melkonyan and J Scott Shonkwiler. “Garbage in, gospel out?
     controlling for the underreporting of remittances”. IMF Working Papers, pages 1–19, 2008.

[16] Human Rights Watch. “Island of happiness: Exploitation of migration workers on saadiyat island,
     abu dhabi”. May 2009.

[17] Jacoby, Hanan G and Emmanuel Skoufias. “Testing theories of consumption behavior using
     information on aggregate shocks: Income seasonality and rainfall in rural india”. American
     Journal of Agricultural Economics, 80(1): 1–14, 1998.


                                                 35
[18] Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Whitfield Ozier. “Does africa need a rotten kin theorem? experimental
     evidence from village economies”. Working paper, 2012.

[19] Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri. “The consumption response to income changes”. Annu. Rev.
     Econ., 2(1): 479–506, 2010.

[20] Kapur, Devesh and Randall Akee. “Remittances and rashomon”. Center for Global Development
     Working Paper, (285), 2012.

[21] Kazianga, Harounan and Christopher Udry. “Consumption smoothing? livestock, insurance and
     drought in rural burkina faso”. Journal of Development Economics, 79(2): 413–446, 2006.

[22] Khandker, Shahidur R. “Seasonality of income and poverty in bangladesh”. Journal of Develop-
     ment Economics, 97(2): 244–256, 2012.

[23] LaLonde, Robert John and Robert W Topel. Economic impact of international migration and
     the economic performance of migrants, volume 1B. Elsevier, 1997.

[24] Lucas, Robert EB and Oded Stark. “Motivations to remit: Evidence from botswana”. The
     Journal of Political Economy, pages 901–918, 1985.

[25] Manser, Marilyn and Murray Brown. “Marriage and household decision-making: A bargaining
     analysis”. International economic review, pages 31–44, 1980.

[26] Manski, Charles F. “Nonparametric bounds on treatment effects”. The American Economic
     Review, 80(2): 319–323, 1990.

[27] McElroy, Marjorie B and Mary Jean Horney. “Nash-bargained household decisions: Toward a
     generalization of the theory of demand”. International economic review, pages 333–349, 1981.

[28] Naidu, Suresh, Yaw Nyarko and Shing-Yi Wang. “Worker mobility in a global labor market:
     Evidence from the united arab emirates”. NBER Working Paper 20388, 2014.

[29] Nations, United. “Number of international migrants rises above 232 million”, September 2013.

[30] Paxson, Christina H. “Using weather variability to estimate the response of savings to transitory
     income in thailand”. The American Economic Review, pages 15–33, 1992.

[31] Paxson, Christina H. “Consumption and income seasonality in thailand”. Journal of political
     Economy, pages 39–72, 1993.

[32] Rapoport, Hillel and Frédéric Docquier. “The economics of migrants’ remittances”. Handbook of
     the economics of giving, altruism and reciprocity, 2: 1135–1198, 2006.

[33] Schofield, Heather. “Economic costs of low caloric intake: Evidence from india”. Working Paper,
     2014.

[34] Seshan, Ganesh and Robertas Zubrickas. “Asymmetric information about migrant earnings and
     remittance flows”. In “Qatar Foundation Annual Research Conference”, 1. 2014.

[35] Wolpin, Kenneth I. “A new test of the permanent income hypothesis: the impact of weather on
     the income and consumption of farm households in india”. International Economic Review, pages
     583–594, 1982.

[36] Yang, Dean. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial Flows,
     1970-2002”. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 8(1): 1–43, June 2008.

                                                 36
[37] Yang, Dean. “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence from
     Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks”. Economic Journal, 118(528): 591–630, April 2008.

[38] Yang, Dean. “Migrant Remittances”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 129–52, Summer
     2011.

[39] Yang, Dean and HwaJung Choi. “Are remittances insurance? evidence from rainfall shocks in
     the philippines”. The World Bank economic review, 21(2): 219–248, 2007.

[40] Yang, Dean, A Martı́nez et al. “Remittances and poverty in migrants home areas: Evidence from
     the philippines”. 2005.




                                               37
          Figure 1: Coefficients from Estimates of Month on Earnings and Remittances
                                                (a) Log Earnings




                                              (b) Log Remittances




 Notes: The estimated coefficients associated with each calendar month is given by the solid line. The regression
includes individual fixed effects and year indicators. The omitted category in the regressions is January. The 95%
                                   confidence interval is given by the dashed lines.




                                                       38
                      Figure 2: Average Precipitation and Temperature by Month




Notes: The dots give the monthly average across all days and cities of the maximum daily temperature. The bands give
   the value associated with city-level maximum and minimum monthly average. The squares indicate the monthly
    average precipitation across all days and cities. The corresponding bands provide the city-level maximum and
                                         minimum precipitation in that month.




                                                        39
      Figure 3: Coefficients from Estimates of Time in the UAE on Earnings and Remittances
                                                   (a) Log Earnings




                                                 (b) Log Remittances




    Notes: The estimated coefficients associated with each month of time in the UAE is given by the solid line. The
     regression includes individual fixed effects, year indicators and month indicators. The omitted category in the
regressions is the first month of work. The 95% confidence interval is given by the dashed lines. The estimation sample
                                  is restricted to time in the UAE of up to 70 months.




                                                          40
                                Table 1: Summary Statistics

                          Remittance     Earnings                  Unobserved     Unobserved
                                                       Merged
                            Only           Only                    Earning as     Remittance
                                                       Sample
                           Sample         Sample                      Zero         as Zero
                         (1)        (2)       (3)                      (4)            (5)
 Panel A: Financial Firm Variables
 Remittances           2668.2               1327.2                   1326.2          912.0
                      (3069.5)             (1383.5)                 (1386.0)       (1305.4)
 India                  0.501      0.487     0.496                    0.495          0.543
                       (0.500)    (0.500)   (0.500)                  (0.500)        (0.498)
 Monthly Earnings                 1433.7    1559.8                   1528.6         1474.1
                                 (1305.6)  (1214.9)                 (1222.3)       (1150.8)
 Age                               35.52     36.31                    36.30          36.05
                                  (8.722)   (8.734)                  (8.729)        (8.617)
 Male                              0.991     0.992                    0.992          0.993
                                 (0.0926)  (0.0895)                 (0.0898)       (0.0845)
 Observations        34997684    6521954    553647                   564968         927158
 Panel B: Constructed Financial Firm Variable
 Outdoor Occupation                0.446     0.516                    0.518          0.547
                                  (0.497)   (0.500)                  (0.500)        (0.498)
 Observations                    2944509    269761                   277017         467419
 Time in UAE                       2.477     2.109                    2.109          2.134
                                  (1.858)   (1.618)                  (1.618)        (1.620)
 Observations                    5267546    537836                   548226         895480
 Panel C: MOL Variables
 Muslim                            0.340     0.323                    0.324          0.313
                                  (0.474)   (0.468)                  (0.468)        (0.464)
 High Education                    0.388     0.404                    0.404          0.382
                                  (0.487)   (0.491)                  (0.491)        (0.486)
 Observations                    5351152    551052                   562362         922782
 Panel D: Within Contract Coefficient of Variation
 CV Earnings                       0.278     0.295                    0.304          0.295
                                  (0.195)   (0.173)                  (0.179)        (0.173)
 CV Remittances                              0.700                    0.700          1.124
                                            (0.478)                  (0.478)        (0.583)
 Observations                     547572    112357                   112342         112668
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Remittances and earnings are in real 2007 dirham.




                                              41
 Table 2: Fixed Effects Relationship between Log Earnings and Log Remittances

                                          (1)        (2)
                   Panel A: Merged Sample
                   Log(Earnings)       0.325**    0.326**
                                        [0.005]    [0.005]
                   Worker Controls        No         Yes
                   Observations        573132     543655
                   Adjusted R2           0.404      0.404
                   Panel B: Unobserved Earnings as Zero
                   Log(Earnings)       0.046**    0.046**
                                        [0.002]    [0.002]
                   Worker Controls        No         Yes
                   Observations        584976     554688
                   Adjusted R2           0.391      0.391
                   Panel C: Unobserved Remittances as Zero
                   Log(Earnings)       1.027**    1.028**
                                        [0.012]    [0.012]
                   Worker Controls        No         Yes
                   Observations        957764     904375
                   Adjusted R2           0.176      0.175
                  Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in
                  parentheses. +, *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
                  and 1% levels, respectively. The regressions include indi-
                  vidual fixed effects, year fixed effects and a constant term.



              Table 3: Effects of Ramadan on Income and Remittances

                                            Log Earnings               Log Remittances
                                      Full Sample All Mons          Full Sample All Mons
                                           (1)         (2)               (3)       (4)
 Panel A: Ramadan Effects
 Days Ramadan/10          -0.012**                     -0.010**        -0.023**   -0.024**
                           [0.001]                      [0.001]         [0.002]    [0.002]
 Observations              573132                       359908          573132     359908
 Adjusted R2                0.714                        0.704           0.392      0.360
 Panel B: Ramadan × Muslim Effects
 Days Ramadan/10           -0.004*                      -0.002         -0.015**   -0.018**
                           [0.002]                      [0.002]         [0.004]    [0.004]
 Muslim × Ramadan Days/10 -0.020**                     -0.019**        -0.020**   -0.019**
                           [0.003]                      [0.003]         [0.006]    [0.007]
 Observations              233204                       159700          233204     159700
 Adjusted R2                0.720                        0.708           0.392      0.363
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *, ** denote sig-
nificance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions include year fixed effects,
individual fixed effects and a constant term.



                                               42
Table 4: Effects of Ramadan on Income and Remittances by Muslim Share in Country of Origin

                                                             Log Earnings       Log Remittances
                                                                  (1)                  (2)
       Ramadan                                                 -0.011*              -0.031**
                                                                [0.005]              [0.012]
       Ramadan X Muslim Share in Origin Country                 -0.001               -0.038
                                                                [0.019]              [0.052]
       Observations                                             129283               129283
       Adjusted R2                                               0.722                0.417
      Notes: Sample restricted to non-Muslim workers. Robust standard errors clustered by in-
      dividual in parentheses. +, *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respec-
      tively. Regressions include year fixed effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.




                Table 5: Impact of Weather Shocks on Income and Remittances

                                                Log Earnings          Log Remittances
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
              Panel A: Rainfall Shocks
              Precipitation           -0.356**           -0.305**    -0.266**     -0.364*
                                       [0.034]            [0.067]     [0.078]     [0.155]
              Precipitation × Outdoor                     -0.170*                  -0.005
                                                          [0.078]                 [0.183]
              Observations           563312               267432     563312       267432
              Adjusted R2             0.715                0.698      0.392         0.371
              Panel B: Heat Shocks
              Maximum Temperature   -0.003**             -0.003**    -0.010**    -0.017**
                                     [0.001]              [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.002]
              Temperature × Outdoor                      -0.001**                -0.001**
                                                          [0.000]                 [0.000]
              Observations                   563312       267432     563312       267432
              Adjusted R2                     0.714        0.698      0.392        0.372
              Mean of Outcome                 7.172        7.160      6.992        6.958
              Standard Deviation              0.598        0.588      0.956        0.962
             Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *,
             ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions
             include fixed effects for year, city-month and individual and a constant term.




                                                   43
    Table 6: Impact of a Labor Reform on Income and Remittances

                                           Log Earnings      Log Remittances
                                               (1)                 (2)
 Post Reform X Post Expiration                0.040+              0.117*
                                              [0.024]             [0.056]
 Post Reform X Contract Expiration            0.035**             0.065*
                                              [0.013]             [0.033]
 Observations                                  56057               56057
 Adjusted R2                                   0.010               0.010
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *, **
denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions in-
clude year-month fixed effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.




  Table 7: Estimates of Time in the UAE on Income and Remittances

                          Log Earnings             Log Remittances
                         (1)       (2)              (3)       (4)
        Panel A: Full Sample
        Time in UAE    0.017** 0.018**            -0.096**    -0.086**
                       [0.002]   [0.003]           [0.005]     [0.007]
        Time in UAE  2           -0.000                        -0.002*
                                 [0.000]                       [0.001]
        Observations   543903    543903            543903      543903
        Adjusted R2     0.719     0.719             0.400       0.400
        Panel B: First Contract Sample
        Time in UAE    0.018** 0.050**            -0.079**    -0.055**
                       [0.003]   [0.005]           [0.006]     [0.011]
        Time in UAE  2          -0.008**                      -0.006**
                                 [0.001]                       [0.002]
        Observations   496266    496266            496266      496266
        Adjusted R2     0.727     0.727             0.404       0.404
       Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in paren-
       theses. +, *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
       respectively. Regressions include year fixed effects, month fixed
       effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.




                                      44
                                           Table 8: Summary Statistics by Individual Type

                                    Changes over Time           Home State Connections                Home District Connections
                              Negative   Positive     Diff      Less     More       Diff              Less       More      Diff
      Panel A: Individual Characteristics (Time-Invariant)
      Initial Contract Salary  1130.98    1182.72 -51.74∗ 1276.49      1299.07 -22.58∗               1186.55      1263.93    -77.38∗
                              (1021.02) (1037.71)            (971.51) (1078.17)                     (1118.89)    (1042.44)
      Initial Contract Hours     8.02       8.03    -0.01∗      8.01      8.03    -0.01∗               8.02         8.03      -0.00
                                (0.18)     (0.19)              (0.13)    (0.16)                       (0.18)       (0.16)
      Initial Contract Length   34.13      33.35     0.79∗     30.41     32.41    -2.00∗              32.76         32.38     0.38
                                (6.32)     (7.90)             (11.09)    (7.94)                       (8.39)       (8.03)
      Initial Remittance       1163.08    1113.59   49.49    1039.88    973.97    65.91∗             1212.11      1117.16     94.95
                              (1007.40) (983.03)             (963.12) (874.54)                      (1001.78)     (958.23)
      Muslim                     0.40       0.37     0.03 ∗     0.18      0.20     -0.02               0.44          0.42     0.02
                                (0.49)     (0.48)              (0.39)    (0.40)                       (0.50)       (0.49)




45
      India                      0.55       0.55     -0.00      0.96      0.97    -0.01∗               0.46         0.51      -0.04∗
                                (0.50)     (0.50)              (0.20)    (0.16)                       (0.50)       (0.50)
      Age                       35.04      35.05     -0.01     35.25     35.05      0.20              34.30        34.59      -0.29
                                (8.63)     (8.62)              (8.83)    (9.01)                       (8.38)       (8.77)
      Male                       0.99       0.99      0.00      1.00      0.99     0.01∗               0.99         0.97      0.01∗
                                (0.10)     (0.10)              (0.03)    (0.08)                       (0.12)       (0.17)
      Dubai                      0.33       0.34    -0.01  ∗    0.34      0.39    -0.04∗               0.33         0.37      -0.05∗
                                (0.47)     (0.47)              (0.47)    (0.49)                       (0.47)       (0.48)
      Observations              19188      18659                4741      5499                         1428         5837
      Panel B: Time-Varying Variables
      Exit UAE                  0.021      0.019    0.002∗     0.025     0.021    0.004∗               0.018       0.016     0.002∗
                               (0.144)    (0.136)             (0.157)   (0.145)                       (0.134)     (0.125)
      Observations             346684     284916               90199    125714                         26123      165058
     Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. * denotes significance at 5% level. The sample in Panel A includes one observation per
     person, while the sample in Panel B includes all observations per person.
Table 9: Asymmetries in the Effects of Time in UAE on Income and Remittances

                                      Log Earnings         Log Remittances
                                     (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)
        Time X Neg Changes        -0.096** -0.103**       -0.106** -0.106**
                                   [0.003]    [0.013]      [0.006]  [0.024]
        Time X Pos Changes         0.114** 0.108**        -0.016**  -0.014
                                   [0.002]    [0.013]      [0.006]  [0.024]
        Worker Controls              No         Yes          No       Yes
        Observations               535254    507812        535254   507812
        Adjusted R2                 0.728      0.730        0.408    0.409
       Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +,
       *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Time
       in UAE refers to the number of months that they have been in the UAE
       divided by 10. Regressions include year indicators and month indicators,
       individual fixed effects and a constant term.


 Table 10: Asymmetries in the Effects of Time in UAE and Home Connections

                                      Log Earnings         Log Remittances
        Home Connections:      Less   More      Less                    More
                               (1)     (2)      (3)                      (4)
        Panel A: State-Level Home Connections
        Time X Neg Changes -0.110** -0.106** -0.088**                 -0.056**
                             [0.007] [0.008]  [0.017]                  [0.021]
        Time X Pos Changes 0.075** 0.106**     0.002                   0.045*
                             [0.007] [0.008]  [0.017]                  [0.020]
        Observations          64929   65014    64929                    65014
        Adjusted R 2          0.043   0.043    0.042                    0.031
        Panel B: District-Level Home Connections
        Time X Neg Changes -0.080** -0.109** -0.173**                 -0.096**
                             [0.007] [0.010]  [0.018]                  [0.026]
        Time X Pos Changes 0.115** 0.127** -0.072**                    -0.036
                             [0.006] [0.010]  [0.018]                  [0.025]
        Observations          47495   43519    46791                    42480
        Adjusted R 2          0.043   0.042    0.011                    0.004
       Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +,
       *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Time
       in UAE refers to the number of months that they have been in the UAE
       divided by 10. Regressions include year indicators, month indicators, in-
       dividual fixed effects and a constant term.




                                          46
Table 11: Impact of Selection on the Relationship between Earnings and Remittances

                               Log Remittances High        Log Remittances Low
                                 (1)        (2)              (3)        (4)
        Log Earnings High      0.391**                     0.248**
                               [0.004]                     [0.004]
        Log Earnings Low                  0.203**                     0.383**
                                          [0.004]                     [0.004]
        Observations           771635     771635           771635     771635
        Adjusted R2             0.435      0.423            0.428      0.439
       Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *,
       ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions
       include year fixed effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.


        Table 12: Impact of Selection on the Estimates of Time in the UAE

                                Log Earnings                 Log Remittances
                               High      Low                 High      Low
                                (1)       (2)                 (3)       (4)
          Panel A: Time in UAE
          Time in UAE        0.014**   0.005+               -0.016**    -0.032**
                              [0.003]   [0.003]              [0.005]     [0.006]
          Observations        771642   771642                771642      771642
          Adjusted R2          0.701     0.716                0.432       0.419
          Panel B: Asymmetric Effect
          Time X Neg Changes -0.102** -0.084**              -0.085**    -0.057**
                              [0.003]   [0.003]              [0.006]     [0.006]
          Time X Pos Changes 0.074** 0.071**                 -0.010      -0.004
                              [0.003]   [0.003]              [0.006]     [0.006]
          Observations        604021   604021                604021      604021
          Adjusted R2          0.705     0.721                0.434       0.419
        Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +,
        *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Time
        in UAE refers to the number of months that they have been in the UAE
        divided by 10. Regressions include year indicators, month indicators, in-
        dividual fixed effects and a constant term.




                                            47
       ONLINE APPENDIX - FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY


A      Theoretical Appendix
A.1     Models of Altruism
Models of altruistic remittances posit that migrants get utility from the consumption of household
members at home. We present a model that adapts Lucas and Stark (1985) and Rapoport and Docquier
(2006). Consider a migrant who maximizes his own utility with respect to the amount remitted:

                                         um = u[cm (w − r), ah uh (ch )]                                               (5)

where the migrant’s consumption, cm , depends on w, the migrant’s earnings in the host country, less
r, the amount remitted to the household at home. The altruism weight attached to the household at
home is given by ah .
      Consumption of the household at home is given by ch = c(y + r) where y is the earnings of
household members at home. A migrant chooses a level of r to maximize his utility, and two predictions
result: ∂r/∂w > 0 and ∂r/∂y < 0. Given our data, one testable implication of the model of altruism
is that remittances should rise and fall with the earnings of the migrant.38 Under a model of pure
altruism, remittances should move with income regardless of whether income is observable by others
or not.

A.2     Models of Consumption Smoothing with Altruism
Models of altruism suggest that migrants treat the consumption of household members at home sim-
ilarly to their own consumption in the host country (adjusted by an altruism weight). Under the
permanent income hypothesis, migrants should attempt to smooth the marginal utility of consump-
tion over short-run fluctuations in income (Friedman 1957, Carroll 2001).39 The key empirical pre-
dictions of this model are that consumption should respond to unpredictable income shocks but not
to predictable, transitory income changes. If remittances finance consumption of households at home,
altruistic migrants should smooth their remittances over anticipated fluctuations in earnings.

A.3     Exchange Motives
Exchange-based models of remittances consider remittances as a method whereby migrants pay for
some type of service at home, such as taking care of the migrants’ children or elderly parents. Similarly,
an exchange-based model may be such that remittances represent a repayment for the loans used to
finance the migrant’s international move or the migrant’s human capital investments.40
     We present an outline from Rapoport and Docquier (2006) of the Cox’s (1987) exchange motive
model of remittance where migrants (and households at home) have no altruistic motives and migrants
want to buy a service, X. The utility function of the migrant, denoted by m, and of the household,
denoted by h, is given by V i (C i , X) where i = m, h. The migrant’s utility is increasing in X at
  38
     The other interesting implication is that remittances should fall with an increase in income of the household at home,
but we do not have the data to explore this.
  39
     The model relies on a number of assumptions, including that credit markets work perfectly such that individuals can
borrow and lend at the same interest rate and quadratic preferences. Common extensions to the standard model relax
some of these assumptions to allow for a failure of the credit market and buffer stock savings (Carroll 2001). We do not
consider this idea in this paper because we do not observe cash-in-hand.
  40
     While the model below would not apply exactly to a loan repayment, migrants want to remit and pay down the debt
when they experience positive income fluctuations and are able to pay less of the debt when they experience negative
income fluctuations. Again the observability of income would not matter.


                                                            48
a decreasing rate while the household’s utility is decreasing in X at an increasing rate. The latter
assumes that it is costly for the household to provide X and there is increasing disutility from this
effort. For the migrant to participate in the exchange, the maximal amount that he is willing to remit,
denoted by X, is such that: V m (I m − Rmax ; X) = V m (I m ; 0). Applying the implicit function theorem
yields the result that Rmax increases with the migrant’s income. Like with the model of altruism,
the exchange model predicts that remittances should increase with the migrant’s income but that the
observability of that income should not matter.41


B      Data Appendix
B.1    Merging Payroll Disbursals and Remittance Transactions
We received hundreds of text files that represented two separate data sets on remittance transactions
and payroll disbursals. The salary data is at the year-month level with occasional cases (less than 5%)
in which the same individual receives multiple payments in a single calendar month. We aggregate
those numbers to the total earned in that month. The remittance data is a transactions level data set
and individuals can choose to remit at any frequency that they desire. However, the fee associated
with remittances is a flat rate per remittance. The mean and median number of remittances per month
in the data is one. Thus, in cases where there is more than one remittance in a calendar month, we
aggregate those up to the monthly level to match with the salary disbursal data. Thus, the final data
set is a panel of individuals at the monthly level.
      The identifiers used in the salary data set are generated by the firm and called customer regis-
tration numbers. These numbers are also available for some observations in the remittance data, and
we begin by linking remittance transactions and earnings disbursals using the employee registration
number. Of the observations that remain unlinked, we next use the labor card identifier, which is a
government issued identifier that is unique for every worker-contract, to match remittances and earn-
ings. While the labor card identifer is not directly associated with earnings disbursals, we are able to
link 95% of the employee registration numbers in the salary disbursal data set to an employees data
set that contains their labor card identification number as well as some characteristics of the worker,
such as age, country of origin and gender.

B.2    Merging the Payroll and Remittance Data with the MOL Data
Both the MOL data on labor contracts of migrant workers and the payroll processing records contain a
UAE government issued identifier called the labor card id number. This numeric identifier is associated
with each individual’s contract. When workers change employer or sign a new contract with an existing
employer, they receive a new labor card and a new labor card id number. We use this identifier to
match the two data sets. We lose 107,698 individuals in the payroll processing data set who have
missing, non-numeric or incomplete identifiers, driven by the fact that some individuals in the payroll
processing data set do not provide their labor card id. Some individuals provide the company with
their passport number or a driver’s license, but the labor card id is used in the vast majority of cases.
We are able to match 553,375 individuals in the payroll processing data with their contract information
in the MOL data set. There are 25,883 individuals present in the payroll processing data that are not
matched into the MOL data set. This reflects the fact that some migrant workers, including domestic
workers and those working in the freezone areas of the UAE, fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry
of the Interior rather than the MOL.


  41
    The exchange model has a distinct prediction from altruism; under the exchange model, remittances can increase
with the incomes of the households at home.


                                                       49
Appendix Table A.1: Impact of Lags and Leads of Earnings on Log Remittances

                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)
   Log(Earnings)             0.323**     0.324**    0.334**     0.339**      0.335**
                             [0.005]     [0.006]    [0.005]     [0.006]      [0.007]
   Lag1 Log(Earnings)        0.044**     0.046**                            0.051**
                             [0.004]     [0.005]                             [0.005]
   Lag2 Log(Earnings)                    0.023**                            0.028**
                                         [0.005]                             [0.005]
   Lag3 Log(Earnings)                     0.004                              0.009+
                                         [0.005]                             [0.005]
   Lead1 Log(Earnings)                              -0.028**    -0.031**    -0.033**
                                                     [0.004]     [0.005]     [0.006]
   Lead2 Log(Earnings)                                           0.018**    0.023**
                                                                 [0.004]     [0.005]
   Lead3 Log(Earnings)                                           0.007+       0.011*
                                                                 [0.004]     [0.005]
   Observations               523609     428683      540938      480236      363033
   Adjusted R2                 0.404      0.403       0.404       0.399       0.396
  Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *, ** de-
  note significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The regressions include
  individual fixed effects, year fixed effects and a constant term.




                                           50
Appendix Table A.2: Effects of Seasonalities on Income and Remittances

                          Log Earnings                Log Remittances
                   Full Sample All Months        Full Sample All Months
                        (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)
  February          -0.015**       -0.012**         -0.007       -0.001
                     [0.002]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  March               0.006*         -0.001          0.005        0.003
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  April                0.003         0.006*        -0.012+       -0.005
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  May               -0.008**        -0.008*         0.014*      0.022**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.008]
  June              -0.017**       -0.018**        -0.015*       -0.006
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.008]
  July                -0.002       -0.005+        -0.033**      -0.030**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  August              0.006*         0.004        -0.030**      -0.029**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  September         -0.043**       -0.040**       -0.061**      -0.059**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  October           -0.038**       -0.043**       -0.029**      -0.028**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  November          -0.016**       -0.022**       -0.022**      -0.020**
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  December           0.018**       0.017**           0.003        0.007
                     [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.006]      [0.007]
  Observations       573132         359908          573132       359908
  Adjusted R2          0.715         0.704           0.391        0.360
 Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *,
 ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions
 include year fixed effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.




                                      51
Appendix Table A.3: Estimates of the Impact of Weather (in Days) on Income and Remittances

                                                Log Earnings      Log Remittances
                                                    (1)                 (2)
                 Panel A: Rainfall Shocks
                 Days Any Precipitation            -0.003∗∗∗           -0.005∗∗∗
                                                    [0.000]             [0.001]
                 Observations                       563312              563312
                 Adjusted R2                         0.714               0.392
                 Panel B: Heat Shocks
                 Days Max Temp 70-80                -0.000             -0.005**
                                                    [0.001]             [0.002]
                 Days Max Temp 80-90                -0.001             -0.007**
                                                    [0.001]             [0.002]
                 Days Max Temp 90-100               -0.001             -0.011**
                                                    [0.001]             [0.002]
                 Days Max Temp 100-110              -0.001             -0.011**
                                                    [0.001]             [0.002]
                 Days Max Temp Over 110            -0.003**            -0.015**
                                                    [0.001]             [0.002]
                 Observations                       563312              563312
                 Adjusted R2                         0.714               0.392
               Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses.
               +, *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
               Regressions include fixed effects for year, city-month and individual
               and a constant term.


            Appendix Table A.4: Effects of Ramadan on Income and Remittances

                                  Log Earnings                      Log Remittances
                            Full Sample All Mons                 Full Sample All Mons
                                 (1)          (2)                     (3)       (4)
           Panel A: Ramadan Effects
           Ramadan           -0.029**      -0.026**                -0.060**        -0.065**
                              [0.002]       [0.002]                 [0.004]         [0.005]
           Observations       573132        359908                  573132          359908
           Adjusted R2         0.715         0.704                   0.392           0.361
           Panel B: Ramadan × Muslim Effects
           Ramadan           -0.013**      -0.011**                -0.046**        -0.053**
                              [0.003]       [0.004]                 [0.008]         [0.009]
           Ramadan X Muslim  -0.042**      -0.040**                -0.034**         -0.035*
                              [0.005]       [0.006]                 [0.013]         [0.014]
           Observations       233204        159700                  233204          159700
           Adjusted R2         0.720         0.708                   0.392           0.363
          Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *, ** de-
          note significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Regressions include
          year fixed effects, individual fixed effects and a constant term.



                                                 52
Appendix Table A.5: Estimates of Time in the UAE and Firm Tenure on Income and Remittances

                                                    Log Earnings        Log Remittances
                                                    (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)
            Time in UAE                           0.030* 0.049*        -0.056** -0.026
                                                  [0.012] [0.024]       [0.017]  [0.036]
            Time in UAE2                                   -0.002                -0.004
                                                           [0.003]               [0.004]
            Tenure                                -0.014 -0.032         -0.041* -0.060+
                                                  [0.012] [0.024]       [0.017]  [0.035]
            Tenure2                                         0.002                 0.002
                                                           [0.003]               [0.004]
            F-Test: Time & Time2 (p-value)                  0.012                 0.001
            Observations                          543903 543903         543903   543903
            Adjusted R2                            0.719    0.719        0.400    0.400
           Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. +, *, ** de-
           note significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Tenure refers to the
           number of months that they have been with the firm divided by 10. Regressions
           include year indicators, month indicators, individual fixed effects and a constant
           term.




Appendix Table A.6: Relationship between Log Earnings and Log Remittances by Time in the UAE

                                                                  (1)        (2)
                      Log Earnings                              0.324**    0.323**
                                                                [0.008]    [0.005]
                      Log Earnings × TimeinUAE                   0.000
                                                                [0.003]
                      Log Earnings × I(Time>21 Months)                     0.003**
                                                                           [0.001]
                      Observations                              543903     543903
                      Adjusted R2                                0.421      0.421
                   Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by individual in paren-
                   theses. +, *, ** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
                   respectively. Regressions include year-month indicators, individ-
                   ual fixed effects and a constant term.




                                                  53
Appendix Figure A.1: Kernel Density of Log Earnings and Log Remittances
                             (a) Log Earnings




                           (b) Log Remittances




                                   54
Appendix Figure A.2: Average Earnings and Remittances by Month
                        (a) Log Earnings




                       (b) Log Remittances




                               55
           Appendix Figure A.3: Kernel Density of Log Earnings by Ramadan Months




Appendix Figure A.4: Kernel Density of Firms’ Share of Workers with Positive Changes over Time




                                              56
