                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




POWER TO CHOOSE? AN ANALYSIS OF CONSUMER INERTIA IN THE RESIDENTIAL
                       ELECTRICITY MARKET

                                           Ali Hortaçsu
                                      Seyed Ali Madanizadeh
                                         Steven L. Puller

                                       Working Paper 20988
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20988


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We thank the University of Chicago Energy Initiative, EI@Haas, and NSF PSERC and NSF SES award
#1426823 for generous financial support. We are grateful for data assistance from Kelly Brink, Robert
Manning, Calvin Opheim, and Jess Totten. We thank Tim Brennan, Severin Borenstein, Koichiro
Ito, Mar Reguant, Nancy Rose, Catherine Wolfram and numerous seminar participants for very useful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ali Hortaçsu, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L. Puller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Power to Choose? An Analysis of Consumer Inertia in the Residential Electricity Market
Ali Hortaçsu, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L. Puller
NBER Working Paper No. 20988
February 2015
JEL No. D8,L0,L5

                                             ABSTRACT

Many jurisdictions around the world have deregulated utilities and opened retail markets to competition.
However, inertial decisionmaking can diminish consumer benefits of retail competition. Using household-
level data from the Texas residential electricity market, we document evidence of consumer inertia.
We estimate an econometric model of retail choice to measure two sources of inertia: (1) search frictions/
inattention, and (2) a brand advantage that consumers afford the incumbent. We find that households
rarely search for alternative retailers, and when they do search, households attach a brand advantage
to the incumbent. Counterfactual experiments show that low-cost information interventions can notably
increase consumer surplus.


Ali Hortaçsu                                        Steven L. Puller
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Chicago                               Texas A&M University
1126 East 59th Street                               3046 Allen
Chicago, IL 60637                                   College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER                                            and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu                               puller@econmail.tamu.edu

Seyed Ali Madanizadeh
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
seyedali@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
The deregulation of formerly regulated utilities has brought about more choice for energy
consumers. Across the world, electricity and natural gas consumers increasingly have the
ability to choose their retail provider. For example, households in over a dozen U.S. states
and over one-half of households in Europe have retail choice in electricity and/or natural gas.
Consumers who previously purchased services from a utility are allowed to buy from other
retailers at prices that are not regulated. This creates new markets where entrant retailers
procure wholesale energy and market that energy to customers. This expansion of retail
choice has been touted to have several benefits. Creating competition for the provision of
utility services can lead to more competitive pricing in the short-run. In addition, introducing
competition can create incentives to provide customers with new value-added services.
    However, choice frictions can diminish the benefits of retail choice. Households who never
have had the “power to choose” may not exercise the option to select an alternative lower-
priced energy retailer. For example, households may not actively acquire information about
other energy retailers, even if that information would indicate that “better” options exist.
Alternatively, households may value the brand name of the incumbent – the old utility – and
this may reduce the amount of switching to new entrant retailers. Both of these sources of
choice frictions can reduce consumer gains of retail choice.
    In this paper, we study a particular retail choice program to measure the size of choice
frictions and to understand the underlying mechanisms. The Texas residential electricity
market provides an excellent setting to investigate retail choice. Beginning in 2002, residen-
tial electricity customers in Texas were allowed to choose their retail provider. Initially, all
households were by default assigned to the incumbent. In every subsequent month, house-
holds had the option to switch to one of several new entrant electricity retailers. In order to
inform consumers and provide transparency to the search process, the Public Utility Com-
mission of Texas created a website – www.powertochoose.com. This website was intended to
create “one stop shopping” where households can search all retail options and switch to an
alternative provider.
    Aggregate data from this market suggest strong evidence of consumer inertia. Figure 1
plots the prices being charged by both the incumbent and new entrant retailers. Although
prices varied over time, the incumbent’s price was consistently higher than several of the
new entrants.1 This suggests that households could reduce their electricity bills by switching
    1
    The rise in prices in fall 2005 was caused by a run-up in wholesale electricity prices, which was largely
driven by a spike in natural gas prices that resulted from supply-side disruptions from Hurricane Katrina.


                                                     1
from the incumbent to a new entrant retailer. However, Figure 2 shows that the incumbent
held on to its market share leadership throughout the first four years of the market. The
incumbent share only gradually eroded over time, and even after more than four years of
retail choice, the incumbent’s market share was over 60%. As we show in section 3.1, the
majority of households did not switch away from the incumbent, even though they would
have significantly reduced their electricity bills. Switching to a new entrant retailer – a
one-time action that would take approximately 15 minutes to complete – would reduce the
average electricity bill by around $100 in the first year, which represents about 8 percent of
electricity expenditures.
    This evidence of consumer inertia presents a puzzle for policymakers who are considering
the deregulation of retail energy. Why do consumers of a relatively homogeneous product
not switch to a lower-priced energy provider? And can retail policy be designed to reduce
consumer inertia? The goal of this paper is to understand the causes of the inertial behavior
of residential electricity consumers. We develop a model to distinguish between two different
mechanisms that could account for this inertia:

  1. Search frictions/inattention: Households may not choose to search for, or, equivalently,
     pay attention to offerings by other retailers. Even though www.powertochoose.com is a
     click away, the household may not be aware of it, or, although informed of the existence
     of alternatives, the household chooses not to expend the effort to pay attention.

  2. Incumbent Brand Advantage/Product differentiation: Even if a household is aware of
     other retailers, consumers may view the retailers, especially the incumbent, as verti-
     cally differentiated. For example, households may believe that service during power
     outage events or other dimensions of power quality could differ across retailers. Such
     beliefs, even if technically incorrect, may be a source of vertical product differentiation.
     Alternatively, consumers may believe that characteristics of customer support such as
     ease of paying bills vary across retailers.

    Understanding the mechanism driving the inertial behavior will inform the design of pol-
icy to enhance the consumer benefits of retail choice. For example, if search frictions are the
cause of observed inertia, then regulatory attempts to lower the cost obtaining information
about retail options could encourage switching and benefit consumers. On the other hand,
suppose that the primary reason households continue to purchase from the incumbent is
that they believe the incumbent provides more reliable power. (Technically, the delivery of
power and all metering operations are not a function of the retailer, but consumers may be

                                               2
unaware of this.) In this case, information campaigns to inform consumers that “it’s all the
same power” may induce households to choose lower price retailers. Finally, if the incumbent
brand effect diminishes with time, then the resulting inertia may be viewed by policymakers
as merely part of the consumer learning process during the transition from regulation to
retail competition: while consumers may start with the belief that the incumbent delivers
the superior product, over time they learn that “it’s all the same power.”
    In order to estimate the magnitude of each source of inertia, we develop an econometric
model of household choice that nests both sources of inertia within a two-stage discrete choice
framework. In each month, the household enters a two-stage process. In the first stage, the
household decides whether to consider an alternative retailer. If it does not consider alterna-
tives, then the household stays with its current retailer for the following month. However, if
it does consider alternatives, the household enters the second stage. In this stage, the house-
hold observes the retailers in the choice set (which are available on www.powertochoose.com)
and chooses the retailer that maximizes utility. In this second stage, we allow for verti-
cal product differentiation to enter the household’s decision, thus capturing potential brand
advantage by the incumbent. In section 4.3, we provide transparent conditions for the identi-
fication of model parameters from sample moments. We show that the first stage “decision”
probabilities that capture inattention are separately identified from the second stage “choice”
probabilities that capture incumbent brand advantage.
    We estimate the model using household-level choice data from the first four years of retail
choice in Texas. We find that both search frictions and the perception of brand differentiation
explain the market dynamics shown in Figures 1 and 2. First, search frictions/inattention
plays a role in the inertial behavior. We estimate that the average customer of the incumbent
only searches for retail options in about 2% of months, or approximately once every 4-5 years.
However, the seasonality of search generates interesting insights about the determinants
of consumer search in this market. Our model does not impose a structure on whether
households are forward-looking when deciding to consider alternatives or, equivalently, the
decision to not pay attention. Rather, households can either search in anticipation of seasonal
patterns in consumption or as a reaction to a large bill caused by high consumption. We do
not find evidence of forward-looking search activity: consumers are most likely to search in
the month after receiving a large bill, which is likely to occur in the summer in Texas.
    But inattention is not the only driver of inertia – the incumbent enjoys a very significant
brand effect. In the earliest years of retail choice, consumers value the incumbent’s brand
at about $60/month. However, this effect quickly diminishes over time and is estimated to


                                              3
be less than $15/month by the fifth year of retail choice. These findings suggest a model of
consumer learning where households who gather more experience with retail choice update
their prior beliefs about the quality of the incumbent relative to new entrant retailers.
    In order to evaluate the implications for policy, we simulate the effect of a low-cost
information intervention that targets each source of inertia. The information intervention
serves to reduce inattention and mitigate misperceptions about the quality differences across
retailers. This intervention would be akin to sending a flyer in the monthly bill telling
consumers two important pieces of information: (1) they can go to www.powertochoose.com
to view options and (2) that their power quality will be the same under any retailer. We
view this as a fairly low-cost policy intervention that combines a nudge with an information
treatment. This counterfactual is modeled as increasing the probability that a household
searches in a given month and reducing the relative size of the perceived incumbent brand
effect. We use model parameters to simulate this counterfactual experiment under various
interpretations of the incumbent brand effect, and we find that consumer surplus could
increase a hundred dollars per year or more for each household.
    A variety of countries have offered retail choice in utilities such as natural gas and elec-
tricity, and this has led to a mixed record on the number of consumers who switch away from
the incumbent.2 This paper contributes to the literature on studying retail choice in utili-
ties. In the most closely related paper, Giulietti et al. [forthcoming] estimate an equilibrium
model of search costs to explain price dispersion in the British electricity market. Retail
choice has been investigated in natural gas (Giulietti et al. [2005]) and telecommunications
(Miravete [2003] and Miravete and Palacios-Huerta [2014]). Our study of deregulated retail
markets expands upon a rich literature on deregulated electricity markets that has focused
on wholesale markets (e.g. Wolfram [1999], Borenstein et al. [2002], Bushnell et al. [2008],
Sweeting [2007], and Hortacsu and Puller [2008]).
    More generally, the phenomenon we study – frictions associated with allowing choice
in settings where consumers previously did not have options – is not confined to formerly
regulated utilities. In the healthcare sector, the prescription drug benefit program under
Medicare Part D provides the elderly with multiple private plan options rather than a single
plan specified by the government; likewise, health exchanges are an alternative to employer-
provided insurance.3 In primary education, parents in some jurisdictions are offered a menu
   2
      For an analysis of the merits of retail choice in electricity, see Joskow [2000]. For a review of experiences
in residential electricity choice and a representation of consumer search in such markets, see Brennan [2007].
    3
      For example, see Abaluck and Gruber [2011], Kling et al. [2012], Ketcham et al. [2012], and Dafny et al.
[2013].



                                                        4
of public schools that their children can attend rather than a single school that children are
zoned to attend.4 And in the arena of retirement savings, the traditional role of government in
pay-as-you-go systems has been replaced by privatized retirement planning where individuals
choose from among a set of privately managed funds.5
    Our paper is also related to a recent literature developing methods to estimate preferences
in settings where decisionmaking is influenced by search frictions/inattention. Hong and
Shum [2006], Hortacsu and Syverson [2004] and Moraga-Gonzalez and Wildenbeest [2008] are
early attempts that utilize aggregate market level data, and more recent efforts by e.g. Kim
et al. [2011], De Los Santos et al. [2012], De Los Santos et al. [2013], Honka [2014], Koulayev
[2014] and Honka et al. [2014] utilize detailed consumer level data on both choices and the
search process/consideration sets (as obtained, e.g., from website clicks) to test and estimate
models of consumer search. Our empirical setting is one where we observe the choices of
consumers, but do not observe their search process/consideration sets. However, we show
that the search friction/inattention component of consumer behavior and the “frictionless”
preference component can be separately identified under reasonable assumptions. Indeed, as
we show in our results section, applying standard discrete choice models to our data without
taking into account the presence of search frictions/inattention can yield distinctly different
and implausible estimates of preferences. Several papers in the recent empirical literature
on consumer inertia exploit the institutional feature that some customers are new to the
market while others are existing market participants (e.g. Handel [2013] and Luco [2014]).
In some settings, new customers face different sources of inertia than existing customers, and
comparing the decisions of these different groups allows for the identification of inertia. In
other institutional settings (including our setting), there may be relatively few new customers
to exploit for identification. As we describe below, our empirical strategy does not require
new customers, although it can incorporate new customers if they are present.


2       Retail Electricity Choice in Texas
Residential electricity customers in Texas, as in many states, historically were served by
vertically integrated utilities at regulated prices. The state was divided into separate service
territories, each with a vertically integrated firm. Beginning in 2002, residential electricity
customers in Texas were allowed to choose their retail provider. In January 2002, all cus-
    4
     See, for example, Hastings et al. [2010], Neilson [2013] and Hastings and Weinstein [2008] on school
choice and the effects of information provision.
   5
     See Hastings et al. [2013], Duarte and Hastings [2012] and Luco [2014].


                                                   5
tomers by default were assigned to a retail firm that was affiliated with the old incumbent
utility. In any subsequent month, a customer can switch to any other retailer at no cost.
Texas is not alone in this regulatory change – over a dozen U.S. states have opened the retail
electricity sector to competition.
    Any customer choosing to procure power from another retailer is entering into a financial
agreement with the retailer. Importantly, retail choice does not impact the technical opera-
tions of power provision. The former utility was split into a “lines” company and a retailer.6
The operations of all electricity transmission, local powerlines, and meters is now operated
by a regulated firm (with a different name) that is a separate business entity from the in-
cumbent retail firm. As a result, the quality of power service (e.g. outages) is independent
of the retailer chosen by a household. (It is possible that consumers were not aware of the
independence of operations, as we discuss below when interpreting our results).
    The incumbent’s price was regulated by the public utility commission and called the
“price-to-beat”.7 The incumbent could request an adjustment to this regulated rate up to
two times a year, however the size of the adjustment was indexed to natural gas input costs.
    The new entrant retailers are firms that procure power in the wholesale market and sell
retail power to residential customers. These retailers need not own any physical infrastruc-
ture to be market participants. Unlike the price of the incumbent, the prices of the entrant
retailers were not regulated. In 2002, most parts of Texas had between three to five entrant
retailers, and by the end of our sample in 2006 the choice set expanded beyond ten.
    Because of relatively low wholesale electricity prices during the first few years of retail
competition, the price-to-beat was considered to be higher than competitive prices for retail
power. This so-called “headroom” was an intentional market design feature by the regulatory
commission to ensure new retailers of sufficient price-cost margins to encourage entry. As a
result, entrant retailers were able to price more than one cent per kWh below the price-to-
beat. As we discuss below, this created the potential for average savings of about $12 per
month for switching away from the incumbent.
    Households had multiple sources of information on potential electric retailers. The most
salient source of information was a well-publicized website established by the state’s pub-
lic utility commission – www.powertochoose.com. A screenshot of the website is shown in
   6
    The generation (i.e. powerplant) sector had already been separated from the utility prior to 2002.
   7
    This rate was the only tariff allowed to be offered by the incumbent. Starting in 2005, the incumbent
could offer alternative rates to incumbent customers but were still required to offer the price-to-beat tariff.
By January 2007 after our sample period ends, the price-to-beat was lifted and the incumbent could charge
existing customers any rate.



                                                      6
Figure 5 in the Appendix. Consumers enter their zip code and view a list of all retailers.
Households could follow links on this website to switch to a new retailer in a process that
was online and relatively quick.
    The public utility commission sought to reduce the costs of switching in several ways.
First, the incumbent was not permitted to charge the customer to switch to another re-
tailer. In addition, a household switching away from the incumbent could switch back to
the incumbent’s price-to-beat later if it chose to do so. Regardless of the retailer chosen, a
household would still receive a single monthly bill that included charges for all electricity
services (energy, transmission, distribution, metering, and billing). Finally, any customer
moving to a different residence after the beginning of retail choice is required to choose a
retailer; the default is “no power”. Less that 1% of observations in our sample are “movers.”


3       Data
We study the retail choice behavior of all residential electricity customers in the service
territories covered by one of the formerly vertical integrated regulated utilities – TNMP.
This utility has the appealing feature that it was formed by several mergers and therefore
has customers spread throughout the state, including both urban and rural areas.
    We use monthly data on each of the approximately 192,000 residential meters in TNMP
territory from January 2002 until April 2006. For each meter, we have information on the
electric retailer used by the household and the electricity consumption for every month.8 We
use the meter address to match to Census block group data on demographics.
    We focus on customers of the six retailers that had at least 1% of the market at some
point in time from January 2002-April 2006.9 These six retailers are the incumbent, two
retailers that were new in the TNMP service territory but were affiliated with incumbents
from other parts of the state, and three retailers that were new to the Texas marketplace.
    We can calculate each household’s bill with high precision. For each household-month,
we have data on the household’s retailer and its electricity consumption. We match these
data to information on the tariffs that were charged by each retailer in a given month.10
    8
     Meter reads do not occur exactly on the last day of the month, so we perform an interpolation to estimate
the consumption occurring during each calendar month.
   9
     We exclude one entrant retailer with 1.1% market share for which no price data are available.
  10
     The Public Utility Commission of Texas collected monthly information on the rate plans offered by each
retailer in the different service territories. In many cases, the retailer offered only a single rate plan, so we
can precisely measure the monthly bill. In fact, only one rate plan was offered by four of the six retailers
that we model, including the incumbent. However, a complication is presented by the fact that two retailers


                                                       7
All of the tariffs for the new entrant retailers were 12-month fixed rates; early termination
fees were waived by law if the customer moved. The incumbent’s tariff was the regulated
price-to-beat which would only change if the incumbent requested an adjustment based on
natural gas prices. The tariff data allow us to calculate the total electric bill that a household
paid to its chosen retailer as well as counterfactually how much the household would have
paid to purchase the same amount of power from any of the other retailers.11
    Most of the retailers use multi-part, or non-linear, tariffs.12 Because the rate plan is an
important determinant of consumer choices, we need to choose an appropriate measure of
price that is likely to drive a household’s decision process. Two options are available – the
marginal price and the average price. The marginal price is likely to be the same for all
households with any given retailer because even those retailers with increasing block tariffs
have the highest block begin at a low usage level (400kWh/month). However, the average
price differs by (expected) consumption because all but one retailer employ non-linear tariffs.
    Although some theoretical work on non-linear tariffs assumes that consumers respond to
the marginal price, the assumption is problematic in this setting. Responding to the marginal
price requires households to have full information on the multi-part tariff function. This
assumption is not likely to hold in this market. First, powertochoose.com saliently displays
only the average price for customers consuming 1000kWh/month. Figure 5 in the Appendix
shows a sample screenshot. Consumers who want to gain more detailed information about the
tariff may click to download the “Facts Label” that is required to contain specific parameters
of a retailer’s service. The rate information on the Facts Label is the average price for
customers consuming either 500, 1000, or 2000 kWh. It is, in fact, impossible to recover the
shape of some of the nonlinear tariffs using this information.
    Recent empirical work suggests a second reason that marginal price may not be a suitable
metric of the price that affects consumer choice. Ito [2014] studies residential electric cus-
tomers in California who face different non-linear tariffs and finds evidence that customers
offer a menu of rate plans, and we have no information on which plan is chosen by a given household. In
these two cases, we chose the plan that was thought to be most popular by the analyst at the public utility
commission with responsibilities of overseeing the retail market.
   11
      We should note that about 6% of customers received discounts as part of a low-income program. However,
eligibility for this program was independent of retailer. We do not have data on which customers qualified
for this program, so we are forced to assume that these customers pay the standard tariff.
   12
      For the incumbent, the tariff is a fixed fee of $5.17 and then an increasing block tariff with the second
block beginning at 400 kWh per month. Three of the other retailers had similar tariff structures – fixed
fees around $5 and increasing block tariffs beginning in the middle of the sample period. One retailer had a
relatively higher fixed fee of $8.70 followed by a single block tariff. And the last retailer had a linear tariff –
no fixed fee and a single block tariff.



                                                        8
respond more to the average than to the marginal price. More generally, utility bills in the
U.S. typically display information that make the average price (total bill due divided by
usage) much more salient than the underlying non-linear tariff schedules.
    For this reason, when we develop a discrete choice model in section 4, we use the retailer’s
average price at 1000 kWh/month as the metric of price. Our rationale is two-fold. First,
the powertochoose.com website saliently displayed the average price at 1000 kWh as the
price used to sort retailers. Second, this usage level is close to the typical usage level of
customers in our sample – the average consumption is 1140 and the median consumption is
968 kWh/month.
    Figure 1 shows the evolution of the average price at 1000kWh by retailer in the TNMP
service territory. Rates ranged from about 8.5 to 14 cents per kWh from 2002-2006. Rates
were generally rising over the sample period with much of this driven by increases in the price
of natural gas, a primary determinant of wholesale electricity prices in Texas. In particular,
rates jumped several cents in late 2005 following the natural gas price spikes caused by
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.
    The average price of the incumbent (i.e. the price-to-beat rate) was systematically higher
than one or more other retailers throughout most of the sample period. In fact, by the Fall
of 2002, the first year of retail choice, at least one entrant offered an average rate at least
one-half cent cheaper than the incumbent in every month except one month in late 2005.
Moreover, in many months in the middle of the sample, an entrant’s average rate was over
one cent cheaper than the incumbent’s price-to-beat.
    Some households move between residences during our sample. In order to identify
movers, we use information on disconnect/reconnect status for each meter.13 The num-
ber of household-months involving a move comprises less than 1% of all observations in our
sample. We discuss how we include movers into the analysis in section 5.3.1.


3.1     Summary Statistics
First, we provide a basic description of observed switching behavior and the dollar magnitude
of expenditure reductions of purchasing from alternative retailers. These summary statistics
yield patterns that are consistent with results that arise from our model’s estimates in
  13
    Specifically, our data on monthly choice of retailer is reported for the meter/address. We do not know the
names of the customers on the bills, so we only directly measure when the residence is served by a different
retailer. To identify movers, we assume that the resident at the meter does not change unless there is a
disconnect of service. If electric service is disconnected for more than 30 days, we assume that new residents
occupy the residence. Otherwise, we assume the same residents are making decisions for the residence.


                                                      9
Section 5, thus providing support for our modeling assumptions.

3.1.1    Switching: Timing and Frequency

The incumbent maintained a large market share despite charging higher rates than entrant
retailers. Figure 2 shows the market shares of the six largest retailers over the first four
years of retail choice. The incumbent exhibited a slow erosion of market share throughout
the sample, but still maintained over a 60% share by April 2006. Two other retailers had
over a 10% share while the remaining retailers had less than a 5% share.
    The total number of switches per month was relatively low in the first year of retail choice
but then rose in the following three years. Figure 3 displays the total number of switches
from one retailer to another for each month. There appears to be a seasonality in switching
behavior with a peak in the summer months. The peak month for switching was July in
2002, June in 2003, and August in 2004 and 2005. Summer is the season with the highest
monthly bills due to the electric cooling; summer electric bills can be twice as high as winter
bills. This seasonality in expenditures may create greater saliency of electricity bills in a
household’s decisionmaking and could increase switching in the summer. Our model below
allows for seasonality in the decision to consider alternative retailers, so that we can explore
this channel of decisionmaking.
    Finally, we measure the frequency with which a household switches retailers. Approx-
imately two-thirds of households never switch away from the incumbent. Among those
households that do switch, most switch only once (21% of meters) or twice (9% of meters).
A histogram of the number of times that a given household switches retailers during the first
four years of retail choice is shown in the Appendix in Figure 6.14

3.1.2    Potential Savings from Switching

Either of the two potential sources of inertia – search frictions/inattention or an incumbent
brand effect – could cause consumers to purchase from the incumbent while lower-priced
retail options are available. A descriptive metric of inertia is the dollar savings to consumers
of purchasing from an entrant retailer rather than the incumbent. This section measures
the potential dollar savings from switching. These savings should be viewed as descriptive
evidence of inertia; we develop a model to decompose the sources of inertia in section 4.
  14
     In this figure, we only include households that are classified as ‘non-movers’. Any changes in residence
for a household or changes in tenancy of a residence are excluded. ‘Non-movers’ are defined according to the
procedure described in section 3.


                                                     10
    We measure the savings to households of buying the same amount of power from an
alternative retailer. To do so, we calculate the bills for each household in months it purchased
from the incumbent and the counterfactual bill if the household had purchased the same
amount of power from other retailers. As noted above, these reductions in expenditures
should be not seen as consumer surplus calculations.
    Consider two extremes of the frequency with which a household switches. First, consider
a scenario in which a consumer switches only once during the four year sample and does
so in the first month of retail choice (January 2002). We calculate the monthly savings if
each household had switched to one of the two large entrant retailers. The mean savings of
purchasing from one of the larger retailers is $7.69/month and the mean savings purchasing
from the other is $9.97/month.
    At the other extreme, consider a scenario in which a consumer switches to the lowest
price retailer each month. For households buying from the incumbent, the mean savings per
month of switching to the lowest price retailer is $12.47 and the median savings is $7.63.
The savings is over $17 per month for about one quarter of the household-months and over
$30 dollars for about one-tenth of the household-months.15
    These savings suggest that there is sizeable inertia to switching in the early years of
this market. Households could purchase the same amount of the same power for less –
averaging between roughly $7-$12 dollars per month, or $84-$144 dollars if scaled up to one
year. This savings represents about 8 percent of total electricity expenditures. Our model
below estimates the extent to which consumers continue to purchase from the higher-priced
incumbent because consumers do not consider alternative retailers or because the consumers
view the incumbent as a higher-valued product.
    These metrics could mask considerable heterogeneity across different demographic sub-
populations. In our structural model below, we estimate the size of specific sources of inertia
– inattention and incumbent brand advantage – and how those sources of inertia differ across
income, education levels, and age. We will show that both sources of inertia are larger in
neighborhoods with lower income, lower education levels, and more senior citizens. In the
Appendix, we break down savings from switching by demographic group. We find that more
of the potential savings of switching is realized by households in neighborhoods that are
wealthier, have higher education levels, and fewer senior citizens.
  15
    We also assess the savings realized by those households that switched rather than purchase from the
incumbent, using similar assumptions as above. For those months in which households purchased from any
retailer other than the incumbent, the average bill would have been $8.86 higher per month if the same
consumption were purchased from the incumbent.



                                                  11
3.1.3    Factors Associated with Switching Away from Incumbent

Finally, we document the relationship between switching behavior and key variables in the
model we present below. Specifically, we show that a household is more likely to switch
away from the incumbent when recent monthly electricity bills are large and when there are
more entrant retailers with lower prices than the incumbent. To show these correlations,
we estimate a linear probability model using data for each household-month for the sample
period used in our structural model below. We focus on household-months when the house-
hold was served in the previous month by the incumbent, and we estimate the probability
of switching away from the incumbent. The baseline probability that a household served by
the incumbent switches to another retailer in a given month is 1.0%.
    Table 1 reports correlations based on regressions that include fixed effects for each house-
hold. Thus, we exploit within-household variation in the probability of leaving the incumbent
for an entrant retailer. Column 1 shows that a household is more likely to switch away from
the incumbent when there are more entrant retailers with lower prices than the incumbent.
The presence of one additional entrant with lower prices increases the probability of switch-
ing by 15% relative to the baseline switch rate. In column 2 we show that households are
more likely to switch after receiving a large monthly bill. Large differences in a customer’s
bill are primarily driven by the large seasonality in electricity consumption. Electricity us-
age in Texas peaks in the summer, and monthly electricity bills are about twice as large in
the summer months as compared to the spring, which creates the potential for “bill shock”.
A doubling of the last bill increases the switch rate by 0.27% or about one-quarter of the
baseline rate. Column 3 shows that there is seasonality in switching, even after controlling
for the number of lower-priced retailers and the size of the most recent bill. Column (3)
includes calendar quarter fixed effects, and we find that switching is more likely during and
after the summer demand peak as compared to the lead-up to the peak in the spring.
    These relationships show that switching is associated with both past information received
by the household – the size of the last bill – and by characteristics of the plans offered by
entrants. Next, we use these relationships to develop a model of switching.


4       Model
In this section, we build an econometric model that allows us to separately identify the two
sources of inertia – search frictions/inattention and an incumbent brand effect. We model the
household-level choice of electricity retailer as a two stage process that occurs each month.

                                              12
Each month, in stage 1, the household has a current retailer and decides whether to consider
alternative retailers with some probability. We refer to this stage as the “Decision to Choose”
Stage. In stage 2, the households who choose not to consider alternative retailers in stage
1 will maintain their current retailer for the following month.16 However, households who
choose to consider alternative retailers in stage 1 will then choose the retailer that maximizes
utility among those in the market. These households may choose a different retailer or may
continue with their current one. We refer to this second stage as the “Choice Stage”. We
allow for heterogeneity across households and across time at both the Decision to Choose
Stage and the Choice Stage, as we describe below.
    One empirical complication is that we do not observe the outcome of the Decision to
Choose Stage. We only observe households who change retailers, i.e. those who decide to
consider alternative retailers and then choose a different one. From the analyst’s viewpoint,
households who do not switch are both those who do not consider alternatives and those
who do consider alternatives but choose their current retailer. We describe a model below
that allows us to separately identify parameters of the Decision Stage and the Choice Stage.


4.1     Stage 1: Decision to Choose

Each month a household decides whether to consider alternative retailers. We model the
probability of considering a (possibly new) retailer to vary by characteristics of the household.
First, the probability varies by the household’s current retailer. For example, a household’s
experience with its existing retailer may induce it to consider alternatives. Anecdotal ev-
idence from industry analysts suggests that households are driven to consider alternative
retailers in response to events such as a large summer bill or by a bad experience with the
current retailer. This envisions the decision to choose as a “push” rather than a “pull” effect.
    Second, we allow for seasonality in the months of the year that customers actively decide
upon their retailer. This allows the model to attribute some of rise in switching during
summer months observed in Figure 3 to result from more searching during the summer. In
some specifications, we allow the decision probability to vary in household characteristics.
    We denote the current retailer by k and the new retailers by j (again, recall that k and
j can be the same if the households searches and chooses its current retailer). The month of
the sample is indexed by t.
  16
    Again, we do not take a stance as to whether the choice to consider alternatives is “rational” or “forward-
looking.”



                                                      13
    We model the decision probability for any household that is currently a customer of
retailer k at time t, denoted λkt , with a standard binary logit:
                       k
                     eWt
       λkt (γ)   =                                                                                (1)
                   1 + eWt
                         k


                             n    o
where Wtk = r γr Zrt   k
                         and Zrtk
                                    is a set of observable characteristics including dummy vari-
                  P

ables for each existing retailer k and month-of-year dummy variables to allow for seasonality
in deciding to search. In some additional specifications discussed below, we also include the
dollar change in the size of customer i’s most recent bill as compared to the previous bill in
order to capture an increase in salience due to “bill shock”. (In those additional specifications,
the λkt and Wtk have additional i subscripts but we do not include them here).17
    We view this specification of the Decision to Choose as a reduced-form representation of
the drivers of inattention. This is a critical feature of modeling choice in settings with inertia
due to inattention. As we show in section 5.3.2, if one were to exclude this stage of the model
and only use a standard discrete choice model in which households chose from the choice set
every month, then one would make incorrect inferences about preference parameters.
    Our descriptive evidence in section 1 suggests that modeling the impediment to search
with a model of inattention is appropriate in this setting. In other settings, researchers have
used switching costs to explain choice frictions. Switching costs can be viewed as generating
choice frictions - via state dependence - even if buyers are fully informed about other options.
In contrast, search cost/inattention represents not having information, or being willing to
gather information, about alternatives. There are several reasons that switching costs are
unlikely to be primary drivers of inertia in this market. First, as discussed above, there
are no monetary costs to switching and powertochoose.com makes time costs small. But
more importantly, the data are not consistent with full information about options – one
of the key features of a switching cost model. To see this, recall that the data strongly
suggest seasonal patterns in both search and switching. (As we document in section 3.1,
switching peaks in the summer, and as we discuss later in section 5.2, the number of visitors
to www.powertochoose.com also peaks in summer). It is difficult to explain why a large bill
would induce search if households had perfect information about alternatives.


4.2     Stage 2: Choice of Retailer
  17
    This formulation can be seen as a reduced form representation for an underlying search protocol or
rational inattention model.


                                                 14
In this stage, each household who enters the choice stage in month t chooses the retailer
from the choice set that yields highest utility, as in a standard discrete choice model. For
households who enter the choice stage, the indirect utility for each household i of choosing
retailer j in period t is:

      Uijt = Vijt (θ) + εijt                                                                 (2)

where Vijt (θ) is a parameterized utility term, and εijt is a random utility shock that is i.i.d.
across consumers, retailers, and time. We assume εijt to be a Type I Extreme Value random
variable. Vijt (θ) is further specified as Vijt (θ) = s θs Xjt,s where Xjt,s is the s’th charac-
                                                     P

teristic of retailer j at time t. The product characteristics include the price, an indicator for
whether the retailer is the incumbent, and the incumbent indicator interacted with a linear
time trend. This specification allows for vertical product differentiation – a brand effect –
by the incumbent. Specifically, the variables comprising Xjt are:
  1. pjt is the price of retailer j in month t for 1000 kWh usage per month (as reported on
     the website powertochoose.com ). As we discuss in section 3, average price is arguably
     the most salient metric of price that affects choice. Note that by using the current
     price, we assume that consumers expect future retail prices to reflect current prices.
     This assumption is consistent with Anderson et al. [2013] who find that consumers’
     beliefs about another energy commodity – gasoline – are consistent with a no-change
     forecast. This allows us to view the household-level choice to a static model.

  2. IN CU M BEN T is an indicator variable for the incumbent retailer, allowing for an
     incumbent brand effect

  3. IN CU M BEN T · M ON T HCOU N T ER is the incumbent indicator interacted with
     the number of months since the market began, allowing for a linear time trend in the
     incumbent brand effect

    Because εijt is a Type I Extreme Value random variable, the probability that household
i chooses retailer j in month t is given by the familiar logit probability:


                   exp (Vijt (θ))
      Pijt (θ) = P                                                                           (3)
                  k≥1 exp (Vikt (θ))



This probability is used in GMM estimation that is described below.

                                               15
4.3    Simultaneously Estimating Decision and Choice Stages

We simultaneously estimate both the decision to consider alternative retailers (Stage 1) and
choice (Stage 2). In order to do so, we exploit our data on observed switching behavior to
derive a set of moment conditions. As noted above, one empirical challenge is that we do
not directly observe the outcome of Stage 1. Rather, we observe switches to other retailers
for those who decide to consider alternative retailers. Thus, households who do not switch
can be either households who did not consider alternatives or households who searched and
choose to stay with their existing retailer.
    To address this complication, we exploit the observed month to month aggregate switch-
ing from the old retailer k to the new retailer j to estimate the probability of search. This
model of the “flow” of customers from one retailer to another provides moments for our
GMM estimation. First we provide a simple example to illustrate the empirical strategy and
then we present the formal model.
    Illustration of Empirical Strategy. We illustrate the empirical strategy with a simple
example that also allows us to show how we can separately identify the search and decision
stages. Assume that we only observe two months of data – the customer’s retailer “last
month” and “this month”. In addition, assume that there are only 3 retailers. Let each
household served the previous month by retailers 1, 2 and 3 decide to consider alternative
retailers with probability given by λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 respectively. And let the probability of
choosing retailer 1, 2, and 3 conditional upon entering the Choice Stage, be given by P1 , P2 ,
and 1−P1 −P2 , respectively. We want to estimate these five probabilities, {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , P1 , P2 }.
    Conceptually, we can create a matrix of counts of the number of customers switching
from retailer k to retailer j during the month. See Figure 4 for an illustration. The cells
of this matrix provide us with statistical moments that we use to estimate the 5 parame-
ters/probabilities.
    Consider all households who were served by retailer 1 the previous month, and denote
this number N (1) . Some of these households will be observed to use retailer 1 in the current
month; such households are ones who did not consider alternative retailers (occurring with
probability 1−λ1 ) and those who considered alternatives but chose to remain with retailer 1
(occurring with probability = λ1 ∗ P1 ). Likewise consider households observed to use retailer
1 in the previous month and retailer 2 in the current month. These households are ones
previously with retailer 1 who considered alternatives and chose retailer 2 (occurring with
probability = λ1 ∗P2 ). Likewise, we can characterize households previously with retailer 1 who


                                                 16
considered alternatives and chose retailer 3 (occurring with probability = λ1 ∗ (1 − P1 − P2 )).
    The expected number of customers who were initially with retailer 1 and continue to use
retailer 1 is: N (1) ·[(1−λ1 )+λ1 P1 ]. The expected number of customers who were initially with
retailer 1 and switched to one of the other retailers is: N (1) ·λ1 Pj for j = 2, 3. This provides 3
moments to match to sample moments on the number of customers flowing between retailer
1 the previous month and the 3 retailers in the current month.
    One can derive similar sets of 3 moments for customers who were initially served by
retailer 2 and retailer 3. This provides us with 9 moment conditions. However, one moment
in each set is redundant because any customer who does not stay with, say retailer 1, must
switch to retailer 2 or 3. Thus, we exclude the redundant moments for customers who stayed
with the same retailer and use the “off diagonal” terms of the flow matrix as the moments
for estimation. This yields six moments to estimate the five probabilities of interest.
    This simple example provides the basic intuition for estimating the model. In our setting,
we have more than two months of data so we have T − 1 flow matrices and could estimate
decision and choice probabilities for each period. In practice, we parameterize the decision
and choice probabilities to specific variables of interest, as described in sections 4.1 and 4.2.
     Formal Specification of Empirical Strategy. We formalize the estimation strategy
described above and allow for households to be heterogeneous in their search and choice
                    (k)                                                               (k)
probabilities. Let Bt be the set of households whose retailer was k at time t − 1. Nt is the
                                  (k) (k)                                          (k)
total number of households in Bt . λit is the probability that a household in Bt chooses
to search in period t. For those households who choose to search, Pjt is the probability that
the household chooses j in period t. Finally at the end of the two stage process each month,
   (k)                                        (k)
Njt is the total number of households in Bt who use retailer j at time t.
                                          (k)       (k)
     Suppose household i is in the set Bt . Let dijt be an indicator function of whether
household i (who had been served by retailer k in time t − 1) is served by retailer j at time
t. The expected value of this indicator variable prior to period t is:
   •For j 6= k (households changing retailers):
           h         i
               (k)                    (k)
      Et−1 dijt          =          λit Pjt
                                    | {z }
                             Pr(deciding & choosing j)


   •For j = k (households keeping the same retailer):
           h         i
               (k)                  (k)                                 (k)
      Et−1 dikt =                  λit Pkt               +     1 − λit                          (4)
                                   | {z }                      |   {z    }
                         Pr(deciding & staying with k)       Pr(not deciding)



                                                              17
               (k)                                                                   (k)
Because Njt is the total number of households in Bt                                        with retailer j at time t, we have:

        (k)                    (k)
      Njt =                                                                                                                   (5)
                      X
                              dijt
                        (k)
                     i∈Bt


Thus, our moment equations tell us that the expected number of customers previously served
by k who are now served by j is given by:

  • For j 6= k:
                        h           i
                              (k)                     (k)
                                        =                                                                                     (6)
                                             X
               Et−1 Njt                              λit Pjt
                                               (k)
                                            i∈Bt



  • For j = k:
                        h           i        X                                  
                              (k)                      (k)                 (k)
               Et−1 Nkt                 =             λit Pkt + 1 − λit                                                       (7)
                                               (k)
                                            i∈Bt



     The last flow equation (7) showing the flow from k to k is redundant because the proba-
bilites of moving away from k and staying with k add up to 1. Thus, we use the “off-diagonal”
(j 6= k) moments for estimation. This yields J (J − 1) moments for each time t.
                                                                              (k)
     We use GMM to estimate (γ, θ), the parameters determining decision (λit ) and choice
    (k)
(Pjt ) using the objective function:


          min η 0 W η
              γ,θ
                                                                                          
                                                              (k)     P        (k)
                                                             Njt −        (k) λit Pjt
                                (k)                  (k)              i∈B
      where η ≡< ηjt > and ηjt =                                          t
                                                                        (k)                    and W is a weighting matrix.
                                                                       Nt



    The intuition behind the objective function is straightforward. Consider the numerator
                      (k)
of each moment. Njt is the number of households in our data that switch from retailer k to
retailer j in month t. Our model says that the expected number of households switching from
                   (k)
k to j is i∈B (k) λit Pjt . We plug in the specified functional forms for the decision and choice
          P
               t
probabilities, given in equations (1) and (3). GMM finds parameters that make the model
most closely fit the data on the number of switchers. The denominator simply downweights
moments with larger variance; it adjusts for the fact that the number of customers for which
the model is “off” is likely larger for retailers that have a large number of customers.

                                                                      18
    Identification. The identification argument is a generalization of the simple example
considered above and illustrated using Figure 4. The matrix capturing the flow of customers
from retailer k to retailer j allows for separate identification of the probabilities of search
λk and the probabilities of choice Pj . Mathematically, this matrix provides moments of the
order J 2 while we are only estimating probabilities on the order J. Embedded in this model
are two key assumptions. First, the decision probability is a function of the last retailer k but
not the next retailer j. As we note above, this envisions a “push” rather than a “pull” model
of search, and is consistent with views of industry analysts. Second, the choice probability
is a function of the next retailer j and not the last retailer k. This assumption implies that
upon deciding to consider alternative retailers (e.g. on www.powertochoose.com), consumers
consider all retailers “on equal terms” and do not have private information on any retailers
based on their past experience. One might be concerned that prior experience with a retailer
influences choice (for reasons beyond observed product characteristics). However, keep in
mind that very few customers switch multiple times during our sample period, so the vast
majority of customers have experience with only one or at most two retailers.
    Importantly, this identification strategy of consumer inertia does not require us to have
choice data for both consumers with pre-existing market experience and consumers new to
the market. Several papers in the existing literature on inertia exploit the fact that some
customers are new while others have pre-existing market experience (e.g. see Handel [2013]
and Luco [2014]). The presence of new market participants – ‘movers’ in our case – fits
into our modeling approach, but we do not require the movers in order to separately identify
inattention bias from vertical product differentiation. To see this, a mover in our setting must
choose a retailer (otherwise they have no power), so the probability of considering retailers in
Stage 1 must equal one (λit = 1). Non-movers may or may not consider alternative retailers
in any given month (λit ≤ 1). Any customer who considers alternative retailers – whether a
mover or non-mover – then enters into the Stage 2 Choice of Retailer.
    Therefore, our model can be estimated where movers decisions are given by λit = 1 and
the choice probability given by equation (3)), and where non-movers decisions are given by
λit as specified in equation (1) and the choice probability from equation (3)). But it is also
clear that the parameters of the model are identified even if no movers are present (i.e. we
could use only non-movers – those existing customers who can switch from retailer k to
retailer j – to estimate the model parameters using equations (1) and (3)). In our setting,
we have only a small number of movers – less than 1% of our observations – so an empirical
strategy that does not depend on new market participants is valuable.


                                               19
5     Results
We organize our results into several sections. First, we show estimates of our benchmark
model that estimates how often incumbent customers search and how much those customers
differentially value the incumbent brand when they do search. Then, we allow the probability
of searching in any given month to vary so that we are able to identify important patterns
in inattention bias. Following those preliminary estimates, we illustrate the importance of
using our modeling framework rather than a standard discrete choice model in section 5.3.2.
Specifically, we show that failing to account for inattention bias and using only the second
stage of our model yields estimates that are not sensible. Next, in section 5.4 we estimate
the model separately for neighborhoods with different demographic characteristics in order
to identify heterogeneities in how consumers respond to retail choice. Finally, these results
are used to motivate our counterfactual policy experiments that we present in section 6.
    For all of the results presented below, we estimate the model on a 20% random sample
of meters in our data in order to ease the computational burden. In addition, we restrict
attention to the period of January 2004-April 2006 when all six firms that we analyze are
present in the market. In most of our results, we include all customers who currently have
a retailer and study their decisionmaking to chose another retailer, however we show results
that include new customers (‘movers’) in section 5.3.1.


5.1    Benchmark Estimates of Inertia
In our benchmark specification, we model the Stage 1 decision of household i in period t to
consider alternative retailers to be a function of whether the household’s existing retailer is
the incumbent or not. Then conditional upon deciding to search, the Stage 2 choice model is
a logit model where each product is characterized by the price of consuming 1000 kWh. We
include an incumbent brand effect and allow the brand effect to have a linear time trend.
    Our benchmark model results are reported in column 1 of Table 2. The table reports the
parameters of both the Stage 1 “Decision” step and the Stage 2 “Choice” Step. In addition,
we use the parameter estimates to calculate other metrics that aid in the economic interpre-
tation of these parameters. Specifically, for the Decision step, we calculate the probability
that a customer with a given firm chooses to consider alternative retailers in a given month.
Also, we use the choice parameters to calculate price elasticities of each firm (evaluated at
the average price) and the dollar value of the incumbent brand effect.
    The parameters of the “decision to choose” model indicate that households do not fre-


                                              20
                                                                   (k)
quently search. Specifically, when the parameters of λit are converted to probabilities, our
model estimates that customers of the incumbent only search in 1.8% of months. This iden-
tifies a large source of inertia in the market. For many households, who by the design of
retail choice in Texas were defaulted to the incumbent, a search will not occur until many
months into the new market. This probability can be used to calculate that only 19% of
households have searched at least once within one year of market opening, 35% within two
years, and 61% by the end of our sample over four years after retail choice begins.18 Thus, our
model implies that inattention bias is an important driver of inertia. In our counterfactual
experiments in section 6, we estimate the impact of policies that increase search.
     Our model also estimates the probability that a customer of an entrant retailer considers
alternative retailers. We find that the search rate for customers of entrants – searching in
3.3% of months – is larger but still relatively small. One possible reason that these customers
may search more is a selection effect; these customers necessarily have searched at least once
before if they are customers of an entrant retailer.
     The parameters of the choice model show that the incumbent brand effect is another
source of inertia. The positive coefficient on the incumbent brand dummy variable indicates
that, conditional upon deciding to choose, customers attach higher utility to the incumbent’s
product than to the entrant retailers. Notably this brand effect declines with time, as
indicated by the negative coefficient on the brand effect interacted with a month-of-sample
counter. We monetize the size of this brand effect using the coefficient on the price. As
shown in the last rows of the table, the brand effect is $61.86 per month in January 2004.19
This means that after accounting for price differences between the incumbent and entrant
retailers, consumers value purchasing from the incumbent nearly $62 per month more than
purchasing the same amount of power from any of the entrant retailers. This product
differentiation yields differences in the own-price elasticities of demand. As shown in the
table, the incumbent’s price elasticity is -2.52 while the entrant retailers have elasticities
averaging -4.51.
     Importantly, the size of this brand effect declines as more months pass since the beginning
of retail choice. By the end of our sample period in April 2006, the incumbent brand effect
is significantly smaller; it has declined to $14.87 per month. This suggests that the large
  18
     This calculation assumes a simple i.i.d. structure to the decision to choose process; in later specifications
we allow for a richer process.
  19
     This uses the standard logit model approach to calculating consumer surplus. The price is measured
in cents/kWh. We use the incumbent brand coefficient, the time trend in that coefficient, and the price
coefficient to estimate in dollars the brand effect for 1000kWh of usage = ((2.764 + (−0.076) ∗ t)/0.435) ∗
(1000/100) for t = 1 (January 2004) to 28 (April 2006).


                                                       21
incumbent brand effect does not persist after the market matures and customers have more
experience with retail choice.
    Several plausible explanations exist for this sizable brand effect. One possibility suggested
to us by market analysts is that customers believe that the quality of their power depends
on the firm providing electric service. As we discuss above, this is not the case – retail
choice is a financial relationship between customer and retailer that has no impact on the
physical distribution of power. Because the physical transmission and distribution system is
operated by a firm that is independent from retailers, a customer will not see any difference
in factors such as power outages, restoration of power in the event of an outage, or meter
reading services. However, customers may not have been aware of this fact because of an
incomplete understanding of the market.20
    “Consumer learning” is a related interpretation of the very large incumbent brand effect
at the beginning of deregulation followed by its gradual erosion. Consumers may have started
out with the belief that the incumbent is the more reliable provider. However, over time,
either through observational learning or by social interactions, they may have revised their
priors via Bayesian learning towards believing that service quality is not differentiated. It is
beyond the scope of this paper to model the evolution of the brand effect; rather we focus
on implications of a brand effect for policy that allows retail choice.21
    Another possible source of the incumbent brand effect may have been a fear that entrant
retailers would go bankrupt and leave them without service. Technically, if a retailer exits
the market, customers are automatically shifted back to the incumbent at a price set at
130% of the wholesale price, however this may have been unknown to customers. Finally,
customers may have feared bait-and-switch tactics by new entrant retailers. Although such
tactics are possible, we do not see such an expectation borne in the data.22
    Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to isolate the exact mechanism driving the es-
timated brand effect and its evolution over time. However in our counterfactual experiments
in section 6, we estimate the effect on consumer surplus if the relative size of the brand effect
(whatever the cause) were made smaller.
  20
     Some of these customers may have experienced the deregulation of long-distance telecom where service
quality was a function of retailer.
  21
     A rich literature in marketing has explored identification in models of Bayesian learning including Erdem
and Keane [1996] and Shin et al. [2012].
  22
     As discussed above, the rise in prices late in our sample period was driven by wholesale cost shocks.




                                                     22
5.2    When Do Households Search?
The descriptive analysis in section 3.1.1 shows that there are strong seasonal patterns in
both bill size and switching behavior, with peaks occurring during the summer. In our next
specifications, we allow for temporal and consumer level heterogeneity in the probability to
decide to search so that we can better understand potential determinants of search. Specif-
ically, we quantify the seasonality of search and the extent to which a customer receiving a
large bill induces search. Results are shown in columns 2-4 of Table 2.
    The first new specification allows for seasonality in the decision to search by adding
                                                                                         (k)
separate dummy variables for each month of the year to the decision probability λit . As
seen in column 2, the coefficient of the monthly dummy variables are substantially higher
during and immediately after the summer months, implying that search behavior is most
intense at the end of the summer.
    We can validate this result of the model with outside data on search. Data on the
number of visitors to www.powertochoose.com were provided to us by the Public Utility
Commission for the period 2005-2009. (Unfortunately, data covering our sample period were
not recorded). In these later years, the pattern of website visitors exhibited similar seasonal
patterns, with the highest number of visits occurring in August. Thus, our model findings,
corroborated with outside evidence, suggests that large electric bills may make electric choice
more salient and induce households to assess their retail options.
    In order to explore the effect of bill size, we estimate another specification that incor-
porates whether the household recently received a large bill. We modify our benchmark
                                           (k)
model so that the decision probability λit includes a household-specific measure of the dol-
lar difference between the most recently received monthly bill and the previous bill. This
variable – “Bill Shock” – primarily reflects increases in consumption rather than changes in
prices. As shown in column 3, “Bill Shock” has a positive and statistically significant affect
on the decision probability, suggesting that receiving an unusually large electric bill induces
customers to search for alternative retailers. In column 4, we include both “Bill Shock” and
monthly dummies simultaneously. It appears that much but not all of the “Bill Shock” effect
is driven by seasonality of electricity consumption.
    This relationship between recent bill size and the probability of searching offers insights
into the determinants of household search behavior. A priori one might expect that house-
holds would search for lower-priced retailers in the spring in anticipation of the summer
peak in electric consumption and expenditures. The potential savings from switching to a
lower-priced is highest if the switch occurs before the summer. However, we do not find evi-


                                              23
dence of anticipatory search. Rather, consumers appear to react to large increases in summer
consumption and respond by searching. Overall, we do not find evidence that consumers are
forward-looking when choosing the time to search.
    The results in columns 2-4 also suggest that our estimates of inertia are robust to different
specifications of the decision to search probability. The estimates of the two major sources of
inertia – the average decision probability and the incumbent brand effect – are quantitatively
very similar to the estimates from the benchmark model.


5.3     Illustrating the Implications of our Modeling Framework for
        Estimating Inertia
In this section, we compare our two-stage model of choice to other empirical methodologies
that study choice in the presence of inertia. First, we show that our model can incorporate
(but does not require) customers that are new to the market, which is an empirical strategy
used in the existing literature on inertia. Second, we show that if one were to use a standard
discrete choice model – the second stage of our two-stage model – then one would obtain
results that are not plausible, illustrating the value of our two-stage model.

5.3.1   Incorporating Movers Into the Model

As we discuss in the Introduction, some papers in the existing literature on inertia have
exploited new market participants that face different levels of inertia. Our model does
not require new customers for identification, but it can incorporate them into the model.
Specifically, new customers – or “movers” in our setting – do not face inattention because
they must choose a retailer to get power to their house but they still may face an incumbent
brand effect. In our setting less than 1% of the observations are movers. Nevertheless, we
can include additional moments into our model to include the decisionmaking of movers.
To do this, we include observations in which a household transitioned from no retailer to
some retailer, generating new moments for GMM given by equation (6). The probability
of entering the choice stage is set equal to one (λmover
                                                    it   = 1). The probability of choosing
retailer j is given by equation (3).
    We allow the preference parameters to differ between movers and non-movers because
the incumbent brand effect could be quite different for the two groups. On one hand, some
customers moving from outside the service territory of the incumbent may not know the
incumbent and thus have a smaller incumbent brand effect. On the other hand, some movers


                                               24
may come from locations that do not have retail choice, which could make those customers
more attached to the incumbent per se, regardless of the identity of that incumbent.
    Results are shown in Table 3. Column 1 re-displays the results of our benchmark model
(the same as in column 1 of Table 2). Column 2 shows estimates from the model that includes
both non-movers and movers. For the non-movers, our estimates of the two sources of inertia
are unchanged. For the movers, we estimate an initial incumbent brand effect that is about
20% higher than for non-movers. However, this brand effect declines substantially slower
for movers – the brand effect is $75/month in January 2004 and only falls to $52/month by
April 2006. Thus, while movers do not face inertia from inattention, they continue to favor
the higher-priced incumbent due to placing additional value on purchasing power from the
firm known as the incumbent retailer in their area.

5.3.2   Illustrating the Need for a Decision Stage

Next, we explore the implications of modeling retail switching with our two stage process and
why a standard one stage discrete choice framework would yield results that are implausible.
Our decision to model switching as a two stage process is motivated by the belief that
consumers in this market do not actively choose retailers every month. Thus if we were to
estimate a standard one stage discrete choice model, we believe that we would make incorrect
inferences about consumer choice.
    To illustrate this point, we apply a standard discrete choice model to our data. We
operationalize this by imposing that the decision probability λkit =1; this is effectively “turning
off” the Stage 1 Decision step and assuming that all households enter the Stage 2 choice
step. Under this assumption, in every month where we observe a customer to stay with
her current retailer, that customer is finding that the current retailer’s product maximizes
utility. Column 3 of Table 3 shows estimates where we “turn off” the Stage 1 decision step.
    Comparing these two sets of results, we see two major differences. First, the implied
incumbent brand effect under no decision step is substantially larger (e.g. $164 as compared
to $62 in January 2004). This is not surprising because imposing that consumers search
every period means that the model must rationalize staying with the higher-priced incumbent
entirely with a brand effect.
    Second and more importantly, the own price elasticities of residual demand for the entrant
retailers are implausibly small (around -0.08). Such a low own price elasticity contradicts
standard oligopoly theory in which profit-maximizing firms price in the elastic portion of
their residual demand. (Recall that the incumbent could not choose its price, but the new


                                                25
entrants were free to set any price.) These estimated price elasticities strongly suggest model
mis-specification. Both of these results illustrate the need to choose an empirical model that
allows for consumers to infrequently search for alternative retailers.


5.4    Does Inertia Vary Across Demographic Groups?
The size of consumer inertia in markets with retail choice can vary in important ways across
different parts of the population. As shown in the Appendix, the amount of realized dol-
lar savings from switching varies notably across neighborhoods with different demographic
characteristics. The descriptive analysis shows that the fraction of savings realized is nearly
twice as large in neighborhoods that were more wealthy, more educated, and have few senior
citizens. In this section, we test if the two sources of inertia vary across neighborhoods.
    We estimate our benchmark model separately for different subpopulations based upon
income, education, and age. We classify a household based upon whether its Census block
group is above or below the median Census block group when ordered by household income,
fraction of the population with at least a bachelor’s degree, and the fraction of the population
that is over age 65. Results are reported in Table 4.
    We find that both sources of inertia are larger for neighborhoods with lower income,
lower education, and more senior citizens. Specifically, customers of the incumbent consider
alternatives at different rates, as estimated by the parameter λIncumbent in Table 4. Customers
of the incumbent search for alternative retailers with higher frequency in neighborhoods with
higher income by 2.3% versus 1.3% (columns 1-2), in neighborhoods with a more college
educated population by 2.6% versus 1.0% (columns 3-4), and in neighborhoods with fewer
senior citizens by 2.4% versus 1.3% (columns 5-6).
    We also find that the initial incumbent brand effect is larger in certain neighborhoods,
however the effect declines to very similar levels by the end of our sample. In neighborhoods
above the median in income, the brand effect is $52/month in January 2004 while it is
$113/month in below median income neighborhoods. However, this vertical differentiation
declines at rates such that both types of neighborhoods have similar brand effects by 2006
($13 and $23). When splitting neighborhoods by education, the below median education
neighborhoods have a very large brand effect at the beginning of the sample ($267/month)
but this brand advantage declines to $17/month by 2006. In contrast, the higher educated
neighborhoods have an initial brand effect of only $47/month which declines to $20. Finally,
neighborhoods with more senior citizens have an initial brand effect that is larger than the
brand effect in “younger” neighborhoods, but the difference disappears by 2006.

                                              26
    This convergence in the size of the incumbent brand effect across different types of cus-
tomers provides suggestive evidence of “consumer learning”. Even though households with
different demographics begin with different priors on the brand value of the incumbent,
households converge on a very similar value after several years. This is consistent with a
simple model of Bayesian learning in which consumers have different initial beliefs about
the relative quality of the incumbent. However, the differences in the priors are eventually
washed away as data accumulates from observational learning or social interactions.


6    Policy Counterfactuals: The Effects of an Informa-
     tion Intervention to Reduce Inertia
Our model estimates the size of two sources of inertia. The mechanisms that inhibit switching
away from the higher-priced incumbent are that the incumbent’s customers only search in
2% of months, and when they do search, customers place a sizable brand effect on the
incumbent’s service. Next, we estimate how much consumer surplus would increase under
an information intervention that reduced the size of each source of inertia.
    Our hypothetical policy intervention is targeted to households who are ‘inertial’ – those
who continue to purchase from the incumbent after two years of retail choice in January 2004.
Our intervention has two dimensions. The first dimension is to inform inertial customers
that they have the ability to choose their retailer and tell them where they can go to find
a list of retailers and each retailer’s offering. The second dimension is to inform customers
that their power quality is entirely independent of their retailer. Specifically, purchasing
from another retailer is buying power that is equally reliable from a technical point of view.
As we discuss above, the brand effect captured by our model could include other dimensions
of quality such as customer service, but there is strong anecdotal evidence that much of this
brand effect captures the perception that the incumbent provides more reliable power.
    Practically this intervention could be an informational flyer. Suppose that the regulator
required the incumbent to attach a one-page flyer with the January 2004 monthly bill that
prominently displayed two pieces of information:
    •1. “Go to www.powertochoose.com to quickly and easily search for another electricity
retailer AND to switch your retailer”
  •2. “It’s all the same power – the quality of electrical service will not change because
Firm X controls your powerlines rather than The Incumbent or any other retailer.”


                                             27
    We view this information intervention having two effects on customer decisionmaking.
First, it will increase the probability of a customer searching for alternative retailers. Second,
it will reduce the relative brand advantage of the incumbent. Of course, this information
intervention is only a nudge – households still choose the retailer that maximizes utility.
    The magnitude of the effect of this information intervention is an empirical question
that we cannot assess without actually conducting a randomized controlled trial. Therefore,
we conduct counterfactual calculations under different assumptions to provide a range of
estimates of the consumer surplus effects of this low-cost information intervention.
    We calculate the expected change in consumer surplus of moving from the status quo
to the counterfactual information intervention.
                                                The change       in expected
                                                                                consumer
                                                                                         surplus
                                                  PJ CT F V CT F         PJ SQ V SQ
per household is given by ∆E(CS)i = −α ln   1
                                                    j=1 e
                                                           ij      − ln    j=1 e
                                                                                  ij    (Small and
Rosen [1981]), where CTF denotes counterfactual and SQ denotes status quo. This is the
difference in log-sum terms divided by the price parameter which “converts” utils to dollars.
Under this interpretation of the logit discrete choice model, the logit shock is interpreted as
product characteristics observable to the consumer but not to the researcher.
    We simulate this information intervention using the following procedure to calculate the
log-sum terms under the status quo and policy counterfactuals. Under the status quo,
2% of the incumbent’s customers consider among all retailers and choose the retailer that
maximizes utility; 98% of customers “choose” from a set that only includes the incumbent.
(2% is the fraction of incumbent customers considering alternative retailers each month in our
benchmark specification in column (1) of Table 2.) For the customers who do not consider
alternatives the choice set is J = 1 (the incumbent), while for those considering alternatives
the choice set is all J = 6 retailers. Under the counterfactual with less inattention, we
increase the fraction of incumbent customers who consider all J = 6 alternatives and reduce
the fraction who only “choose” the incumbent from the J = 1 choice set.
    The second dimension of our policy experiment is to reduce the relative brand advantage
of the incumbent. We conceptualize the information treatment that “It’s all the same power”
to increase the brand effect of the entrant retailers to some fraction of the brand effect of the
incumbent. To calculate this effect, we augment the product characteristics of each entrant
retailer to have its own brand effect that is some fraction of the incumbent’s brand effect.
This effect is plugged into the indirect utility function of the incumbent’s product under the
counterfactual policy (VijCT F ), and consumer surplus is calculated as we describe above.
    It is beyond the scope of this paper to model the change in pricing as a response to
consumers who search more frequently or attribute less of a relative brand advantage to the


                                               28
incumbent. However, it it worthwhile to keep in mind that the incumbent’s price-to-beat is
regulated and cannot be changed in response to any change in demand-side behavior. We
leave an equilibrium model of the entrant retailers’ supply side response to future work.
    The estimated annual changes in consumer surplus are reported in Table 5. We find
that for a relatively modest impact of the information treatment – inducing 25% of the
customers to search and changing the perception of the new retailer brand to be 25% of the
brand effect of the incumbent – the per household consumer surplus would rise by $50/year.
The gains in consumer surplus rise in both the fraction searching and the new entrant
brand effect, especially the brand effect. If 50% are induced to search and the new entrant
brand effect is half of the incumbent brand effect, the per household gains are $149/year.
And if 75% are induced to search and the new entrant brand effect is three-quarters of the
incumbent brand effect, the per household gains are $309/year. While we do not take a
position on what fraction of households would read and respond to a bill insert, we view all
of these percentages as a prior possible. Other research suggests that benchmark estimates
of responding to information mailed by utilities to customers are over 50%.23
    These consumer surplus calculations assume that product characteristics other than price
impact consumer utility. One could argue that such factors should not be factored into
welfare calculations. Our calculations above assume that the brand effect of the incumbent
represents utility to consumers that should be factored into welfare calculations. However, if
a large part of this brand effect is the incorrect perception that the incumbent provides more
reliable power, then one might argue that this is an information problem that should not
impact welfare calculations. Likewise, the above calculations assume that the logit shocks
represent product characteristics unobserved (to researchers) that impact consumer utility.
However, an alternative interpretation is that the shocks represent consumer choice error
or confusion. Under this interpretation, the Small and Rosen consumer surplus calculations
would overstate the true gains to consumers.
    In order to consider these alternative interpretations of observed and unobserved product
characteristics, we calculate consumer surplus gains to our policy counterfactual if none of
the product characteristics are modeled as affecting utility. Under the assumption that there
are no product characteristics that impact utility, then retail electricity is a homogeneous
product and the consumer benefit to switching retailers is merely the cost savings. Under
the counterfactual where 75% of incumbent customers are induced to search and choose the
  23
    Navigant [2013] finds that over half of households read and respond to OPOWER Home Energy Reports;
Seattle City Light [2014] find similar figures for reading newsletters.



                                                 29
lowest priced retailer, the expected consumer surplus gain per customer is $96 per year.
   This counterfactual experiment suggests that a relatively low-cost policy intervention
– adding a flyer to an existing bill – could meaningfully increase consumer surplus. We
should emphasize that we are modeling only changes in consumer surplus – each household is
continuing to purchase the same amount of power each month, so our information treatment
leads to a reallocation of rents from the incumbent to the consumers and new retail firms.
Nevertheless, these results suggest that low-cost interventions to reduce choice frictions can
meaningfully increase the consumer benefits of retail choice policy.


7     Conclusions
This paper investigates an important policy change that brings choice to consumers in a
previously regulated setting. We find that even in a relatively homogeneous good market,
factors other than price competition play a very important role in shaping market outcomes:
after four years of deregulation, the incumbent still maintains over 60% market share, despite
the fact that some competitors consistently offer lower prices. Our model shows that two
sources of inertia are prevalent – households do not frequently consider offerings of alternative
retailers and they attach a significant brand advantage to the incumbent, especially in the
early years of retail choice. Moreover, different consumer groups face different magnitudes
of the frictions.
    This paper suggests that there may be low-cost information interventions that reduce
both sources of inertia. These types of interventions are likely to be particularly valuable
as policy instruments in the early years of retail choice in the many jurisdictions that are
expanding choice. Future work in this area could model firm behavior to better understand
supply-side responses to changes in the demand parameters.
    Residential electricity is just one setting where policymakers are shifting to a regime where
customers are first provided with choice. Other types of electricity customers – commercial
and industrial – also are being offering retail choice, as are all types of customers of natural
gas. Even more broadly, households are increasingly provided with choice in health care,
retirement, and education. The types of inertia that we study in the residential electricity
market are likely to present, perhaps to differing degrees, in many of these settings. Our
paper provides a model to quantitatively assess the magnitude of different mechanisms that
drive inertia. In addition, our framework allows one to measure consumer surplus gains from
policies that reduce the sources of inertia.


                                               30
References
Jason T. Abaluck and Jonathan Gruber. Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence
  from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program. American Economic Review, 101(4):
  1180–1210, June 2011.

Soren T. Anderson, Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. What do consumers believe about
  future gasoline prices? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66:383–
  403, November 2013.

Severin Borenstein. The redistributional impact of non-linear electricity pricing. Working
  Paper No. 15822, National Bureau of Economics Research, March 2010.

Severin Borenstein, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. Measuring market inefficiencies
  in California’s restructured wholesale electricity market. American Economic Review, 92
  (5):1376–1405, 2002.

Timothy J. Brennan. Consumer preference not to choose: Methodological and policy impli-
  cations. Energy Policy, 35(3):1616–1627, March 2007.

James B. Bushnell, Erin T. Mansur, and Celeste Saravia. Vertical arrangements, market
  structure, and competition: An analysis of restructured U.S. electricity markets. American
  Economic Review, 98(1):237–266, 2008.

Leemore Dafny, Kate Ho, and Mauricio Varela. Let them have choice: Gains from shift-
  ing away from employer-sponsored health insurance and toward an individual exchange.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1):32–58, February 2013.

Babur De Los Santos, Ali Hortacsu, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest. Testing models of con-
  sumer search using data on web browsing and purchasing behavior. American Economic
  Review, 102(6):2955–2980, October 2012.

Babur De Los Santos, Ali Hortacsu, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest. Search with learning.
  Working paper, 2013.

Fabian Duarte and Justine S. Hastings. Fettered consumers and sophisticated firms: Evi-
  dence from Mexico’s privatized social security market. Working Paper No. 18582, National
  Bureau of Economics Research, December 2012.

Tulin Erdem and Michael P. Keane. Decision-making under uncertainty: Capturing dynamic
  brand choice processes in turbulent consumer goods markets. Marketing Science, 15(1):
  1–20, 1996.

Monica Giulietti, Catherine W. Price, and Michael Waterson. Consumer choice and com-
 petition policy: A study of UK energy markets. The Economic Journal, 115:949–968,
 October 2005.


                                            31
Monica Giulietti, Michael Waterson, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest. Estimation of search
 frictions in the British electricity market. Journal of Industrial Economics, Accepted:–,
 forthcoming.

Benjamin R. Handel. Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When
  nudging hurts. American Economic Review, 103(7):2643–2682, September 2013.

Justine S. Hastings and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. Information, school choice, and academic
  achievement: Evidence from two experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4):
  1373–1414, 2008.

Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. Heterogeneous preferences
  and the efficacy of public school choice. Brown University, June 2010.

Justine S. Hastings, Ali Hortacsu, and Chad Syverson. Advertising and competition in
  privatized social security: The case of Mexico. Working paper, 2013.

Han Hong and Matthew Shum. Using price distributions to estimate search costs. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 37(2):257–275, Summer 2006.

Elisabeth Honka. Quantifying search and switching costs in the U.S. auto industry. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 45(4):847–884, 2014.

Elisabeth Honka, Ali Hortacsu, and Maria Ana Vitorino. Advertising, consumer awareness
  and choice: Evidence from the U.S. banking industry. Working paper, 2014.

Ali Hortacsu and Steven L. Puller. Understanding strategic bidding in multi-unit auctions:
  A case study of the Texas electricity spot market. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1):
  86–114, 2008.

Ali Hortacsu and Chad Syverson. Product differentiation, search costs, and the welfare
  effects of entry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  119:403–456, May 2004.

Koichiro Ito. Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
 electricity pricing. American Economic Review, 104(2):537–563, 2014.

Paul L. Joskow. Why do we need electricity retailers? Or can you get it cheaper whole-
  sale? Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Center for Energy and Environmental Policy
  Research, 2000.

Jonathan D. Ketcham, Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J. Miravete, and Christopher Roebuck.
  Sinking, swimming, or learning to swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review,
  102(6):2639–2673, October 2012.

Jun B. Kim, Paulo Albuquerque, and Bart J. Bronnenberg. Mapping online consumer search.
  Journal of Marketing Research, XLVIII:13–27, February 2011.

                                           32
Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel.
  Comparison friction: Experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127(1):199–235, 2012.

Sergei Koulayev. Search for differentiated products: identification and estimation. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 45(3):553–575, Fall 2014.

Fernando Luco. Distinguishing sources of inertia in a defined-contribution pension system.
  Texas A&M University, 2014.

Eugenio J. Miravete. Choosing the wrong calling plan? Ignorance and learning. American
  Economic Review, 93(1):297–310, March 2003.

Eugenio J. Miravete and Ignacio Palacios-Huerta. Consumer inertia, choice dependence
  and learning from experience in a repeated decision problem. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 96:524–537, 2014.

Jose Luis Moraga-Gonzalez and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest. Maximum likelihood estimation
  of search costs. European Economic Review, 52(5):820–848, July 2008.

Navigant. Home Energy Reports Program: Program year 2012 evaluation report. Technical
  report, Appendix H, 2013.

Christopher Neilson. Targeted vouchers, competition among schools, and the academic
 achievement of poor students. Working paper, 2013.

Seattle City Light. Seattle City Light Community Energy Forum: Communications study.
  Technical report, Vision Critical, November 2014.

Sangwoo Shin, Sanjog Misra, and Dan Horsky. Distentangling preferences and learning in
  brand choice models. Marketing Science, 31(1):115–137, 2012.

Kenneth A. Small and Harvey A. Rosen. Applied welfare economics with discrete choice
  models. Econometrica, 49(1):105–130, January 1981.

Andrew Sweeting. Market power in the England and Wales wholesale electricity market
 1995-2000. Economic Journal, 117(520):654–685, April 2007.

Catherine D. Wolfram. Measuring duopoly power in the British electricity spot market.
  American Economic Review, 89:805–826, September 1999.




                                           33
                                      .16
             Average $/kwh for 1000kwh
              .1      .12      .14.08




                                                   Jan 2002   Jan 2003       Jan 2004   Jan 2005     Jan 2006

                                                                         Incumbent       Entrant 1
                                                                         Entrant 2       Entrant 3
                                                                         Entrant 4       Entrant 5



Figure 1: Prices Charged by Incumbent and New Entrant Retailers in First Four Years of
Market


                                                                  Evolution of Market Shares
                                  1
             Share of Monthly Residential Consumption
                  .2       .4     0  .6       .8




                                      Jan 2002                Jan 2003       Jan 2004   Jan 2005     Jan 2006


Figure 2: Market Shares of Incumbent and New Entrant Retailers in First Four Years of
Market


                                                                              34
                                  Total Switches By Month




         40003000
Total Switches
  2000   1000
         0




                Jan 2002     Jan 2003     Jan 2004      Jan 2005     Jan 2006


          Figure 3: Total Number of Switches of Retailer By Month




                     Figure 4: Illustration of Identification Strategy




                                            35
      Table 1: Descriptive Analysis of Switching Away from Incumbent

Dependent Variable: Indicator of Switching from Incumbent
                                                      (1)         (2)                (3)
Number of Cheaper Entrant Retailers              0.0015*     0.0016*            0.0020*
                                                 (0.0001)    (0.0001)          (0.0001)
Log of Last Monthly Bill Received                            0.0027*            0.0010*
                                                             (0.0001)          (0.0001)
Calendar Quarter 2                                                              0.0038*
                                                                               (0.0001)
Calendar Quarter 3                                                              0.0069*
                                                                               (0.0001)
Calendar Quarter 4                                                              0.0070*
                                                                               (0.0001)
Constant                                         0.0047*    -0.0081*           -0.0056*
                                                 (0.0002)    (0.0005)          (0.0005)


Household Fixed Effects                              Yes          Yes                Yes


Observations                                    3,729,919   3,729,919         3,729,919

Notes: This table reports factors that are associated with switching away from the incum-
bent. An observation is a household-month when the household was served by the incumbent
in the previous month. The dependent variable is an indicator of whether the household
switched away from the incumbent to an entrant retailer in that month; the mean switch
rate is 1%. We estimate the correlations with a linear probability model using household
fixed effects.
* indicates statistical significance at 1% level.




                                           36
                                    Table 2: Primary Model Results

                                                                          Seasonality      Bill Shock
                                                          Benchmark        in Search     Affects Search          All

                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)
Stage 1: Decision to Choose
Parameters (γ)
Constant                                                    -3.363***        -3.72***         -3.468***        -3.643***
                                                             (0.04493)       (0.1233)         (0.04824)         (0.1485)
Incumbent                                                  -0.6432***      -0.6471***        -0.5893***       -0.6255***
                                                             (0.06408)      (0.06168)         (0.06848)        (0.06386)
January                                                                        0.2217                           0.03844
February                                                                       0.3753                             0.3148
March                                                                          0.2661                           0.04284
April                                                                         0.04052                            -0.1245
May                                                                            0.2098                             0.1757
June                                                                           0.2279                             0.1703
July                                                                       0.6384***                              0.3638
August                                                                     0.6347***                              0.4737
September                                                                    0.5412**                           0.4238*
October                                                                    0.5466***                            0.4288*
November                                                                      0.3833*                           0.3652*
Bill Shock ($ Change in Two Most Recent Bills)                                             0.007027***         0.002581
                                                                                             (0.001629)       (0.003098)
Estimated Effects
Prob(Search in month) if Incumbent Customer (λ)                   0.018         0.018                0.018         0.017
Prob(Search in month) if New Retailer Customer (λ)                0.033         0.033                0.032         0.032


Stage 2: Choice of Retailer
Parameters (θ)
Price (cents/kwh)                                          -0.4346***      -0.4642***        -0.4621***       -0.4453***
                                                             (0.09054)      (0.08343)         (0.09619)        (0.08476)
Incumbent Brand Dummy                                          2.764***      2.946***          2.789***        2.834***
                                                               (0.2559)      (0.2685)          (0.2943)          (0.293)
Incumbent*Month-of-Sample Counter                         -0.07564***     -0.08586***       -0.07542***      -0.07974***
                                                             (0.01427)      (0.01449)         (0.01578)        (0.01569)
Estimated Effects
Incumbent Price Elasticity                                        -2.52          -2.61               -2.67         -2.55
Avg Entrant Price Elasticity                                      -4.51          -4.82               -4.80         -4.62
Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in Jan 2004                        $61.86        $61.61            $58.72           $61.85
Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in April 2006                      $14.87        $11.67            $14.66           $13.50

Notes: This table reports results from the benchmark structural model of section 4 estimated via GMM. Parameter
estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses for the parameters of the two stages of the model. Then
the table reports point estimates of model effects that are calculated using the parameter estimates, in order to
facilitate model interpretation. We do not report standard errors for the month fixed effects in the interest of space.

                                                          37
                  Table 3: Illustrating Implications of Our Modeling Framework

                                                                   Benchmark        Include Movers       Turn Off Decision Stage

                                                                        (1)                (2)                       (3)
Stage 1: Decision to Choose
Parameters (γ)                                                                                                    λkit == 1
Constant                                                             -3.363***             -3.363***
                                                                     (0.04493)             (0.04493)
Incumbent                                                           -0.6432***           -0.6432***
                                                                     (0.06408)             (0.06408)
Estimated Effects
Prob(Search in month) if Incumbent Customer (λ)                           0.018                  0.018              == 1
Prob(Search in month) if New Retailer Customer (λ)                        0.033                  0.033              == 1


Stage 2: Choice of Retailer
Parameters (θ)
Price (cents/kwh)                                                   -0.4346***           -0.4346***                   -0.007849***
                                                                     (0.09054)             (0.09054)                       (0.002285)
Incumbent Brand Dummy                                                 2.764***             2.764***                        0.1322***
                                                                       (0.2559)             (0.2559)                        (0.02381)
Incumbent*Month-of-Sample Counter                                  -0.07564***          -0.07564***                   -0.003858***
                                                                     (0.01427)             (0.01427)                       (0.001211)
Mover*Price                                                                                  -0.0902
                                                                                            (0.1182)
Mover*Incumbent                                                                            1.231***
                                                                                            (0.2759)
Mover*Incumbent*Month-of-Sample Counter                                                   0.02964**
                                                                                           (0.01506)
Estimated Effects
Incumbent Price Elasticity                                                 -2.52                 -2.51                          -0.08
Avg Entrant Price Elasticity                                               -4.51                 -4.46                          -0.08
Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in January 2004                            $61.86               $61.86                          $163.51
Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in April 2006                              $14.87               $14.87                           $30.80
Movers Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in Jan 2004                                              $75.25
Movers Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in April 2006                                            $51.58

Notes: This table reports results to illustrate the implications our modeling framework, as described in section 5.3. Column (1)
reports our benchmark model results, which is also Column (1) 38from Table 2. Column (2) includes new market participants (movers)
by restricting movers to choose in stage 1 (λkit = 1) and allowing movers to have difference preference parameters, as described in
section 5.3. Column (3) illustrates the need for a Decision Stage of the model by removing the decision stage and imposing that
λkit = 1.
                                         Table 4: Benchmark Model by Neighborhood Demographics

                                                                      Income                          Education                     % Senior Citizens
                                                              Below           Above              Below           Above               Below           Above
                                                             Median          Median             Median          Median              Median          Median

     Stage 1: Decision to Choose
     Parameters (γ)
     Constant                                               -3.298***        -3.385***            -3.3***        -3.437***           -3.426***      -3.292***
                                                             (0.09961)         (0.0481)          (0.1039)        (0.03929)           (0.04682)      (0.09318)
     Incumbent                                              -1.019***       -0.3501***          -1.284***      -0.1967***            -0.291***      -1.021***
                                                              (0.1508)       (0.06585)           (0.1546)        (0.05506)           (0.07084)       (0.1481)
     Estimated Effects
     Prob(Search) if Incumbent Customer (λ)                      0.013            0.023              0.010           0.026               0.024           0.013
39




     Prob(Search) if New Retailer Customer (λ)                   0.036            0.033              0.036           0.031               0.031           0.036
     Stage 2: Choice of Retailer
     Parameters (θ)
     Price (cents/kwh)                                        -0.2747*      -0.4989***            -0.1343      -0.4561***          -0.4972***        -0.4064*
                                                              (0.1458)         (0.1039)          (0.1106)        (0.09459)           (0.09309)       (0.2351)
     Incumbent                                               3.204***         2.641***           3.707***        2.194***            2.327***        3.616***
                                                              (0.5377)         (0.2752)          (0.6016)         (0.1731)             (0.225)       (0.5068)
     Incumbent*Month-of-Sample Counter                     -0.0914***      -0.07093***        -0.1242***      -0.04595***         -0.05463***      -0.1044***
                                                             (0.02991)       (0.01531)          (0.03207)      (0.008963)            (0.01179)      (0.02776)
     Estimated Effects
     Incumbent Price Elasticity                                   -1.35            -3.04             -0.59            -2.98               -3.23          -1.81
     Avg Entrant Price Elasticity                                 -2.93            -5.13             -1.46            -4.67               -5.08          -4.36
     Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in Jan ‘04                  $113.31           $51.51           $266.78           $47.10              $45.70         $86.41
     Incumbent Brand Effect ($/mo) in April ‘06                 $23.47           $13.13            $17.08           $19.89              $16.04         $17.05

     Notes: This table reports results of estimating the benchmark model (Column 1 of Table 2) split by the demographic characteristics of the household’s
     Census block group. A household is classified by whether its Census block group is above or below the median among all Census block groups. “Education”
     is defined by the fraction of the population with a BS degree or above.
Table 5: Policy Counterfactuals: Annual Changes in Consumer Surplus Per Household

                                   Entrant Brand Effect Relative to Incumbent
                                           0%         25%        50%         75%         100%
   Fraction Searching
            2%             $0 (Status Quo)              $1          $3          $6           $8
           25%                            $32         $50         $73        $101         $133
           50%                            $67        $103        $149        $205         $268
           75%                           $101        $155        $225        $309         $404
          100%                           $136        $208        $301        $412         $539
   Notes: This table shows the average annual change in consumer surplus per household
   under the counterfactual experiment described in section 6. The status quo is that 2% of
   the incumbent’s customers search for alternative retailers in a given month and that new
   entrant retailers enjoy none of the incumbent’s brand effect. Under each counterfactual,
   we simultaneously change two characteristics of high inertia customers, i.e. those who are
   still purchasing from the incumbent after two years of retail choice. First, we increase the
   fraction of incumbent customers who search in a given month (displayed down the rows).
   Second, we endow the new entrant retailers with a fraction of the incumbent brand effect
   (displayed across the columns). The dollar figures are the estimated yearly increases in
   consumer surplus for each incumbent customer, calculated as discussed in section 6.




                                                40
A        Appendix
For Online Publication
       Demographic Differences in Potential Savings that are Achieved

    Here we provide descriptive evidence that retail choice disproportionately benefits specific
demographic groups. These correlations are consistent with the findings of our structural
model in section 5.4.
    We calculate metrics of the fraction of potential savings that were realized by switching,
as compared to a benchmark of purchasing from the incumbent at the price-to-beat for the
entire sample period. Our “upper bound” measure of electricity expenditures is the bill size
if the household had purchased from the incumbent for the entire sample period. Our “lower
bound” of expenditures is the monthly bill size if the household had purchased from the
lowest price retailer each month. Finally, we calculate the actual monthly bill under the
observed retail choice by the household and compare it to these bounds.
    For each household-month, we define a metric of the amount of potential savings that
are realized. “Percent achieved” is the percent of possible gains realized and is defined as:
P ercent Achieved ≡ Lowest Actual Bill−Incumbent Bill
                              P ossible Bill−Incumbent bill
                                                            . The mean “Percent achieved” across all
household-months is 11.0%.24 This relatively low figure should not be surprising because
nearly 60% of households purchase from the incumbent at the end of the sample period.
    We characterize correlations between “Percent achieved” and demographic characteris-
tics of the household’s neighborhood. Note that we do not have demographic data on the
occupants of each household; rather we have characteristics of the household’s Census block
group. Thus, we interpret these regressions as correlations between realized gains of retail
choice and demographics of the neighborhood rather than demographics of individuals.25
    Table 6 shows the mean of “Percent achieved” for households in Census block groups
above and below the median of three demographic characteristics – income, education, and
fraction of senior citizens. Specifically, we compute if each Census block group is above or
below the median Census block group when ordered by household income, fraction of the pop-
ulation with at least a bachelor’s degree, and the fraction of the population that is over age
65. The mean “Percent achieved” is nearly twice as large in high income versus low income
neighborhoods – 14.2% in wealthier neighborhoods and 7.5% in less wealthy neighborhoods.
Similar trends are present when comparing neighborhoods by education and senior citizens.
Households realize more of the potential savings of switching in neighborhoods with higher
education and fewer senior citizens.




  24
     In calculating this figure, we do not include months in which there were no potential savings from
switching away from the incumbent, which primarily includes only the first few months of the sample period.
  25
     Borenstein [2010] documents the heterogeneity within Census block groups and the shortcomings of
using such metrics for distributional analyses in some settings.


                                                    41
Table 6: Direct Measures of Potential Savings that are Achieved by Switching


     Characteristic of Block Group                              High             Low
     Income                                                    14.2%             7.5%
     Fraction Senior                                            8.1%           13.8%
     Fraction with Education Bachelor or More                  14.3%             7.4%

     Notes: This table contains the mean “Percent Achieved” of possible savings
     from switching to the lowest price retailer, as compared to remaining with
     incumbent. We calculate the monthly bill size under three scenarios: 1) pur-
     chasing from the incumbent, 2) purchasing from the lowest-price retailer, and
     3) the household’s actual choice. “Percent achieved” is the percent of possible
     gains realized ((actual bill - incumbent bill) / (lowest possible bill - incumbent
     bill)). Households are grouped by the characteristics of their Census block
     group into categories of above or below the median for the sample.




                                            42
                      Figure 5: Web Portal to Search and Switch Retailers



Notes: This displays a screenshot of the website www.powertochoose.com where households can search for
alternative retailers and switch on-line. A customer enters her zipcode and then is able to observe a list
that displays the average price per kwh at a usage level of 1000kwh/month. If she finds a plan she wishes
to switch to, she clicks on “Sign Up” and then goes through a brief on-line process to switch the retailer.




                                                    43
                         Figure 6: Frequency of Switches Per Household



Notes: This figure displays the frequency of the number of switches in retailer by a household over the
sample period of January 2002-April 2006. This indicates that 64% of households never switched, and for
those that did switch retailers, most switched only once or twice.




                                                  44
