NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEACHERS’ PAY FOR PERFORMANCE IN THE LONG-RUN:
EFFECTS ON STUDENTS’ EDUCATIONAL AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES IN ADULTHOOD
Victor Lavy
Working Paper 20983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20983

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

Excellent research assistance was provided by Boaz Abramson, Elior Cohen, and Michal Hodor. I
thank Jo Altonji, Josh Angrist, Peter Dolton, Zvi Eckstein, Nathaniel Hendren, Hilary Hoynes, Ed
Lazear, Yona Rubinstein, three referees of this journal and participants at seminars at Hebrew
University, University of California Santa Barbara, IDC Herzelia, University of Warwick, NBER
2015 Summer Institute Personnel Economics Conference, CEPR 2016 Public Economics Annual
Symposium, Warwick-Venice 2016 Labor Economics Conference, Barcelona 2016 Summer
Forum and CESifo Economics of Education 2016 Conference for useful comments and
suggestions. I thank Israel’s National Insurance Institute (NII) for allowing restricted access to
post-secondary schooling and economic and social outcomes data at adulthood in the NII
protected research lab. I acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council
through ERC Advance Grant 323439, the Israeli Science Foundation and the Maurice Falk
Institute in Jerusalem. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Teachers’ Pay for Performance in the Long-Run: Effects on Students’ Educational and Labor
Market Outcomes in Adulthood
Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 20983
February 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. J24,J3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the dynamic effects of a teachers’ pay for performance experiment on longterm outcomes at adulthood. The program led to a gradual increase in university education of the
high school treated students, reaching a gain of 0.25 years of schooling at age 28-30. The effects
on employment and earnings were initially negative, coinciding with a higher enrollment rate in
university, but became positive and significant with time. These gains are largely mediated by the
positive effect of the program on several high school outcomes, including quantity and quality
gains in the high stake matriculation exams.

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk

1. Introduction
The long term effect of teachers’ pay for performance (PFP) schemes is of particular interest
because of skeptics’ claims that they only improve student test scores by teaching to the test, or by
encouraging teachers and schools to cheat. Skeptics claim there is no real increase in human capital
because teachers do not respond to pay incentives by promoting broad human capital acquisition.
They argue that teachers focus on improving students’ test taking ability; on test preparation instead
of teaching material not included in the exam; on exam strategies such as how to answer multiple
choice questions, and on skills and actions that raise scores on the formulas used to reward teachers.1
Concerns about narrowly targeted gains are heightened if those gains are focused on areas where labor
market rewards are due to signaling rather than human capital acquisition.
To address these claims, I examine the effect of teachers’ PFP on long term human capital
outcomes, in particular attainment and quality of higher education, and labor market outcomes at
adulthood, in particular employment and earnings. I use a teachers’ PFP experiment which I
conducted a decade and half ago in Israel. In Lavy (2009) I analyzed the short-term effects of this
experiment on students’ cognitive high school outcomes. Now, this earlier research presents an
unusual opportunity to evaluate whether an intervention that offered teachers performance-based
bonuses for student test achievements has had a lasting impact on adult well-being. This paper
provides the first evidence of links between teachers’ PFP during high school and students’ schooling
and labor market outcomes in their late 20s and early 30s. I measure post-secondary educational
attainment, employment, earnings, eligibility for unemployment benefit and marriage and fertility.
Some of these outcomes, for example the latter two, can also be viewed as potential mechanisms for
the effect of the intervention on employment and earnings.
I observe these students' outcomes every year, from high school graduation (2000-2001) until
age 30 (in 2012). Thus I can estimate the treatment effects for every year in the period, and trace the
dynamic evolution of the program effect. Since a high proportion of the sample was in military

See Jacob and Levitt (2003), Glewwe, Ilias and Kremer (2010), Neal (2011) and Muralidharan and
Sundararaman (2011) for a discussion of this issue.

1

1

service for two (female) or three (male) years after high school2, the estimates for these years (20002004) are not very informative, because they are based on a small and selective sample of those
students not enlisted into military service. However, during 2005-2008 the treated group showed a
higher enrollment rate in university schooling, and a corresponding lower employment rate and lower
earnings. By the end of this period these negative effects were eliminated and the earnings effect
turned positive, increasing in size and becoming significantly different from zero 9-12 years after high
school graduation.
Just over a decade after the end of the intervention, treated students are 5 percentage points
more likely to be enrolled in university education and to complete an additional 0.25 years of
university schooling, a 35 percent increase relative to the control group mean. These gains are most
likely explained by the improvements in high school bagrut outcomes facilitated by the teachers’ PFP
intervention. The higher passing rate and average score in the math and English matriculation exams
(Lavy 2009), are also expressed in improvements in average matriculation outcomes, such as
matriculation diploma certification (up by 3 percentage points) and the overall composite
matriculation score (up by 2.9 points). These two outcomes determine admission to university and to
selective study programs, such as medicine, engineering and computer science. Other dimensions of
the matriculation study program that signal quality of schooling also improved, in particular the
number of science credit units, which increased by 26 percent, and the number of subjects studied at
the most advanced level, which increased by 5 percent.
These high school outcomes are also highly correlated with labor market outcomes at
adulthood. These improvements, along with the increase in university schooling, led to a 1.2
percentage point gain in employment rate and to a 6-7 percent increase in earnings at age 28-30. The
estimates suggest that the program did not have an effect on average marriage and parenthood rates.
These average gains mask some heterogeneity by family income and gender. For example, children
from families with above median income experience a higher increase in schooling but no effect on

Israelis begin a period of compulsory military service after high-school graduation. Boys serve for three years
and girls for two (longer if they take a commission). Ultra-orthodox Jews are exempt from military service as

2

2

employment, while children from families with below median income have lower gains in schooling
and a large positive effect on employment. The effect on earnings is the same for both groups.
Children from families with below median income also experienced a significant decline in marriage
rate and a more modest decline in fertility.
The results of this analysis have meaningful external validity and are easily transferable and
applicable to education in other developed countries. Both the high school system in Israel and its
high-stakes exit exams are very similar to those in other countries. Importantly, variants of the
teachers’ PFP intervention studied here have been implemented in recent years in developed and
developing countries. This study contributes to the accumulation of empirical evidence about the
returns to educational interventions, creating a useful guide for policy makers. Another important
advantage of the evidence presented in this paper is that teachers’ PFP is an intervention that can be
directly implemented by public policy, whereas evidence based on parameters such as school or
teacher quality are not so easily measured or rewarded by policy interventions.
This paper adds to a growing literature on the long term effects of educational programs.
Earlier studies focused on the long-term effects of compulsory schooling laws on adult educational
attainment (Angrist and Krueger, 1991) and on adult health (Lleras-Muney, 2005), for example. More
recent studies have addressed schooling programs aimed at improving the quality of education in
addition to increasing attainment. Most of these studies have asked whether the evaluation of shortterm outcomes, primarily standardized test scores, are an effective measure of success. However, an
equally relevant question is the extent to which educational interventions lead to long-term
improvements in well-being – measures assessed not by attainment on tests but by attainment in life.
Puzzling and conflicting results from several evaluations make this a highly salient issue. Three smallscale, intensive preschool experiments produced large effects on contemporaneous test scores that
quickly faded (Schweinhart et al., 2005; Anderson, 2008). Non-experimental evaluations of Head
Start, a preschool program for poor children, revealed a similar pattern, with test-score effects
dissipating by middle school. But in each of these studies, treatment effects re-emerged in adulthood
long as they are enrolled in seminary (Yeshiva); orthodox Jewish girls are exempt upon request; Arabs are

3

in the form of increased educational attainment, enhanced labor market attachment, and reduced crime
(Deming, 2009; Garces et al., 2002; Ludwig and Miller, 2007). Other studies have shown evidence for
the effect of investments in childhood on postsecondary attainment (Krueger and Whitmore 2001,
Dynarski et al 2011). Very recently, Chetty et al (2011 and 2014) examined the longer-term effect of
value-added measures of teachers’ quality in a large urban school district in the United States, and
reported significant effects on earnings at age 27 even though the effect on test scores had faded away
much earlier. Dustmann et al (2012), however, found that attending a better school in Germany had no
effect on school attainment or labor-market outcomes. Even though the ultimate goal of education is
to improve lifetime well-being and there is much uncertainty about the long term gains from such
programs, there have not been any studies that focus on the long term effect of teachers’ PFP.
Determining which interventions are more effective in improving long-term outcomes is critical for
refining the effectiveness of education and school resource allocation.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the PFP experiment and the
identification and econometric model. Section 3 describes the data and Section 4 presents the
empirical findings. Section 5 concludes.
2. The Pay for Performance Experiment
Teacher incentive programs are increasing in popularity. Performance-related pay for teachers
is being introduced in many countries, amidst much controversy and opposition from teachers and
unions. The rationale for these programs is that incentive pay may motivate teachers to improve their
performance (Lazear 2000 and 2001, Lavy 2002, 2007 and 2009, Neal 2011, Duflo et al. 2012).
Opponents of teachers’ incentive programs argue that schools may respond to test score-based
incentives in perverse ways such as by cheating in grading and teaching to the test (Glewwe et al,
2010, Neal 2011), leading to short term gains in performance but not to the long-term accumulation of
human capital. Even though there is some evidence that performance pay for teachers has significant
short term benefits for student outcomes, their critique is focused on purported harmful long term

exempt, though some volunteer.

4

effects, for which there is scant evidence. The evidence in this paper cast doubts on these claims by
presenting results on a wide array of lifetime outcomes.
The Teachers’ Incentive Experiment
In December 2000, the Israeli Ministry of Education unveiled a new teachers’ bonus
experiment that I designed and helped to implement in 49 high schools. The main feature of the
program was an individual performance bonus paid to teachers on the basis of their students’
achievements. The experiment included all teachers of English, Hebrew, Arabic, and mathematics for
grades 10 through 12, in advance of matriculation exams in these subjects in June 2001. The ranking
was based on the difference between the actual outcome, and a value predicted on the basis of a
regression that controlled for the students’ study program and socioeconomic characteristics and a
fixed school level effect. Separate regressions were used to compute the predicted pass rate and mean
score, and each teacher was ranked twice – once for each outcome – using the size of the residual
from the regressions. All teachers whose students' mean residual was positive in both outcomes were
divided into four ranking groups, from first place to fourth. The first place award was $7,500; second
place, $5,750; third place, $3,500; and fourth place, $1,750.
There were two criteria for school eligibility: 1) a recent history of relatively poor
performance in the mathematics or English matriculation exams, and 2) the most recent school-level
matriculation rate was equal to or lower than the national mean of 45 percent. Though 99 schools met
the first criterion, only 49 met the second criterion. The program included 629 teachers. Nearly half of
the teachers, 302 of them, won awards—94 in English, 124 in math, 67 in Hebrew and Arabic, and 17
in other subjects. Although the program was designed as an experiment, schools were not randomly
assigned to it. Nevertheless, the design of the program enables the implementation of a randomized
trial identification strategy, which I outline below. The short term impact, presented in Lavy (2009),
was that teacher incentives increased students' achievements by increasing the test taking rate, as well
as the conditional pass rate and test scores, in math and English exams. The improvement in these
conditional outcomes, which were estimated based on external tests and grading, accounted for more
than half of the increase in the unconditional outcomes in math and somewhat less in English. These

5

improvements appear to result from changes in teaching methods, after-school teaching, and increased
responsiveness to students’ needs, and not from artificial inflation or manipulation in test scores. The
evidence that incentives induced improved effort and pedagogy is an important counter to concern
that incentives may have unintended effects, such as “teaching to the test” or cheating and
manipulation of test scores, and that they do not generate real learning. However, more conclusive
evidence about whether teachers' PFP schemes improve human capital accumulation can only be
based on longer term outcomes, in particular the effect on completed post-secondary schooling,
employment, wages, welfare dependency and crime, which I investigate here.
Identification and econometric model: measurement error in the assignment variable
The program rules limited assignment to schools with a 1999 matriculation rate equal to or
lower than 45 percent (43 percent for religious and Arab schools). However, the matriculation rate
used for assignment was an inaccurate measure of this variable. This measurement error could be
useful for identification of the program effect. In particular, conditional on the true matriculation rate,
program status may be virtually randomly assigned due to mistakes in the preliminary file. Most (80
percent) of the measurement errors were negative, 17 percent were positive, and the rest were free of
error. Identification based on the random measurement error can be presented formally as follows:
Let S = S* +  be the error-affected 1999 matriculation rate used for the assignment, where S*
represents the correct 1999 matriculation rate and  the measurement error. T denotes participation
status, with T = 1 for participants and T = 0 for non-participants. Since T (S) = T (S* +), once we
control for S*, assignment to treatment is random (“random assignment” to treatment, conditional on
the true value of the matriculation rate). The presence of a measurement error creates a natural
experiment, where treatment is assigned randomly, conditional on S*, in a sub-sample of the 98
eligible schools. Eighteen of the eligible schools had a correct 1999 matriculation rate above the
threshold. Thus, these schools were “erroneously” chosen for the program. For each of these schools,
there is a school with an identical correct matriculation rate but with a draw from the (random)
measurement error distribution which is not large (and negative) enough to drop it below the

6

assignment threshold. Such pairing of schools amounts to non-parametrically matching schools on the
basis of the value of S*(see Figure 3 in Lavy 2009 for a graphical presentation of this matching).
Therefore, the eighteen untreated schools may be used as a control group that reflects the
counterfactual for identification of the effect of the program. The group of 18 treated and 18 control
schools is perfectly balanced in student and school characteristics (see Table A1 in the appendix,
which is reproduced from Lavy 2009 Table 3. In the next section I show that the treatment-control
similarities observed in Table A1 are also evident when comparing the pre-program long-term
outcomes). The following model is used as the basis for regression estimates using the NE sample:
Yijt =  + Xijt’  + Zjt’  +  Tjt + Φj + η Dt + ijt
where i indexes individuals; j indexes schools; t indexes years 2000 and 2001, and T is the assigned
treatment status. X and Z are vectors of individual and school level covariates and Dt denotes year
effects with a factor loading η. The treatment indicator Tjt is equal to the interaction between a dummy
for treated schools and a dummy for the year 2001. The regressions will be estimated using pooled
data from both years (the two adjacent cohorts of 2000 and 2001), stacked as school panel data with
fixed school-level effects (Φj) included in the regression. The resulting estimates can be interpreted as
an individual-weighted difference-in-differences procedure comparing treatment effects across years.
The estimates are implicitly weighted by the number of students in each school. The introduction of
school fixed effects controls for time-invariant omitted variables and also provides an alternative
control for school-level clustering.
Identification based on a Regression Discontinuity model
To check the robustness of the results based on the NE sample, I use an additional alternative
method, an RD design, to identify the effect of the teacher bonus program. Given that the rule
governing selection to the program was simply based on a discontinuous function of a school
observable, the probability of receiving treatment changes discontinuously as a function of this
observable. The discontinuity in our case is a sharp decrease (to zero) in the probability of treatment
beyond a 45 percent school matriculation rate for nonreligious Jewish schools and beyond 43 percent
for Jewish religious schools and Arab schools. I exploit this sharp discontinuity to define a treatment

7

sample that included schools that were just below (up to -5 percent) the threshold of selection to the
program and a comparison group that included untreated schools that were just above (up to +5
percent) this threshold. The time series on school matriculation rates show that the rates fluctuate
from year to year for reasons that transcend trends or changes in the composition of the student body.
Some of these fluctuations are random. Therefore, marginal (in terms of distance from the threshold)
participants may be similar to marginal nonparticipants. The degree of similarity depends on the width
of the band around the threshold. Sample size considerations exclude the possibility of a bandwidth
lower than 10 percent, and a wider band implies fluctuations of a magnitude that are not likely to be
related to random changes. Therefore, a bandwidth of about 10 percent seems to be a reasonable
choice in our case. The main drawback of this approach is that it produces an estimate from
marginally (relative to the threshold) exposed schools only. However, this sample may be of
particular interest because the threshold schools could be representative of the schools that such
programs are most likely to target.
There are 13 untreated schools with matriculation rates in the 0.46–0.52 range and 14 treated
schools in the 0.40–0.45 range. The 0.40–0.52 range may be too large, but I can control for the value
of the assignment variable (the mean matriculation rate) in the analysis. Note, also, that there is some
overlap between this sample and the natural experiment sample. Eleven of the 14 treated schools and
8 of the 11 control schools in the RD sample are also part of the natural experiment sample, leaving
only six schools (3 control and 3 treated), which are included in the former but not in the latter.
However, there are 17 schools in the NE sample (7 treated and 10 control) that are not included in the
RD sample, which suggests that there is enough “informational value added” in each of the samples.
Table A2 in the appendix (reproduced from Lavy 2009 Table 6) is similar to Table A1, but
for the RD sample. The treatment-control differences and standard errors in the student background
variables (columns 3 and 6) reveal that the two groups are very similar in both years in all
characteristics except the ethnicity variable in year 2000 and number of siblings in 2001. However,
both estimated differences are only marginally significant. The third panel reveals some treatmentcontrol differences: in math lagged credits and in the average score for the 2001 cohort, and in
English lagged credits for the 2000 cohort. However, the control-treatment gaps in lagged credits are

8

opposite in sign in math (negative) and English (positive) and in each subject they are significant for
only one of the two cohorts. In the next section I show that the RD sample treatment-control
similarities observed in Table A2 are also evident when comparing the pre-program long-term
outcomes.
To interpret similarity or differences between the estimates of the two methods, it is important
to note that the main conceptual difference between the NE and the RD methods is that the latter does
not control for S* and, if there were no measurement errors, the RD design would have compared, in
addition, pupils or schools with different S*. The two methods would therefore yield similar results if
either S* is weakly related to the outcomes or if the variance of the measurement error is large relative
to the variance of S* around the cut-off point (which means that those above and below the critical S
have approximately the same S*). The first condition is met, as S* has very small positive correlations
with the high school and post-secondary schooling and labor market outcomes. The second condition
is not met because within the range (0.40-0.52) around the cutoff point of the assignment variable (S),
the two relevant variances are very similar, 0.075 for the measurement error and 0.078 for S*.
3. Data
In this study I use data from the administrative files of the participants in the treatment and
control groups. The students in the sample graduated from high school between 2000 and 2001, and in
2013 they are adults aged 30-31. I use several panel datasets from Israel’s National Insurance Institute
(NII). The NII is responsible for social security and mandatory health insurance in Israel. NII allows
restricted access to this data in their protected research lab. The underlying data sources include: (1)
the population registry data, which contains information on marital status, number of children and
their birth dates; (2) NII records of post-secondary enrollment from 2000 through 2013, based on
annual reports submitted to NII every fall term by all of Israel’s post-secondary education institutions.
Based on this annual enrollment data I computed the number of years of post-secondary schooling3;
(3) Israel Tax Authority information on income and earnings of employees and self-employed

3

The NII, which is responsible for the mandatory health insurance tax in Israel, tracks post-secondary
enrollment because students pay a lower health insurance tax rate. Post-secondary schools are therefore required

9

individuals for each year during 2000-2012. This file includes information both for the students and
their fathers and mothers; (4) NII records on unemployment benefits for the period 2009-2012, and
marriage and fertility information as of 2012. The NII linked these data to students’ background data
that I used in Lavy (2009). This information comes from administrative records of the Ministry of
Education on the universe of Israeli primary schools during the 1997-2002 school years. In addition to
individual identifier, and a school and class identifier, it also included the following familybackground variables: parental schooling, number of siblings, country of birth, date of immigration if
born outside of Israel, ethnicity and a variety of high school and high school achievement measures.
This file also included a treatment indicator, school ID and cohort of study. I had restricted access to
this data in the NII research lab at the NII headquarters in Jerusalem.
The NII data track all individuals in Israel and also those who left the country providing they
continue to pay National Insurance Tax (similar to social security tax in the US). The basic sample of
students from all 98 schools that were eligible to participate in the program included 25,588 students.
Only 153 students from this sample (0.6 percent) were not found in the Population Registry at NII, 68
were from the control group (out of 12,500) and 85 from the treated group (out of 13,068). The
proportion in the natural experiment and in the regression discontinuity sample are very similar to the
proportion in the eligible sample. This means our long term analysis tracks 99.4 of the students to
adulthood.
The post high school academic schooling system in Israel
The post high school academic schooling system in Israel includes seven universities (one of
which confers only graduate and PhD degrees), and over 50 colleges that confer academic
undergraduate degrees (some of these also give masters degrees)4. All universities require a bagrut
diploma for enrollment. Most academic colleges also require a bagrut, though some look at specific
bagrut diploma components without requiring full certification. For a given field of study, it is
typically more difficult to be admitted to a university than to a college. The national university

to send a list of enrolled students to the NII every year. For the purposes of this project, the NII Research and
Planning Division constructed an extract containing the 2001–2013 enrollment status of students in our study.

10

enrollment rates for the cohort of graduating seniors in 1995 (through 2003) was 27.6 percent and the
rate for academic colleges was 8.5 percent.5
The post-high school outcome variables of interest here are indicators of ever having enrolled
in a university or in an academic college as of the 2013 school year, and the number of years of
schooling completed in these two types of academic institutions by this date. I measure these two
outcomes for the 2000 and 2001 12th grade students. Even after accounting for compulsory military
service6, we expect that most students who enrolled in academic post-high school education, including
those who undertook post-graduate studies, to have graduated by the 2013 academic year.
Definitions of Outcomes in Adulthood
In this subsection, I describe the outcomes in adulthood for students in the sample.
Post-Secondary Academic Schooling
In the NII data, I observe two sets of post-secondary outcomes for each of the students in the sample.
First, I observe year-by-year post-secondary schooling attainment, including the type of postsecondary schooling institution attended – if any – and the number of years of schooling completed in
each type of institution.
Labor Market Outcomes
I observe year-by-year labor market outcomes from high school graduation to 2012, including
employment status and annual earnings. Individual earnings data come from the Israel Tax Authority
(ITA). Only individuals with non-zero self-employment income are required to file tax forms in
Israel, but ITA has information on annual gross earnings from salaried and non-salaried employment
and transfers this information annually to NII, including the number of months of work in a given
year. NII produces an annual series of total annual earnings from salaried and self-employment.
Following NII practice, individuals with positive (non-zero) number of months of work and zero or

A 1991 reform sharply increased the supply of post-secondary schooling in Israel by creating publicly funded
regional and professional colleges.
5
These data are from the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, Report on Post-Secondary Schooling of High
School Graduates in 1989–1995 (available at:
http://www.cbs.gov.il/publications/h_education02/h_education_h.htm).
4

11

missing value for earnings are assigned zero earnings. 14.1% of individuals (students) have zero
earnings at age 30-31 in our basic sample and 16.6% have zero earnings in this sample. To account
for earnings data outliers I dropped from the sample all observations that are six or more standard
deviations away from the mean. Very few observations are dropped from the sample in each of the
years and the results are not qualitatively affected by this sample selection procedure. To account for
age differences of the different cohorts included in the sample, the outcomes are adjusted for years
since graduating high school. The same earnings data is also available for the parents of the students
in our sample, for the years 2000-2002 and 2008-2012. I compute the average earnings of each parent
and of the household for 2000-2002 and use it as an additional control in a robustness check of the
evidence presented in this paper. These data were not available for the analysis of the effect of the
program on short-term outcomes. I also use as additional outcomes the NII indicator of being Eligible
for Unemployment Benefit and the annual amount of Unemployment Benefit Compensation.
Personal Status Outcomes
The Population Registry is available to us only for 2012. However, the dates of each marriage
and birth event are reported in the data and therefore I can adjust the demographic outcomes for years
since graduating high school. These outcomes include indictors for Marriage Status and for Having
Children.
Descriptive Statistics
Table 1, columns 1-2, presents detailed summary descriptive statistics for the outcome
variables for 2012 by treatment and control group, for the pre-program cohort who graduated high
school in 2000 (pre-treatment) for the NE full sample and treatment-control balancing tests (column
3). In columns 4-6, I present the respective evidence for the first three quartiles sample (3Q) of the
ability distribution of students. I present results based separately on the 3Q sample because these are
the students whose math and English matriculation outcomes were most affected by the teachers’
bonuses program (Lavy 2009). The balancing tests extend the analysis presented in Lavy (2009) for
the similarity between the treatment and the control group in terms of family characteristics and preprogram high school outcomes. These results are reproduced here for convenience in Table A1 in the

12

appendix. In this section I show that the treatment-control similarities observed in Table A1 are also
evident when comparing the pre-program long-term outcomes presented in Table 1.
Statistics on post-secondary academic enrollment rates are presented in panel A, and on postsecondary completed years of schooling in panel B. The ever enrolled rate in university up to 2012 in
the treatment group for the pre-treatment cohort (2000) in the full sample is 21.6 percent, and in the
control group it is 19.1 percent. The treatment-control difference is 0.026 (se-0.046), not statistically
different from zero. The respective enrollment rates in academic colleges are 14.5 and 14.3,
practically equal for the two groups.7 This perfect balancing is also evident when the treatmentcontrol differences are measured based on the 3 quartile sample (columns 4-6): the university and
academic-college enrollment rate differences between the two groups are 0.001 (se=0.034) and 0.009
(se=0.035). Note that the means of these outcomes show clearly that in the full sample the mean of
enrollment rate in university is higher than in the 3 quartiles sample while the respective means in
academic colleges in the two samples are identical. This is expected as the students in the fourth
quartile have the highest mean high school outcomes.
Similar treatment-control similarities are observed with respect to completed years of
university and academic college. This evidence is presented in panel B: all four differences (in the
natural experiment full and three quartile samples) are small and not statistically different from zero.
For example, the mean years of academic college in the full sample is 0.379 in the treatment sample
and 0.365 in the control sample; the difference, 0.014, is not statistically different from zero. In
summary, of the 8 schooling related difference estimates presented in panel A and B, none suggest
any pre-program control-treatment gaps.
Summary statistics and balancing tests for the pre-program cohort labor market outcomes in
2012 are presented in panel C of Table 1. The employment rate in 2012 among the treatment and
control groups is 84.0 and 84.6 percent, the difference (-.006) is small and not significant. Average
annual earnings of these two groups are 67,214 New Israel Shekels (NIS), equivalent to $17,690, and
69,478 NIS ($18,300), respectively, and the difference is not statistically different from zero (-2,265,
se=3945). The unemployment rate for these two groups is 8.0 percent and 8.7 percent (very similar to

13

the national unemployment rate in 2012), and again the groups’ difference is not statistically different
from zero. Correspondingly there is no difference between the mean annual unemployment benefits
received during 2012 for the two groups. The evidence from the 3 quartile sample, presented in
columns 4-6, shows the same basic similarity in outcome means between the treatment and control
groups. None of the eight differences presented in panel C of Table 1 are statistically different from
zero.
Panel D presents the means and balancing tests for marriage and fertility outcomes. About 56
percent of the individuals in the sample are married by 2012 and the treatment-control difference (two
percent) is not different from zero. 45 percent of the sample have children, suggesting that almost all
who are married have children by 2012. However, there are no differences in these two outcomes
between treatment and control group and in the mean number of children, which is just below one.
The evidence about the means and balancing tests based on the three quartile sample are identical to
those based on the full sample.
Panel E presents the means and balancing tests for father and mother average earnings in
2000-2002, the years that students in the sample were in high school. Note that this information
became available only recently through the NII data, and I therefore add them now to the treatmentcontrol balancing analysis. The treatment-control differences in these variables are positive in the full
sample but they are relatively small and not significantly different from zero. In the three quartile
sample the differences are even smaller, and in the case of maternal earnings the difference changes
signs and is negative. Here as well, the small differences are not statistically different from zero. The
evidence on balancing of parental earnings when using the treated cohort sample is very similar,
without any noticeable treatment-control differences in the full or three quartile sample. These results
are not presented in Table 1, which presents balancing tests for the pre-treatment cohort.
Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics and balancing tests based on the Regression
Discontinuity (RD) sample. This sample is smaller than the NE sample, in particular the treated group
is smaller by about 30 percent. Yet the means of the treatment and control groups are very similar to
those based on the NE sample, and the respective balancing tests show a very similar pattern to that
7

Note that very few students ever enroll in both university and academic colleges.

14

obtained from the NE sample. Namely, there are no detectable differences between treatment and
control groups and all t-tests permit rejecting the hypothesis that the differences are different from
zero. However, it is worth noting that the signs of some of the differences are opposite to the signs of
the NE sample differences. Of particular interest and importance is the treatment-control earnings gap
in the pre-program cohort. In the NE sample (panel C in Table 1) this gap is negative though small
and not significant, while in the RD sample it is positive, though small and not significant (panel C in
Table 2). I will return to this distinction when discussing the treatment estimates of the effect on
earnings which, as will be shown, are very similar in the NE and RD samples.
4. Empirical Evidence
Effect on Post-Secondary Academic Schooling Attainment
The program had positive and significant short term effects on high school English and math
outcomes at the end of high school (Lavy 2009). Since the program increased exam participation, the
average score, and the passing rate in the math and English matriculation exams, we should expect
also a positive effect on the overall summary outcomes of the matriculation exams. This includes the
matriculation rate, total number of matriculation credits, and the average score in the all matriculation
exams which could also have improved because of spillover effects of the program on other subjects’
exam take up rate and test scores. Improvement in these summary achievement measures should lead
to an increase in post-secondary academic schooling, because they are used as admission criteria for
various academic institutions and study programs.
Table A3 presents results for the short-run impact of the PFP experiment summary measures
on the matriculation exam program, including the average matriculation score, the matriculation rate
and other related end of high school outcomes. In the full sample, the average matriculation score is
up by 3.8 points (se=1.017), and the matriculation rate went up by 3.6 percentage points, which
amounts to a 8 percent improvement. The average number of credit units increased by 0.8, the number
of credits in science increased by 0.6 units (a 25% percent increase), and the number of subjects
studied at the most advanced level (5 credits) increased by 0.1. The respective estimated effects based
on the three quartile sample are similar to those based on the full sample with one exception: the

15

effect on the matriculation rate is a 5.5 percentage point increase, larger than the effect estimated in
the full sample. This difference is consistent with and can be explained by the evidence presented in
Lavy (2009) that indicated that the effect on the math and English tests’ passing rate was also
marginally larger in the three quartile sample, an improvement that allowed marginally failing
students to qualify for the matriculation diploma.
I make a graphical representation of the effect of the PFP program on post-secondary
schooling, focusing on the two branches of academic post-secondary education in Israel. The first
includes the seven research universities in Israel that confer BA, MA and PhD degrees. These schools
require a matriculation diploma for admission, an intermediate or advanced matriculation study level
in English (note that to qualify for a matriculation diploma a basic study program in English is
sufficient) and at least one matriculation subject at an advanced level. About 35% of all students are
enrolled in one of the seven universities. The second branch includes more than 50 academic colleges
that mostly confer a BA degree and generally offer social sciences, business and law degrees.
In figure 1, we measure the treatment effect for each year since high school graduation and
trace the dynamic pattern for university enrollment for the NE sample. To do so, we run a separate
regression for each of the outcomes and for each of the years since high school graduation. We then
plot the coefficients of these regressions around a 90% confidence interval. Note that both the everenrolled variable and the years of schooling are cumulative variables. Hence, we expected the effects
to be either flat or increasing over time.
This treatment effect becomes positive from year three after graduating high school and it
reaches its height, at 5 percentage points, from the eighth year after high school graduation, remaining
flat afterwards.8 This pattern likely reflects the fact that students who do not enroll in post-secondary
schooling in the first eight years are very unlikely to return to school later in life. In contrast, the
effect on years of schooling accumulates over time (Figure 1A). Although most of the increase
happens in the first eight years, the effect seems to be increasing even after 12 years since graduation,
reaching a peak of 0.25 years. The fact that the increase keeps accumulating even 12 years after high

The emergence of treatment effect after three years is reasonable given that most of the female students are in
military service for the two years following high school graduation and for boys this period is three years.

8

16

school graduation suggests that focusing on outcomes immediately after graduation may
underestimate the long-term effects. Note that the effect on the intensive margin seems to operate
beyond the increase in enrollment. Given a 5 percentage-point increase in enrollment and a typical
duration of 3-4 years, we should expect schooling to increase by only 0.15-0.20 years. The fact that
the effect on years of schooling is larger than 0.20 years suggests that the program induced treated
students to stay longer and complete longer programs.
The effect size on enrollment and years of schooling can be assessed in comparison to the
mean enrollment rate for the treated group, which increases gradually from year one and is highest at
20 percent thirteen years later. The mean of university years of schooling in the treatment group is
0.8.9 Figures 2 and 2A present the estimated effects on academic college enrollment and attainment
and the pattern revealed in these figures is very different, as the effect is negative and small,
practically close to zero.
In Figures 3-3A and 4-4A I replicated this graphical analysis based on the RD sample and the
results are identical to those obtained based on the NE sample. Figures 5-5A and 6-6A present the
respective graphs for the NE 3Q sample and Figures 7-7A and 8-8A do the same for the RD 3Q
sample. The evidence in these figures is practically the same as those obtained based on the full
sample.
Table 3 presents the point estimates and their standard errors for the impact of the PFP
experiment on university and academic colleges schooling attainment, as measured at the end of the
period of study. The table presents results based on the NE sample (columns 1-4) and the RD sample
(columns 5-8). Effects on enrollment are presented in columns 1-2 and 5-6. Evidence for years of
schooling is presented in columns 3-4 and 7-8. The results based on the full sample are presented in
panel A.
Enrollment in university increased by 4.8 percentage points and this effect is precisely
measured (se=0.013). This gain, relative to the pre-program mean of students in treatment schools
(21.6 percent), is a 22 percent increase. This increase in enrolment led to a 0.250 increase in

The yearly university enrollment rate is highest at year 4-7 and then starts to decline until practically leveling
at close to zero at year 13 (this result is not shown in the paper due to space limitations).

9

17

completed years of university schooling, reflecting a 30 percent increase relative to the baseline mean
of 0.825 years of university schooling. The relative gain in university enrollment and in the respective
completed years of schooling are of similar magnitude, both being large relative to the impact of some
other educational interventions or policy change, for example in comparison to the gain due to an
increase in compulsory schooling. The effect on academic-colleges enrollment and years of schooling
is negative but close to zero and not very precisely measured. This pattern may suggest some
compositional change in the academic schooling but the offsetting decline in academic college
schooling is too small to be economically meaningful.
The estimates based on the RD sample are consistent with the estimates based on the NE
sample. Enrollment in university education increased by 6 percentage points (se=0.014) and
completed years of university schooling increased by 0.242 years (se=0.073). The relative magnitude
of these gains is identical to those presented above based on the NE sample. Obtaining similar results
based on two different identification strategies, randomized assignment to treatment based on a
natural experiment and assignment to treatment based on a threshold of an observed criterion, lends
credibility to the causal interpretation of the finding reported in panel A of Table 3. The comparability
of the NE and RD evidence with respect to the treatment effect of the program on long term
educational outcomes at adulthood is similar to the respective comparability between the results
obtained from the NE and RD samples regarding the program’s effect on high school educational
outcomes.
In Table 4 I present uncontrolled simple differences in differences estimates, using only a post
treatment dummy, a treated school dummy interacted with the post dummy and school fixed effects.
The estimated treatment effects based on this limited control specification are positive and significant
for all university attainment outcomes, both in the NE and RD samples. These estimates are very
close to those of estimates based on the full specification presented in Table 3, confirming what is
expected given the balancing tests presented in Tables 1-2 and in appendix Tables A1-A2. For
example, the full sample simple difference in differences estimate on university enrollment is 0.039
(se=0.015) and the respective controlled difference in difference estimate is 0.048 (se=0.013). The
two respective estimated effects on university years of schooling are 0.206 (0.072) and 0.250 (0,067).

18

The results based on the three quartile sample (presented in panel B) are similar to the results
based on the full sample. Based on the NE sample, university enrollment increased by 5.2 percentage
points and completed years of university schooling increased by 0.24 years. The estimated effects on
academic-college enrollment and years of schooling are also negative but somewhat smaller than
those estimated based on the full sample. The results based on the RD three quartile sample are fully
consistent with the respective estimates based on the NE sample. Note also that a comparison between
the uncontrolled and controlled differences in differences estimates based on the Q3 sample (lower
panel of Tables 3-4) shows even smaller differences.
Effect on Employment and Earnings
We expect the increase the quality and the quantity of high school and post-secondary
education to result in better labor market outcomes in adulthood. In figures 9-12, I repeat the year-byyear analysis, focusing on labor market outcomes. The figures show the estimated effects by years
since graduation from high school. The employment and earnings data are available until year 2012,
so eleven years is the longest period since graduating high school for which I examine the effect of
the program. Overall I find an increasing pattern in both employment and earnings. The effects
become significantly different from zero about 9-11 years after high school graduation. Perhaps
reflecting the higher enrollment in post-secondary schooling, the effect on employment is initially
negative and increases thereafter. The effects on earnings follow a similar pattern. As treated students
spent more years on average in the schooling system and appear on average to start working later, we
expect the effect on earnings to be initially negative and to increase as students complete their postsecondary schooling and accumulate labor market experience. Indeed, we find that the effects are
initially negative and become significantly different from zero by the end of our sample period. In the
following paragraph I describe these results in more detail.
Figures 9 and 9A present the yearly estimates on employment for the NE and RD samples
respectively. As already noted, the estimates for the first three years are not meaningful because most
of the students in our sample were still in military service. In the fourth year after high school
graduation, about 70 percent of the individuals in the sample were employed (according to our

19

definition of employment, which is employed for at least for one month during the year and had
positive earnings). From year four until year eight following high school graduation, the treatment
effect estimates on employment are negative. The largest effect is about -0.02 in the NE sample and 0.03 in the RD sample. The NE estimates are not precisely estimated: none of these negative estimates
are different from zero. The RD estimates are more precisely measured and two of the four estimates
are statistically different from zero. When stacking the data for these four years (from the fourth to the
seventh year following high school graduation), both the NE estimates (-0.014 se=0.008) and the RD
estimates (-0.026 se=0.010) are statistically different from zero.10 From year seven following high
school graduation the treatment effect on employment is positive, statistically significant in some
years and marginally so in others, in both the NE and RD samples. The highest employment treatment
effect estimate is about 3 percentage points. The average employment rate from the seventh year
following high school graduation is about 87 percent and this rate is stable until the end of the period.
The evidence based on the NE and RD 3 quartiles samples is very similar to the evidence from the full
sample.
The year-by-year estimated treatment effects on annual earnings are presented in Figures 1111A. These estimates are negative from the fourth to the seventh year since graduation and then they
turn positive and remain so until the end of the period studied. The lowest estimate based on the NE
sample is about IS -4,000 shekels relative to mean earnings of IS 25,000 in the same year. The
estimates based on the RD sample are very similar. The period with negative earnings effect coincides
with the years with negative employment effect and with the period when the treatment effect on
university enrollment becomes positive and increasing. This inverse mirror image of the treatment
effect on employment and on university enrollment explains the negative effect on earnings. The
treatment effect on earnings turns positive and significant from year seven on but it fluctuates in size,
not surprisingly because earnings is a noisier outcome than university enrollment. The evidence based
on the RD sample and the full and three quartiles samples reveal similar patterns to those based on the
NE full sample.

However, it is likely that these estimates are biased downward because the employment measure I use does
not distinguish between part time and full time employment and students usually have lower labor supply while
10

20

Table 5 columns 1-2 and 5-6, present the point estimates and their standard errors for the
various labor market outcomes at the end point of the period we study. I also present in columns 3-4
and 7-8 estimates from stacked regressions where I pool the data from the last three years of the
studied period, namely nine to eleven years after graduating high school. The stacked regression
yields average treatment effect for this period and allows more precise estimation of the effect on
labor market outcomes. Focusing on the stacked regression results, the teachers’ incentive experiment
increased employment of treated students by 1.3 percentage points. The relevant average employment
rate is 83 percent. Based on the three quartiles sample the effect is higher, about a 2 percentage point
higher employment rate, and more precisely measured (se=0.010). Similar estimates are obtained
based on the RD sample. The estimated effect on eligibility for unemployment benefits is negative but
small and not significantly different from zero. The average unemployment rate in the treated group
before treatment is low, only 6.9 percent, perhaps the reason why there is no discernable effect on this
outcome. This rate is very similar to the national unemployment rate in 2010-2012 (7.1 percent) for
the closest age group (25-34).
In Table 6 I present the simple differences in differences estimates for the labor market
outcomes. These estimates are very close to those of estimates based on the full specification
presented in Table 5, again reaffirming our earlier conclusion that the treatment and control groups
are well balanced in characteristics and also in terms of outcomes of the pre-treatment cohort. For
example, the simple difference in differences estimate on earnings 11 years after school completion is
5,312 (se=2,022) and the respective controlled difference in difference estimate is 5851 (se=1993).
The two respective estimated effects from the stacked regression for 9-11 years after school
completion are 4,353 (1,773) and 4,714 (1,519).
The average annual earnings in the pre-treatment cohort in 2009-2011 NE sample is NIS
55,311 ($14,555 based on an exchange rate of 3.8 Israeli Shekels to one US Dollar). The average
estimated effect of the PFP program on annual earnings for this three years’ period is NIS 4,711
(se=1519) ($1240). The estimated effect based on the RD sample is similar, also amounting to a 9

in school.

21

percent annual increase relative to the pre-treatment treatment group mean.11 The effect on annual
earnings based on the three quartile sample is lower, 7 percent in the NE sample and 6 percent in the
RD sample. I note again that the similar earnings effect estimates from two different identification
strategies lends support and credibility to the causal interpretation of these estimates. I further note
that the pre-program treatment-control mean difference in earnings was small and not significant in
both samples and it was of different signs, negative in the NE sample and positive in the RD sample,
yet both samples yield the same positive earnings gain.
A natural question about the above estimated effect on earnings is whether it captures the
permanent long term effect. First, note that I measure the effect on earnings at about age 30-31, when
individuals already completed their post-secondary schooling. Second, based on a sample of older
cohorts, I find that earnings at age 30-35 is a strong predictor of earnings at an older age. Yet, it is
important to note that earnings have larger variation over time than other personal outcomes. To get a
better indication about the permanency of the effect on earnings, I estimated the effect on the
percentile rank of individuals in the respective distribution of their cohort. There is no direct evidence
that suggests that rank forecast is more stable than earnings or log earnings. However, recent papers in
the intergenerational mobility literature provide some indirect evidence that is relevant to this issue.
These studies have shown that movements across ranks in the income distribution are uncorrelated
with parental income conditional on rank at age 30; in contrast, movement in log earnings are
correlated with parental income conditional on log income at age 30 — in particular, rich offspring
have higher earnings growth, so that age 30 measurements are biased predictors of later-life earnings.
However, the rank forecasts appear to be less biased. For example, Nybom and Stuhler (2016) show
with data from Sweden that the relationship between a child’s income rank and their parental income
rank stabilizes by around age 30; in contrast, the relationship in log earnings is less stable. Chetty et al
(2015) find a similar pattern in the US tax data, reporting that percentile ranks predict well where
children of different economic backgrounds will fall in the income distribution later in life. Using

The fact that the treatment effect on earnings stays positive over several consecutive years is perhaps an
indication that this gain reflects real productivity differences and not signaling of the higher schooling outcomes
that resulted from ‘teaching to the test’.
11

22

instead log earnings leads to inferior predictions because of the growth path expansions at the top of
the income distribution.
Table 7 presents estimates of the effect of the program on percentile rank of earnings, where
the rank is computed separately for each cohort. The estimates are fully consistent with the estimated
effects on earnings that are presented in Table 5. After nine to eleven years from high school
graduation, the program moves treated individuals by 2 percentile ranks (column 4, first row) and this
effect is relatively precisely measured. The rest of the estimates presented in the table suggest similar
findings.12
How Robust Are the Results to Controlling for Parental or Family Earnings?
In this section I present a robustness check of the PFP program effect when I add father,
mother, or family earnings as an additional control in the DID estimation of treatment effect. Each of
these variables is the respective average earnings in 2000-2002, the years just before and during the
program implementation. I prefer to use a three-year average of earnings instead of a specific year
because this measure is more likely to be correlated with the permanent level of family resources.
These results for university schooling based on the NE sample are presented in Tables A4. The
respective estimates for the effect on employment and earnings are presented in Table A5.
In columns 1-3 of Table A4, I present the treatment estimates on university enrollment when
a control for father’s earnings (row 1) or mother’s earnings (row 2) is added to the controlled DID
regressions. The three columns correspond to estimates after 10, 11 and 12 years since high school
graduation. These estimates of the treatment effect of the program are very similar to the estimates
presented in Table 3. Columns 4-6 present the respective treatment estimates on years of schooling.
Again these estimates are practically identical to those presented in Table 3.
In Table A5 I present the treatment estimates on earnings and employment when controls are
added for parental or family earnings. The three columns correspond to estimates after 9, 10 and 11
years since high school graduation. These estimates of the treatment effect of the program are very
similar to the estimates presented in Table 5. Columns 5-7 present the treatment estimates on

23

employment. These estimates suggest somewhat larger effect on employment in comparison to the
estimates presented in Table 5.
The obvious conclusion is that adding a control for parental earnings does not affect at all the
treatment estimates of the effect of the PFP program on university schooling attainment and on labor
market outcomes. This result is not unexpected given that the parental or family earnings controls are
quite balanced between treatment and control, both in the pre and post-treatment cohorts (see
estimates presented in panel E of Table 1).
Treatment Heterogeneity by Family Earnings and Gender
Next I estimate program treatment heterogeneity in university schooling, employment and
earnings, by baseline family income. The possibility of a different program effect by family income
has policy implications with respect to the targeted versus universal implementation of teachers’
incentives programs, and for the external validity of our findings with respect to different socioeconomic backgrounds of treated students. The sample is divided by the median of family income in
2000-2002. The estimates based on these two samples are presented in Table 8 for the NE sample.
Columns 1-2 present the estimates for sub-samples by family income, panel A for the above median
sample and panel B for the below median sample. The effect on university schooling is positive and
significant for both groups but the effect in the high income sample is twice as large the effect in the
lower income sample. The effect on earnings, however, is just about the same, though marginally
higher for the lower income sample. The much larger effect on employment for the low family
income group is what makes the income effect shortfall, due to the lower education gain of this group.
The estimated increase in employment is 4.9 percentage points versus no employment effect at all for
the higher family income sample. However, it is interesting to note that the increase in earnings for a
unit gain in university schooling is the same for the high and low family income samples. The higher
income sample had no gain in employment, therefore the earnings gain for every tenth of a year of
schooling gain is 1492 NIS (4,447/2.98). The earnings gain due to the increase in employment for the
sample of low family income is 3,445 NIS ((54,885/80.4) x 4.9)) and therefore the earnings gain per a
12

The uncontrolled difference in differences estimates of the percentile rank regressions, not presented here for

24

tenth of a year increase in schooling is 1,483 NIS (1958/1.32), remarkably identical to 1,492 NIS, the
figure for the high income sample. This means that the return to an increase in years of university
schooling does not differ by family income, which implies that the increase in quality of schooling,
both at high school and at university, is similar for both groups.
The estimated effects by gender are presented in columns 3-4, panel C for boys and panel D
for girls. The effect on schooling is positive and significant for both genders, but it is higher for girls,
a gain of a third of university year of schooling versus about half of that for boys. However, boys have
a larger increase in earnings, by about 2,000 NIS a year, which is almost 30 percent of the total gain.
Two explanations related to employment patterns can account for this difference. First, there is a
positive effect of 1.7 percentage points on male employment (though this effect is not precisely
measured) while the respective estimate for women is zero. This effect on male employment will
account for a large part of the gender difference in earnings. Secondly, the lower gain in female
earnings most likely reflects a much higher propensity among women to work part-time during this
period in life. I cannot provide direct evidence on this second explanation because the data I use does
not include information on hours of work. However, based on data from the 2012 Israeli Labor Force
Survey, I estimated that in the age group 29-34 the rate of part time employment is 25 percent among
women versus 8 percent among men.
Comparing the Effect on Earnings to Related Evidence
This is the first study to provide evidence on the effect of teachers' PFP on student earnings at
adulthood. However, it is still useful to compare our results to the impact of other childhood and
schooling interventions on earnings at adulthood. Andersson et al. (2013) estimated that the effects of
living in public or voucher housing on later earnings are positive, substantial, and significant for nonHispanic Black female teenagers, but living in public or voucher housing has no effect on the later
earnings of non-Hispanic Black male teenagers. The point estimates suggest that females earn 21
percent more if they ever resided in voucher housing and 18 percent more if they ever resided in
public housing. The corresponding estimates when treatment is measured as number of years indicate
sake of space, are very similar to the control difference in differences estimates presented in Table7.

25

that each additional year of voucher-supported housing increases earnings by 7 percent for females,
while each additional year of public housing also increases female earnings by 7 percent. The overall
estimated treatment effects for males suggest that each year of public housing participation as a
teenager increases adult earnings by 5 percent.
Gertler et al. (2014) report substantial effects on the earnings of participants in a randomized
intervention conducted in 1986–1987 that gave psychosocial stimulation to growth-stunted Jamaican
toddlers. The intervention consisted of weekly visits from community health workers over a 2-year
period that taught parenting skills and encouraged mothers and children to interact in ways that
develop cognitive and socioemotional skills. Twenty years later the intervention participants’ earnings
increased by 25 percent. Chetty et al. (2011) have shown that having a kindergarten teacher with more
than ten years of experience increased students’ average annual earnings at ages 25 to 27 by 6.9
percent ($1,093) between 2005 and 2007. Similarly, an improvement in class quality increased
average annual income earned between ages 25 and 27. Johnson et al. (forthcoming QJE) show that
for children from low-income families, increasing per-pupil spending by 10 percent in all 12 schoolage years increased adult hourly wages by 13 percent. Schweinhart et al. analyze the long term effect
of the High/Scope Perry Preschool experiment and find that students in treatment had significantly
higher median annual earnings than the no-program group: 20 percent higher at age 27 and by 36
percent higher at age 40. Finally, Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016) find that moving to a lowerpoverty neighborhood (MTO) significantly improves college attendance rates – by 2.5 percent – and
earnings by 31 percent, for children who were young (below age 13) when their families moved.
Clearly our estimated effects on earnings are not unusually high relative to estimates surveyed above.
For example, the teachers’ pay experiment raised college enrollment by 5 percent, twice that of the
MTO effect, and increased earnings 10-12 years after high school graduation by 7-9 percent, a fourth
of the MTO effect.
Mechanisms for the Effect on Earnings
The direct effect of the program on high school outcomes, for example the increase in the
average composite score in the matriculation exams and the increase in the matriculation diploma rate,

26

could have caused the increase in earnings that we find. Lavy, Ebenstein and Roth (2014) and
Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth (forthcoming) use random shocks to performance in matriculation exams to
identify the reduced form effects of these high school outcomes on earnings at adulthood and find
strong and significant positive effect. We still want, however, to understand the sources of the reduced
form effect of 6 to 9 percentage points increase in earnings that we estimated in this paper. First, we
should account for the contribution of the positive effect on employment to the increase in earnings.
In the NE full sample, the employment gains accounts for 2 of the 9 percentage points increase and in
the NE three quartile sample it accounts for 2 of the 7 percentage points increase in earnings.
Similarly, in the RD three quartile sample it accounts for 1 of the 6 percentage-points increase in
earnings. A second factor explaining earning growth is the increase in university years of schooling.
Recent estimates of the rate of return to a year of university schooling in Israel range from 12 to 16
percent.13 The lowest estimate (12%) implies that the 0.25 increase in years of university schooling
contributed 3 percentage points to the gain in earnings. The highest estimate (16%) implies that the
increase in university schooling accounts for 4 percentage points of the increase in earnings.
Another factor that accounts for part of the increase in earnings is the direct effect of the
improved matriculation outcomes on earnings, independently of the effect they have on university
years of schooling. Particularly important is the matriculation rate, which increased by 3.5-5
percentage points. The evidence suggests that having a matriculation diploma is rewarded in the labor
market by a return beyond its effect on post-secondary schooling. For example, Angrist and Lavy
(2009) estimate that bagrut holders earn 13 percent more than other individuals with exactly 12 years
of schooling. Therefore, the matriculation rate accounts for almost 0.5 percentage points of the
earnings gain in the NE full sample and 0.7 percentage points of the earnings gain in the NE three
quartile sample. Similarly, the quality improvements in the matriculation study program (as reflected
in the composite score, number of credit units and credits in honor and science subjects) are also

Frish (2009) exploits changes in compulsory schooling laws and obtains IV estimates that are much larger
than the OLS Mincerian estimates. Navon (2005) estimates that the return to an MA degree (two years of
schooling) is 30 percent.
13

27

rewarded in the labor market beyond their effect on post-secondary schooling (Caplan et al (2009)).14
The implied mechanism is that the improvements in high school educational outcomes that resulted
from the PFP intervention gave students access to higher quality post-secondary education, mainly by
facilitating enrollment in more selective programs that have a higher return to schooling. Examples of
selective programs include computer science, engineering, and the top 2-3 law schools. We can
partially assess this channel by checking the correlations between bagrut outcomes that measure
quality and earnings. We estimate OLS regressions of annual earnings on the various high school
bagrut outcomes, controlling for student’s parental and demographic characteristics. We only use the
sample of pre-program students in control schools, though the evidence is similar when using the
sample of treated students. The results for the NE sample are presented in Table A6. Clearly each of
the high school outcomes is highly and positively correlated with earnings at adulthood (panel A
column 2). When all four high school outcomes are included jointly in the regression, they still have
positive coefficients but only two of them are statistically significant: the average matriculation score
and the number of honor level subjects (column 3). In panel B, I present similar evidence for the
correlation between two post-secondary outcomes, enrollment in an academic college or university
and the number of completed years of schooling in any of these institutions. Clearly both of these
outcomes have a high correlation with earnings at adulthood (panel B column 2). When included
jointly in the regression, they have still a positive coefficient but only the first two are statistically
significant (panel B column 3). In column 4, I present the estimates from a regression when the high
school and the post-secondary schooling outcomes are included jointly. All estimates are positive but
the outcomes that are significant are the average matriculation score and the enrollment indicator in
university and academic colleges. In Table A7, I present similar regressions for the two sub-samples
by family income. The estimates in these two sub-samples are qualitatively similar.
Effect on marriage and children

Caplan et al (2009) demonstrate that earnings in Israel are highly positively correlated with the quality of
post-secondary schooling (colleges versus universities and higher versus lower quality universities). For
example, this study shows that earnings are much higher for graduates of Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and the Technion
Universities relative to graduates from the other four universities in the country. Admission to the top
universities is of course positively correlated with the high school matriculation outcomes.
14

28

I next examine teacher PFP treatment impacts on students’ marriage and fertility outcomes in
Table 9. I define these outcomes 11 years after graduating from high school because I only have data
for these variables for 2012. Therefore, the two outcomes I examine are an indicator of being married
and an indicator of having children, 11 years after high school graduation. About 58 percent of the
students from the pre-treatment treated schools sample are married by 2011. The treatment effect on
marriage rate based on the full NE sample is negative, but not significantly different from zero. This is
evident in the full sample (NE sample) and in sub-samples by family income and by gender.
Similarly, the estimated effect on having children, based on the full sample, is negative but very small
and not statistically different from zero. In panel B I report results based on sub-samples by family
income. For the sub-sample of low family income, the estimates on marriage and children are
negative and the first effect is large and significant: a decline of 3.3 percentage points in the marriage
rate and decline of 1.7 percentage points in the probability of having children 11 years after high
school graduation, but the latter effect is not precisely measured. The two estimates for the high
family income sample are small and not statistically significant. In panel C, I report the results by
gender, and clearly the treatment effect on the two demographic outcomes is small and not
distinguishable from zero. This implies that the teachers’ PFP program reduced the marriage rate –
probably by delaying it to a later age – among students from low income families, but not for others.
5. Conclusions
In this paper I study the long term effect of an experiment that paid teachers a bonus based on
their students’ performance in high stakes exams at the end of high school. All studies of teachers’
incentive programs and the vast majority of published research on the impact of other school
interventions has examined their effects on short-run outcomes, primarily by looking at their impact
on standardized test scores. This study is the first to use a long horizon follow up, from high school to
age 30, to examine impact of a teachers PFP scheme on long-run life outcomes. This analysis
addresses the critical question of whether a public education intervention can achieve the ultimate
goal of improving lifetime well-being. It also makes an important contribution to the growing
literature on the long-term effects of education quality by providing evidence about an intervention

29

that changes a specific input which can improve student achievement. Focusing on an intervention
that can be expanded or implemented elsewhere, such as teachers’ PFP, provides explicit guidance for
educational policy making. This avenue of research is a natural follow up to recent studies that
estimated a positive effect of teaching quality using teachers’ fixed effect and value added models.
However, explicit policy prescriptions for how to improve teaching quality do not follow immediately
from this important evidence; the results presented in this paper help in this regard by unraveling
‘wires’ in the ‘black box’ of teachers quality.
This study shows that more than a decade after the initial intervention, treated individuals
experienced sizable gains in schooling attainment and quality and large increases in annual earnings,
some of which reflect a return to education quality beyond the return to years of schooling. These
gains are very large relative to the cost of the program. The average cost of the program was $170 per
student versus a gain of $1,000 in annual earnings starting at about age 28-30. A complete costbenefit analysis should also take into account the forgone earnings during post-secondary education
and tuition fees. However, given that individuals will benefit for many years from the increase in
earnings, the present value of benefits clearly outweigh the cost, suggesting a high private rate of
return. A social rate of return analysis of this project should take into account the cost of university
schooling not recovered by tuition fees, and the additional tax revenue levied on higher earnings.
Clearly, these adjustments will still yield a high social internal rate of return on this project.
Merit and incentive based pay for teachers is being contemplated or implemented in many
countries, making the evidence in this paper relevant and important for education policy world wide.
In U.S. education policy, for example, merit pay reforms for teachers have recently returned to the top
of the policy agenda. In his first major education policy speech, President Obama promoted merit pay
for teachers and in 2009 announced the Race to the Top, supported by $4.4 billion in federal funds, to
encourage states to implement performance pay for teachers.15 In a 2014 UK reform, teachers’ annual
salary increases have been tied to performance, replacing a system where almost all teachers
automatically moved up a point on the pay scale every year. The move has been hugely controversial.
15

Merit-Based Pay For Teachers | eduflow: https://eduflow.wordpress.com/2013/10/08/merit-based-pay-forteachers.

30

For example, on March 26 2014 the National Union of Teachers struck in protest at the overhaul in
pay structures that was due to begin later in the year.16
The intervention described in this paper targeted the period leading up to high-stake exams
that play a key role in determining university and college admission. Since in this experiment the
stakes were high both for students and teachers, it makes sense that the PFP intervention produced
long-term results. However, if a similar program were introduced in a primary or middle school, the
gains in test scores may not necessarily lead to similar long-term effects. Nevertheless, the evidence
presented here is relevant for countries that use similar high stake high school exams for university
admission.17 Another point to note is that a PFP program when implemented at scale, for example
nation-wide, will have general equilibrium implications. The scope of expansion of university
enrollment estimated above will only be possible if the supply of post-secondary education can meet
the increase in demand, as was the case in this study.

The Economist, March 29 2014.
High school exit exams play a similar role for university admission in many other countries. Those mentioned
as examples in Wikepdia include the A level exams in the UK, the matriculation (‘Bacalaureate’) exams in
Finland, Germany, Italy and Norway, the ‘Matura exams’ in Albania, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Ukraine, the
Gaokao National Matriculation Examination in China and the General Exiting Exam (EGEL) in Mexico.
16
17

31

6. References
Abramitzky R., and V. Lavy. 2014. “How Responsive is Investment in Schooling to Changes in
Returns? Evidence from an Unusual Pay Reform in Israel’s Kibbutzim”, Econometrica, Vol.
82, No. 4 (July), 1241–1272.
Andersson, Fredrik, John Haltiwanger, Mark Kutzbach, Giordano Palloni, Henry Pollakowki, and
Daniel Weinberg. “Childhood Housing and Adult Earnings: A Between-Siblings Analysis of
Housing Vouchers and Public Housing”. Discussion Papers, CES 13-48, U.S. Census Bureau,
Center for Economic Studies September 2013.
Angrist Josh and Victor Lavy, 1999, "Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
Children's Academic Achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114 No. 2 (May),
533-575.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
Projects," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103 (484), 1481-1495.
Angrist, J. D. and A.B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (4), 979-1014.
Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. "The Impact of Economic Conditions on
Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust." American
Economic Review, 92(1): 27-50.
Caplan Tom, Orly Furman, Dmitri Romanov, Noam Zussman. 2009. “The Quality of Israeli
Academic Institutions: What the Wages of Graduates Tell About It?” Central Bureu of
Statistics, Israel , Working Paper Series NO. 42, May.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan B. 1991. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, pp:1-40.
Chetty, R., J. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. Whithmore Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan. 2011. “How
Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-1660.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2013. “Measuring the Impact of Teachers I:
Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates” American Economic Review, June.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2013. “Measuring the Impact of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood” American Economic Review,
June.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren and Lawrence Katz “The Effects of Exposure to Better
Neighborhoods

on

Children:

New

Evidence

from

the

Experiment”, American Economic Review 106(4): 855-902, 2016.

32

Moving

to Opportunity

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, “Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-1623, 2014.
Deming, David. 2009. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence
from Head Start," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (3), 111-134.
Deming David, S. Cohodes, J. Jennings, and C. Jencks. 2013. “School Accountability, Postsecondary
Attainment and Earnings.” NBER Working Paper. w19444.
Dustmann C., P. Puhani and U. Schonberg. 2012. “The Long-Term Effects of School Quality on Labor
Market Outcomes and Educational Attainment”, Draft, UCL department of economics,
January.
Dynarski, S., J. Hyman, and D. Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2013. “Experimental Evidence on the Effect
of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment and Degree Completion” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 32(4).
Duflo E., R. Hanna, and S. Ryan. 2012. “Incentives Works: Getting Teachers to Come to School”
American Economic Review, pp: 1241-78.
Ebenstein Avraham, Victor Lavy and Sefi Roth “The Long Run Economic Consequences of HighStakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution”. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, October 2016.

Frish Roni, 2009, “The Economic Returns to Schooling In Israel” Israel Economic Review
Vol. 7 No. 1, 113–141.
Fryer, R. G. 2011. "Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New York City
Public Schools," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16850.
Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie. 2002.

“Longer-Term Effects of Head Start," American

Economic Review, pp: 999-1012.
Gertler, Paul J., James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan
Walker, Susan M. Chang, and Sally Grantham-McGregor. “Labor Market Returns to an Early
Childhood Stimulation Intervention in Jamaica” Science, 344(6187): 998–1001, May 2014.
Glewwe, Paul, N. Ilias and M. Kremer. 2010. “Teacher Incentives,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, pp: 205-27.
Gould E., V. Lavy and D. Paserman. 2011. “Fifty-five Years after the Magic Carpet Ride: The LongRun Effect of the Early Childhood Environment on Social and Economic Outcome”, Review of
Economic Studies, July: 77, 1164–1191.
Jacob, B. A., and S. D. Levitt. 2003.: "Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating," Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 843-77.

33

Johnson, Rucker C., C. Kirabo Jackson and Claudia Persico “The Effects of School Spending on
Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming).
Krueger, Alan B., and Diane M. Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early
Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project
STAR,” Economic Journal, CXI: 1–28.
Lazear, E. “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review, December, 2000.
Lazear, E. 2001. “Paying Teachers for Performance: Incentives and Selection,” Draft, August.
Lavy, V. 2002. “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Students
Achievements.” Journal of Political Economy, 10 (6), December: 1286–1318.
Lavy, V. 2007. “Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers”, The Future of
Children, 87-110.
Lavy, V. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading Ethics”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 5, December: 1979-2011.
Lavy Victor, Avraham Ebenstein and Sefi Roth. “The Long Run Human Capital and Economic
Consequences of High-Stakes Examinations”. NBER Working paper 20647, 2014,
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States," Review of Economic Studies, 72, 189-221.
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122
(1), 159-208.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R.
Kling and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2013. “Long-Term Neighborhood Effects On Low-Income
Families: Evidence From Moving To Opportunity”, NBER Working Paper 18772.
Muralidharan Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. "Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental
Evidence from India", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp. 39-77.
Navon, Guy, 2006. "Human Capital Heterogeneity: University Choice and Wages," MPRA

Paper 9708, University Library of Munich, Germany.
Neal, D. 2011. "The Design of Performance Pay in Education," Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Vol. 4, pp. 495-550.

Nybom Martin and Jan Stuhler. “Biases in Standard Measures of Intergenerational Income
Dependence”. Draft, April 1, 2016.
Schweinhart, L., J. Montie, Z. Xiang, W.S. Barnett, C.R. Belfeld, and Milagros Nores. 2005. Lifetime
effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40, Ypsilanti: High/Scope Press.

34

Table 1: Post-Secondary Schooling, Employment and Income, and Demographic Statistics in 2012: The 2000 Cohort: The Natural Experiment
Sample

Dependent variable

4 Quartiles Sample
Treated
Non treated
Difference
schools
Schools
(1)
(2)
(3)

3 Quartiles Sample
Treated
Non treated
Difference
schools
Schools
(4)
(5)
(6)

A. Enrollment in Post High School Education
University

0.216

0.191

0.026
(0.046)

0.119

0.118

0.001
(0.034)

Academic College

0.145

0.143

0.001
(0.029)

0.142

0.133

0.009
(0.035)

University

0.825

0.716

0.109
(0.211)

0.343

0.380

-0.037
(0.122)

Academic College

0.379

0.365

0.014
(0.080)

0.372

0.328

0.044
(0.093)

Employed (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.840

0.846

-0.006
(0.015)

0.837

0.860

-0.023
(0.016)

Average Annual Earnings (NIS)

67,214

69,478

-2,265
(3,945)

63,456

66,565

-3,108
(4,657)

Received Unemployment Insurance Benefits (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.080

0.087

-0.007
(0.011)

0.083

0.092

-0.009
(0.014)

911

941

-30
(138)

870

937

-67
(158)

Married

0.563

0.542

0.020
(0.042)

0.557

0.549

0.008
(0.037)

Children (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.451

0.454

-0.003
(0.051)

0.455

0.468

-0.013
(0.046)

Number of Children

0.836

0.792

0.044
(0.127)

0.845

0.834

0.011
(0.125)

Age at Marriage

24.338

24.591

-0.253
(0.379)

24.314

24.467

-0.153
(0.383)

Age at First Birth

25.302

25.467

-0.165
(0.357)

25.236

25.269

-0.033
(0.353)

Average of Father Earnings in 2000-2002

102,212

96,212

6,001
(16,693)

86,975

85,776

1,199
(12,666)

Average of Mother Earnings in 2000-2002

47,715

45,484

2,231
(7,798)

39,336

41,351

-2,014
(6,096)

Number of Observations

2,424

2,703

5,127

1,704

2,020

3,724

Weighted Number of Observations

3,980

4,171

8,151

3,058

3,087

6,145

B. Post High School Years of Schooling

C. Employment Outcomes in 2012

Total Unemployment Insurance Benefits Received (NIS)
D. Demographic Outcomes

E. Parental Outcomes

Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations for different post-secondary schooling, employment, income, and dempographic variables for the
natural experiment sample described in the paper. Columns 1-3 report results for all four quartiles, and columns 4-6 report results for students who are in
the lowest three quartiles of test grades. Panel A is comprised of binary variables indicating whether the individual has been enrolled or not to a specific
type of post-secondary institution by 2012. The categories are not mutually exclusive and overlapping is possible. Panel B reports the number of years of
education an individual has attained by 2012 in each type of the post-secondary institutions described in panel A. Panel C reports different employment
and income variables for the individual in the year 2012. Panel D reports different demographic variables for the year 2012 in addition to the age at
marriage and the age at first birth. Panel E reports different parental variables. Standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for school level clustering.
Number of observations does not apply to the the age at marriage and the age at first birth variables, as these are computed on a sub-sample of
individuals that are married/have children.

Table 2: Post-Secondary Schooling, Employment and Income, and Demographic Statistics in 2012: The 2000 Cohort: The Regression
Discontinuity Sample
4 Quartiles Sample
3 Quartiles Sample
Treated
Non treated
Treated
Non treated
Difference
Difference
schools
Schools
schools
Schools
Dependent variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Enrollment in Post High School Education
University

0.209

0.148

0.061
(0.039)

0.116

0.084

0.032
(0.023)

Academic College

0.160

0.127

0.033
(0.032)

0.162

0.112

0.050
(0.035)

0.793
(0.155)

0.523
(0.100)

0.270
(0.184)

0.333

0.249

0.084
(0.080)

0.423

0.317

0.106
(0.084)

0.422

0.274

0.148
(0.093)

Employed (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.843

0.844

-0.001
(0.017)

0.842

0.858

-0.016
(0.019)

Average Annual Earnings (NIS)

70,091

67,389

2,701
(3,841)

66,275

64,249

2,026
(4,744)

Received Unemployment Insurance Benefits (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.080

0.091

-0.011
(0.013)

0.086

0.100

-0.014
(0.015)

890

967

-77
(165)

889

1,026

-137
(178)

Married

0.548

0.558

-0.010
(0.050)

0.551

0.556

-0.005
(0.047)

Children (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.427

0.487

-0.060
(0.053)

0.439

0.493

-0.054
(0.053)

Number of Children

0.760

0.830

-0.070
(0.138)

0.789

0.864

-0.075
(0.150)

Age at Marriage

24.586

24.495

0.090
(0.409)

24.521

24.349

0.172
(0.415)

Age at First Birth

25.523

25.405

0.117
(0.415)

25.451

25.165

0.287
(0.402)

Average of Father Earnings in 2000-2002

103,816

81,924

21,892
(16,668)

91,632

75,312

16,321
(13,093)

Average of Mother Earnings in 2000-2002

49,082

39,383

9,699
(6,945)

43,912

36,496

7,416
(5,935)

Number of Observations

1,697

2,471

4,168

1,257

1,844

3,101

Weighted Number of Observations

2,843

3,064

5,907

2,281

2,246

4,527

B. Post High School Years of Schooling
University
Academic College
C. Employment Outcomes in 2012

Total Unemployment Insurance Benefits Received (NIS)
D. Demographic Outcomes

E. Parental Outcomes

Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations for different post-secondary schooling, employment, income, and dempographic variables for the
natural experiment sample described in the paper. Columns 1-3 report results for all four quartiles, and columns 4-6 report results for students who are in
the lowest three quartiles of test grades. Panel A is comprised of binary variables indicating whether the individual has been enrolled or not to a specific
type of post-secondary institution by 2012. The categories are not mutually exclusive and overlapping is possible. Panel B reports the number of years of
education an individual has attained by 2012 in each type of the post-secondary institutions described in panel A. Panel C reports different employment
and income variables for the individual in the year 2012. Panel D reports different demographic variables for the year 2012 in addition to the age at
marriage and the age at first birth. Panel E reports different parental variables. Standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for school level clustering.
Number of observations does not apply to the the age at marriage and the age at first birth variables, as these are computed on a sub-sample of
individuals that are married/have children.

Table 3: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Teachers' Bonuses Program on Post-Secondary Schooling
The Natural Experiment Sample

The Regression Discontinuity Sample Sample

Enrollment in Post-Secondary Schooling

Post-Secondary Years of Schooling

Enrollment in Post-Secondary Schooling

Post-Secondary Years of Schooling

12 Years After High-School Graduation
Outcomes
2000 Cohort in
Estimate
Treated Schools

12 Years After High-School Graduation
Outcomes
2000 Cohort in
Estimate
Treated Schools

12 Years After High-School Graduation
Outcomes
2000 Cohort in
Estimate
Treated Schools

12 Years After High-School Graduation
Outcomes
2000 Cohort in
Estimate
Treated Schools

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

University

0.216
(0.412)

0.048
(0.013)

0.825
(1.877)

0.250
(0.067)

0.209
(0.407)

0.060
(0.014)

0.793
(1.856)

0.242
(0.073)

Academic College

0.145
(0.352)

-0.026
(0.014)

0.379
(1.051)

-0.072
(0.037)

0.160
(0.367)

-0.017
(0.018)

0.423
(1.107)

-0.047
(0.046)

Number of Observations

2,703

10,077

2,703

10,077

2,471

8,230

2,471

8,230

Weighted Number of Observations

4,171

15,903

4,171

15,903

3,064

11,561

3,064

11,561

University

0.119
(0.324)

0.052
(0.012)

0.343
(1.115)

0.239
(0.043)

0.116
(0.320)

0.061
(0.014)

0.333
(1.130)

0.226
(0.053)

Academic College

0.142
(0.349)

-0.011
(0.013)

0.372
(1.046)

-0.028
(0.030)

0.162
(0.369)

-0.014
(0.017)

0.422
(1.106)

-0.019
(0.036)

Number of Observations

2,020

7,382

2,020

7,382

1,844

6,161

1,844

6,161

Weighted Number of Observations

7,382

11,952

7,382

11,952

2,246

8,801

2,246

8,801

A. 4 Quartiles Sample

B. 3 Quartiles Sample

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the School Choice program on post-secondary schooling 12 years after high-school graduatoin. Panel A and Panel B report
the results for the three quartile and four quartile samples described in the paper. Columns 1-4 report the results for the natural experiment sample described in the paper, and columns 5-8 report the results
for the regression discontinuity sample described in the paper. Columns 1,3,5, and 7 represent the mean and standard error for the 2000 cohort in the treated schools. These cohorts did not receive the
treatment so it is useful to compare their averages as a benchmark for the treatment effect. Columns 2,4,6, and 8 report the Differences-in-Differences estimate for each of the dependent variables. Standard
errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table 4: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of The Teachers' Bonuses Program on Employment and Income
The Natural Experiment Sample

11 Years After High-School
Graduation Outcomes

The Regression Discontinuity Sample

9-11 Years After HighSchool Graduation
Outcomes Stacked
Outcomes

11 Years After High-School
Graduation Outcomes

9-11 Years After HighSchool Graduation
Outcomes Stacked
Outcomes

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Employment Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.841
(0.366)

0.010
(0.009)

0.830
(0.376)

0.013
(0.008)

0.842
(0.365)

0.008
(0.007)

0.832
(0.373)

0.012
(0.007)

Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

64,993
(56,317)

5,851
(1,993)

55,311
(49,396)

4,714
(1,519)

66,903
(57,493)

6,731
(2,481)

56,655
(50,032)

4,860
(1,857)

Received Unemployment Insurance Benefits Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.068
(0.252)

0.000
(0.011)

0.070
(0.255)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.069
(0.254)

-0.004
(0.014)

0.071
(0.257)

-0.005
(0.008)

Total Unemployment Insurance Benefits Received (NIS)

693
(3,076)

37
(114)

597
(2,699)

28
(60)

725
(3,193)

-112
(134)

602
(2,694)

-14
(82)

Number of Observations

2,703

10,077

8,109

30,231

2,471

8,230

7,413

24,690

Weighted Number of Observations

4,171

15,903

12,513

47,709

3,064

11,561

9,192

34,683

Employment Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.827
(0.378)

0.024
(0.013)

0.819
(0.385)

0.020
(0.010)

0.831
(0.375)

0.019
(0.012)

0.825
(0.380)

0.014
(0.010)

Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

61,919
(52,965)

4,982
(1,513)

53,438
(46,647)

3,869
(1,435)

64,158
(54,107)

5,190
(1,457)

55,187
(47,487)

3,567
(1,524)

Received Unemployment Insurance Benefits Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.068
(0.252)

0.003
(0.012)

0.073
(0.260)

-0.002
(0.008)

0.057
(0.231)

-0.003
(0.015)

0.057
(0.231)

-0.007
(0.010)

Total Unemployment Insurance Benefits Received (NIS)

700
(3,137)

114
(133)

619
(2,750)

37
(67)

520
(2,570)

-73
(147)

429
(2,133)

-18
(90)

Number of Observations

2,020

7,382

6,060

22,146

1,844

6,161

5,532

18,483

Weighted Number of Observations

3,087

11,952

9,261

35,856

2,246

8,801

6,738

26,403

A. 4 Quartiles Sample

B. 3 Quartiles Sample

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of theTeachers' Bonuses program on different employment and income outcomes. Panel A and Panel B report the results for the three quartile and

four quartile samples described in the paper. Columns 1-4 report the results for the natural experiment sample described in the paper, and columns 5-8 report the results for the regression discontinuity sample described in the
paper. Columns 1-2 and 5-6 report results for 11 years after high-school graduation, and columns 3-4 and 7-8 report results for the stacked outcomes of 9-11years after high-school graduation. The variable "Employment
Indicator" receives the value of 1 is the individual has any work record for the given year and 0 otherwise. The variable "Received Unemployment Insurance Benefits Indicator" Receives the value of 1 if the individual has any
record indicating that he received any amount of unemployment benefits in the given year, and 0 otherwise. The variable "Total Unemployment Insurance Benefits Received" describes the total NIS amount of unemployment
benefits the individual received in the given year. Average Annual Earnings measure the total NIS amount of earnings the individual received in the given year. Columns 1,3, 5, and 7 report the mean and standard error for the
2000 cohort in the treated schools. This cohort did not receive the treatment so it is useful to compare their averages as a benchmark for the treatment effect. Columns 2,4, 6, and 8 report the Differences-in-Differences estimate
for each of the dependent variables listed above. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table 5: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of The Teachers' Bonuses Program on Percentile Ranking of Income
The Natural Experiment Sample

11 Years After High-School
Graduation Outcomes

The Regression Discontinuity Sample

9-11 Years After HighSchool Graduation
Outcomes Stacked
Outcomes

11 Years After High-School
Graduation Outcomes

9-11 Years After HighSchool Graduation
Outcomes Stacked
Outcomes

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort
in Treated
Schools

Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

48.777
(30.337)

2.638
(0.863)

48.3
(30.3)

2.041
(0.794)

49.814
(30.547)

3.018
(1.019)

49.0
(30.5)

1.972
(0.899)

Number of Observations

2,703

10,077

8,109

30,231

2,471

8,230

7,413

24,690

Weighted Number of Observations

4,171

15,903

12,513

47,709

3,064

11,561

9,192

34,683

47.164
(29.975)

2.181
(0.836)

47.5
(30.3)

1.533
(0.892)

48.174
(30.113)

2.334
(0.832)

48.5
(30.3)

1.256
(0.938)

Number of Observations

2,020

7,382

6,060

22,146

1,844

6,161

5,532

18,483

Weighted Number of Observations

3,087

11,952

9,261

35,856

2,246

8,801

6,738

26,403

A. 4 Quartiles Sample
Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

B. 3 Quartiles Sample
Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of theTeachers' Bonuses program on percentile ranking income outcomes. Percentile ranking of

income are assigned within each cohort and are lagged to be age-adjusted. Panel A and Panel B report the results for the three quartile and four quartile samples described in the
paper. Columns 1-4 report the results for the natural experiment sample described in the paper, and columns 5-8 report the results for the regression discontinuity sample described in
the paper. Columns 1-2 and 5-6 report results for 11 years after high-school graduation, and columns 3-4 and 7-8 report results for the stacked outcomes of 9-11years after highschool graduation. Average Annual Earnings measure the total NIS amount of earnings the individual received in the given year. Columns 1,3, 5, and 7 report the mean and standard
error for the 2000 cohort in the treated schools. This cohort did not receive the treatment so it is useful to compare their averages as a benchmark for the treatment effect. Columns
2,4, 6, and 8 report the Differences-in-Differences estimate for each of the dependent variables listed above. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table 6: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of The Teachers' Bonuses Program by Family Income and Gender, 11 Years
After High-School Graduation - The Natural Experiment Sample
2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

A. High Family Income

C. Boys

University Enrollment

0.246
(0.431)

0.078
(0.027)

0.176
(0.381)

0.028
(0.015)

University Years of Schooling

0.953
(1.969)

0.298
(0.103)

0.647
(1.663)

0.161
(0.060)

Employment Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.868
(0.339)

0.002
(0.012)

0.860
(0.348)

0.017
(0.015)

Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

69,678
(57,684)

4,477
(1,930)

73,557
(59,466)

6,778
(3,416)

1,481

5,891

1,353

4,953

Number of Observations

B. Low Family Income

D. Girls

University Enrollment

0.127
(0.333)

0.027
(0.014)

0.209
(0.407)

0.066
(0.028)

University Years of Schooling

0.451
(1.423)

0.132
(0.041)

0.804
(1.852)

0.333
(0.117)

Employment Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.804
(0.397)

0.049
(0.015)

0.819
(0.386)

0.004
(0.013)

Total Annual Earnings (NIS)

Number of Observations

54,885

5,403

52,400

4,681

(50,950)

(1,654)

(48,378)

(2,226)

1,222

4,186

1,350

5,124

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of theTeachers' Bonuses program on employment, income,

university enrollment and university years of schooling by family income and by gender, for the natural experiment sample described in the paper.
Columns 1-2 report the results for the high family income sample and the low family income sample. Individuals included in the high family
income sample are those who come from families in which the average household income in 2000-2002 is higher than the mean average
household income in the same years. Columns 3-4 report the results for boys and for girls. The variable "Employment Indicator" receives the value
of 1 is the individual has any work record for the given year and 0 otherwise. Columns 1 and 3 report the mean and standard error for the 2000
cohort in the treated schools. This cohort did not receive the treatment so it is useful to compare their averages as a benchmark for the treatment
effect. Columns 2 and 4 report the Differences-in-Differences estimate for each of the dependent variables listed above. Standard errors are
clustered at the school year level.

Table 7: OLS Relationships between High School Matriculation Outcomes, College Schooling, and Earnings at Adulthood: : The Natural
Experiment Sample - Treated Schools
Annual Earnings - 11 Years After High-School
Graduation
2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Separate Estimate

Joint Estimate
Panel A\B

Joint Estimate
Panels A + B

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

73
(23)

321
(62)

221
(65)

205
(67)

0.538
(0.499)

9,099
(2,352)

4,360
(2,628)

3,787
(2,611)

22
(10)

600
(131)

41
(159)

86
(155)

2.517
(1.820)

3,579
(916)

1,744
(1,211)

1,040
(1,222)

0.318
(0.466)

10,577
(2,419)

8,431
(3,462)

7,073
(3,212)

1.138
(1.984)

2,213
(770)

648
(1,177)

397
(1,166)

Number of Observations

2,703

5,344

5,344

5,344

Number of Weighted Observations

4,171

7,995

7,995

7,995

A. High School Matriculation Outcomes
Average Matriculation Score
Received High School Matriculation (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
Number of Credit Units in Matriculation Exams
Number of Honor Level Subjects
B. Post Secondary Schooling
Enrollment in University or Academic College Throughout 11 Years
After High-School Graduation (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
`
Completed Years of University or Academic College Throughout 11
Years After High-School Graduation

Notes : This table presents OLS relationships between high school matriculation outcomes, college schooling, and earnings at
adulthood for the natural experiment four-quartile treated schools sample described in the paper. Column 1 reports means and
standard deviations for the 2000 cohort in treated schools. Column 2 represents the OLS estimate of a regression where the
dependent variable is the annual wage 11 years after high-school graduation, and the independent variables include the same
variables as reported in the paper in addition to the outcome variable described in the table. Column 3 reports the OLS estimate
when all the variables that appear in Panel A\B are controlled for in the wage regression in addition to the rest of the control
variables described in the paper. Column 4 reports the OLS estimate from a wage regression where all the explanatory variables in
the table are controlled simultaneously. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table 8: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of the Teachers' Bonuses Program on Demographic Outcomes 11
Years After High-School Graduation - The Natural Experiment Sample
Married

Children

2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Estimate

2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.584
(0.493)

-0.011
(0.013)

0.451
(0.498)

-0.003
(0.011)

High Family Income

0.554
(0.497)

-0.003
(0.019)

0.407
(0.491)

0.006
(0.015)

Low Family Income

0.621

-0.033

0.506

-0.017

(0.485)

(0.017)

(0.500)

(0.018)

Boys

0.493
(0.500)

-0.005
(0.020)

0.338
(0.473)

-0.003
(0.018)

Girls

0.677

-0.007

0.569

-0.001

(0.468)

(0.016)

(0.495)

(0.016)

A. Full Sample

B. By Family Income

C. By Gender

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the Teachers' Bonuses program on

different demographic rate outcomes 11 years after high-school graduation for the natural experiment sample described in
the paper. Panel A reports the results for the full sample, Panel B reports the results for the high and low family income
samples, and Panel C reports the results by gender. Columns 1-2 report the results for the variable "Married"", which
receives the value of 1 is the individual is married 11 years after graduation, 0 otherwise. Columns 3-4 report the results
for the variable "Children", which receives the value of 1 is the individual has any children by 11 years after graduation, 0
otherwise. Columns 1 and 3 report the mean and standard error for the 2000 cohort in the treated schools. This cohort did
not receive the treatment so it is useful to compare its' average as a benchmark for the treatment effect. Columns 2 and 4
report the Differences-in-Differences estimate for each of the dependent variables listed above. Standard errors are
clustered at the school year level.

Table A1 - Treatment-Control Balancing Tests: The Natural Experiment Sample
Treatment
(1)

2000
Control
(2)

Difference
(3)

Two-years lagged
Bagrut rate

A. School characteristics
0.219
0.110
(0.163)
0.158
0.000
0.158
(0.088)
0.467
0.509
-0.042
(0.032)
0.490
0.519
-0.029
(0.049)

Father education

10.685

Mother education

10.624

Number of siblings

3.009

Gender (male=1)

0.513

Immigrant

0.016

Asia-Africa ethnicity

0.218

Religious school
Arab school
Lagged "Bagrut" rate

Math credits gained
English credits gained
Total credits attempted
Total credits gained
Average score

0.330

B. Student background
10.586
0.100
(0.821)
10.764
-0.140
(0.849)
2.026
0.983
(0.410)
0.414
0.098
(0.066)
0.029
-0.013
(0.017)
0.325
-0.107
(0.062)

C. Student lagged outcomes
0.277
0.061
(0.172)
0.155
0.077
0.078
(0.051)
5.251
4.594
0.657
(0.674)
4.308
3.761
0.547
(0.601)
63.131
64.774
-1.643
(2.591)
0.337

Treatment
(4)

2001
Control
(5)

0.324

0.214

0.155

0.000

0.474

0.475

0.527

0.528

10.539

10.332

10.519

10.539

2.912

1.662

0.556

0.431

0.025

0.012

0.235

0.276

0.256

0.453

0.107

0.079

5.322

5.342

4.218

4.482

62.121

67.710

Difference
(6)
0.110
(0.164)
0.155
(0.087)
-0.001
(0.053)
-0.002
(0.034)
0.207
(0.838)
-0.020
(0.947)
1.250
(0.384)
0.125
(0.061)
0.013
(0.018)
-0.041
(0.054)
-0.197
(0.118)
0.028
(0.061)
-0.020
(0.498)
-0.264
(0.393)
-5.589
(2.217)

# obs
2,654
2,369
5,023
2,598
2,236
4,834
# obs, weighted
4,095
3,818
7,913
3,812
3,679
7,491
# schools
18
18
36
18
18
36
Notes: Standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for school level clustering.
* Observations were weighted with frequency weights in order to have similar number of students in control
and treatment schools within each group of schools with close true matriculation rate.
* The schools status of nationality and religiosity does not change. Therefore, any change in the means across
years reflects relative changes in the number of students in a cohort.
* This table is based on the math sample.

Table A2 - Treatment-Control Balancing Tests: The Regression Discontinuity Sample
Treatment
(1)
Religious school

0.100

Arab school

0.131

Lagged "Bagrut" rate

0.448

Father education

11.027

Mother education

11.095

Number of siblings

2.622

Gender (male=1)

0.493

Immigrant

0.014

Asia-Africa ethnicity

0.215

Math credits gained

0.185

English credits gained

0.207

Total credits attempted

4.788

Total credits gained

4.008

Average score

61.671

2000
Control
(2)

Difference
(3)

A. School characteristics
0.301
-0.201
(0.142)
0.000
0.131
(0.094)
0.495
-0.047
(0.017)
B. Student background
10.219
0.808
(0.591)
10.526
0.570
(0.659)
2.288
0.335
(0.352)
0.425
0.068
(0.058)
0.045
-0.031
(0.021)
0.313
-0.097
(0.052)
C. Student lagged outcomes
0.364
-0.180
(0.131)
0.053
0.155
(0.061)
4.944
-0.156
(0.476)
4.066
-0.058
(0.376)
64.548
-2.877
(2.932)

Treatment
(4)

2001
Control
(5)

0.095

0.290

0.132

0.000

0.458

0.470

10.835

10.081

11.027

10.527

2.605

1.902

0.499

0.451

0.013

0.009

0.214

0.273

0.185

0.452

0.183

0.101

5.064

5.346

4.188

4.394

61.797

65.770

Difference
(6)
-0.195
(0.140)
0.132
(0.096)
-0.012
(0.041)
0.753
(0.643)
0.501
(0.711)
0.703
(0.383)
0.048
(0.052)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.060
(0.054)
-0.267
(0.128)
0.083
(0.088)
-0.283
(0.489)
-0.206
(0.384)
-3.973
(1.973)

# obs
2,471
1,638
4,109
2,401
1,519
3,920
# schools
14
13
27
14
13
27
Notes: Standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for school level clustering.
* The schools status of nationality and religiosity does not change. Any change in the means across years
reflects relative changes in the number of students in a cohort.
* This table is based on the math sample.

Table A3: Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Teachers' Bonuses Program on High School Education Outcomes

Sample

4 Quartiles

3 Quartiles

Mean 2000 Cohort
in Treated Schools

Treatment
Estimate

Mean 2000 Cohort
in Treated Schools

Treatment
Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average Matriculation Score

72.926
(23.098)

2.779
(0.892)

66.537
(22.599)

2.868
(1.017)

Received High School Matriculation (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.532
(0.499)

0.036
(0.020)

0.423
(0.494)

0.055
(0.023)

Number of Credit Units in Matriculation Exams

22.199
(10.257)

0.803
(0.334)

20.205
(10.238)

0.669
(0.329)

Number of Science Credit Units in Matriculation Exams

2.339
(3.813)

0.589
(0.181)

1.340
(2.910)

0.343
(0.154)

Number of Honor Level Subjects

2.491
(1.821)

0.128
(0.062)

2.034
(1.631)

0.092
(0.065)

4,162

16,031

3,072

11,921

Number of Observations

Notes : This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the Teachers' Bonuses program on high-school educational outcomes
fo the three and four quartiles samples described in the paper. Columns 1 and 3 report the means and standard deviations for the 2000 cohort in the
treated schools. This cohort did not receive the treatment so it is useful to compare its' average as a benchmark for the treatment effect. Columns 2 and
4 report the differences-in-differences estimates for each of the dependent variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table A4: Estimates of Parental Earnings Controls Added to the Basic University Enrollment and Years of Schooling Difference-in-Difference Model - The Natural Experiment Sample
University Enrollment, Years After High School Graduation

University Years of Schooling, Years After High School
Graduation

10

11

12

10

11

12

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Father's Average Earning 2000-2002

0.048
(0.016)

0.045
(0.015)

0.044
(0.014)

0.229
(0.072)

0.237
(0.073)

0.237
(0.075)

Mother's Average Earning 2000-2002

0.048
(0.013)

0.044
(0.012)

0.042
(0.012)

0.228
(0.058)

0.234
(0.059)

0.233
(0.061)

Household's Average Earning 2000-2002

0.048
(0.015)

0.044
(0.014)

0.042
(0.013)

0.220
(0.066)

0.227
(0.067)

0.225
(0.069)

A. Main Effect

Notes: This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the Teachers' Bonuses program on post-secondary education outcomes for the natural experiment sample described in
the paper, when controling for parental income. Panel A reports the estimates of the main treatment effect from the differences-in-differences model describes in Table 4, to which each of these
parental income controls are separately added. Columns 1 and 5 report results for 10 years after high-school graduation, columns 2 and 6 report results for 11 years after high-school graduation, and
columns 3 and 7 report results for 12 years after high-school graduation. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table A5: Estimates of Parental Earnings Controls Added to the Basic Earnings and Employment Difference-in-Difference Model - The Natural Experiment Sample
Earnings, Years After High School Graduation

Employment, Years After High School
Graduation

9

10

11

9-11 Years After
Graduation Stacked

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

Main Effect

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Father's Average Earning 2000-2002

5,203
(1,377)

3,974
(1,852)

6,174
(2,137)

5,105
(1,588)

0.025
(0.011)

0.010
(0.009)

0.018
(0.009)

Mother's Average Earning 2000-2002

4,837
(1,289)

2,970
(1,965)

5,676
(2,027)

4,532
(1,558)

0.025
(0.011)

0.001
(0.009)

0.012
(0.009)

Household's Average Earning 2000-2002

5,220
(1,415)

3,706
(1,846)

6,055
(2,187)

4,983
(1,627)

0.026
(0.011)

0.009
(0.009)

0.017
(0.009)

9

10

11

A. Main Effect

Notes: This table presents the differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the Teachers' Bonuses program on earnings and employment outcomes, when controling for
parental income. Panel A reports the estimates of the main treatment effect from the differences-in-differences model describes in Table 4, to which each of these parental income
controls are separately added. Columns 1 and 5 report results for 9 years after high-school graduation, columns 2 and 6 report results for 10 years after high-school graduation, and
columns 3 and 7 report results for 11 years after high-school graduation. Column 4 report results for the stacked earnings of 9-11 years after high-school graduation. The variable
"Employment Indicator" receives the value of 1 is the individual has any work record for the given year and 0 otherwise. Standard errors are clustered at the school year level.

Table A6: OLS Relationships between High School Matriculation Outcomes, College Schooling, and Earnings at Adulthood by Family Income: The Natural Experiment Sample - Treated Schools
High Family Income

Low Family Income

Annual Earnings - 11 Years After High-School
Graduation

Annual Earnings - 11 Years After High-School
Graduation

2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Separate Estimate

Joint Estimate
Panel A\B

Joint Estimate
Panels A + B

2000 Cohort in
Treated Schools

Separate Estimate

Joint Estimate
Panel A\B

Joint Estimate
Panels A + B

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

78
(20)

377
(113)

305
(117)

295
(124)

68
(25)

292
(68)

172
(69)

150
(67)

0.608
(0.488)

6,911
(2,702)

2,751
(3,466)

2,348
(3,560)

0.452
(0.498)

11,199
(2,792)

5,608
(3,065)

4,887
(2,883)

24
(09)

436
(208)

-104
(238)

-94
(232)

20
(11)

747
(139)

184
(245)

286
(228)

2.869
(1.804)

2,773
(1,310)

1,560
(1,749)

1,266
(1,811)

2.078
(1.743)

4,359
(1,020)

1,827
(1,522)

590
(1,411)

0.409
(0.492)

6,861
(2,982)

7,267
(3,948)

6,429
(3,907)

0.204
(0.403)

15,926
(4,096)

8,126
(7,073)

6,182
(6,630)

1.506
(2.186)

1,164
(1,064)

-120
(1,569)

-477
(1,595)

0.677
(1.582)

4,140
(1,087)

2,476
(1,856)

2,323
(1,823)

Number of Observations

1,481

2,958

2,958

2,958

1,222

2,386

2,386

2,386

Number of Weighted Observations

2,317

4,464

4,464

4,464

1,854

3,531

3,531

3,531

A. High School Matriculation Outcomes
Average Matriculation Score
Received High School Matriculation (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
Number of Credit Units in Matriculation Exams
Number of Honor Level Subjects
B. Post Secondary Schooling
Enrollment in University or Academic College Throughout 11 Years
After High-School Graduation (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
`
Completed Years of University or Academic College Throughout 11
Years After High-School Graduation

Notes : This table presents OLS relationships between high school matriculation outcomes, college schooling, and earnings at adulthood for the natural experiment four-quartile treated schools
sample described in the paper by family income. Columns 1-4 reports the results for individuals who come from high income families. Individuals included in this sample are those who come from
families in which the average household income in 2000-2002 is higher than the mean average household income in the same years. Columns 5-8 report the results for individuals who come from
low income families. Individuals included in this sample are those who come from families in which the average household income in 2000-2002 is lower than the mean average household income
in the same years. Columns 1 and 5 report means and standard deviations for the 2000 cohort in treated schools. Columns 2 and 6 represents the OLS estimate of a regression where the dependent
variable is the annual wage 11 years after high-school graduation, and the independent variables include the same variables as reported in the paper in addition to the outcome variable described in
the table. Columns 3 and 7 report the OLS estimate when all the variables that appear in Panel A\B are controlled for in the wage regression in addition to the rest of the control variables described
in the paper. Columns 4 and 8 report the OLS estimate from a wage regression where all the explanatory variables in the table are controlled simultaneously. Standard errors are clustered at the
school year level.

