                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PICK YOUR POISON:
       THE CHOICES AND CONSEQUENCES OF POLICY RESPONSES TO CRISES

                                          Kristin J. Forbes
                                          Michael W. Klein

                                        Working Paper 20987
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20987


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




Thanks to Rajeev Dehejia, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Ayhan Kose, Jeffrey Sachs, anonymous reviewers
at the IMF, and conference participants at the IMF for helpful comments. Patrick O’Halloran provided
excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the IMF for this
paper which was prepared for the IMF's Annual Research Conference in November 2013. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kristin J. Forbes and Michael W. Klein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Pick Your Poison: The Choices and Consequences of Policy Responses to Crises
Kristin J. Forbes and Michael W. Klein
NBER Working Paper No. 20987
February 2015
JEL No. F41

                                              ABSTRACT

Countries choose different strategies when responding to crises. An important challenge in assessing the
impact of these policies is selection bias with respect to relatively time-invariant country characteristics,
as well as time-varying values of outcome variables and other policy choices. This paper addresses
this challenge by using propensity-score matching to estimate how major reserve sales, large currency
depreciations, substantial changes in policy interest rates, and increased controls on capital outflows
affect real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation during two periods marked by crises, 1997 to
2001 and 2007 to 2011. We find that none of these policies yield significant improvements in growth,
unemployment, and inflation. Instead, a large increase in interest rates and new capital controls are
estimated to cause a significant decline in GDP growth. Sharp currency depreciations may raise GDP
growth over time, but only with a lagged effect and after an initial contraction.


Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu
I.       Introduction
         In the mid- and late-1990s, a series of emerging markets faced sudden stops of capital
inflows. The standard policy prescription included a sharp increase in interest rates in an effort
to attract capital.1 Countries that followed this prescription generally experienced severe
recessions and increased unemployment, and while the medicine was not necessarily worse than
the alternative, there were adverse side effects. This experience caused many countries to take
steps to attempt to avoid such severe policies during the next crisis, such as accumulating
international reserves, experimenting with capital controls, and developing currency swap
arrangements. When the Global Financial Crisis hit in late 2007, many countries responded in
ways other than through substantial increases in interest rates. But these other policies also had
their own painful side effects. Thus, these crisis episodes suggest that countries must “pick their
poison,” since virtually every policy response to a crisis involves costs and tradeoffs.
         This paper analyzes the causes and consequences of different policy responses to
contractions in international capital flows and their corresponding crises. It focuses on two crisis
windows: from 1997 through 2001 (which includes the crises in Asia, Russia, Brazil, Argentina
and Turkey, and the global turmoil after the collapse of LTCM), and from 2007 through 2011
(which includes the crises in Latvia, Iceland, and several euro-zone countries, as well as the
turmoil during the Global Financial Crisis [GFC]).2 We analyze four policy responses: major
reserve sales, large currency depreciations, substantial interest rate increases, and new controls
on capital outflows. These major policy shifts do not typically occur during stable times and are
nimble enough to be quickly adopted in response to sudden stops in capital flows.3 We document
patterns in the use of these four policies during the two crisis periods. We also estimate the
determinants of which countries use these policies and at what times. These estimates are then


1
  See Fischer (2004), Chapter 3.
2
  Although the crises in the period from 1997 to 2001 were often more regional or country-specific in nature than
during the later period (except perhaps during the fall of 2008 after the collapse of LTCM), both crisis windows are
periods of volatility in global capital flows punctuated by “sudden stops.” Claessens et al. (2014) presents a wide-
ranging analysis and overview of financial crises, and the chapter by Claessens and Kose (2014) provides a detailed
discussion of the different types of crises and patterns over time. Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) present an
analysis of the causes and consequences of crises from 1973 to 2010.
3
  This roughly corresponds to the tradeoffs countries face in the policy trilemma, as discussed in Obstfeld,
Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010); Dominguez (2013); and Klein and Shambaugh (2013). As with the policy trilemma,
we do not consider fiscal policy responses since these are less nimble and generally take longer to implement. We
also do not analyze fiscal policy responses as these are discussed in detail in Chari and Henry(2015), as part of the
same conference for which this paper was prepared.

                                                                                                                    1
used, in a manner described below, in our analysis of the impact of these policies on three key
outcome variables: GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment.
        Estimates of the impact of these policies cannot simply compare outcomes in the wake of
a particular policy change to outcomes in the absence of that policy due to “selection bias.”
Selection bias can occur because of three potentially important differences between countries
that do and do not undertake these policies: longstanding underlying economic differences,
differences in outcome variables before and at the time when the policy is enacted, and
differences in the use of other policies. These differences could potentially affect outcome
variables and, therefore, confound estimates of the effects of policies on outcomes. For example,
estimates in this paper show that countries are more likely to have large depreciations during the
two crisis periods if they were less open, if recent GDP growth was slower, and if they did not
recently sell reserves, all of which could potentially affect GDP growth, unemployment, or
inflation independent of whether a large depreciation occurred. Although previous studies note
these issues when considering the impact of crisis responses, there is typically a limited ability to
address them. This is because of the difficulties controlling for all differences across countries
using a limited set of observable statistics and because of the difficulty in finding effective
instrumental variables.
        In this paper, we address selection bias between countries that undertake these policy
responses at particular times and those that do not by using a propensity-score matching
methodology, as developed in Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985).4 This technique is common in
some areas of economic analysis (such as labor economics), but rarely used in international
macroeconomics.5 To the best of our knowledge, it has not yet been used to analyze the effect of
different policy responses to crises. This methodology allows us to construct a counterfactual for
each major policy response in each country. The counterfactual is created using an estimated
propensity score, based on the estimated likelihood that a policy is undertaken, that selects
relevant observations to compare countries which use a certain policy at a certain time (a
treatment group) with countries that do not (a control group).
        In the first stage of this propensity-score methodology, we estimate logit models of the
probability that a country undertakes each of the four policy responses as a function of global

4
  In Section IV.A, we discuss the methodology in more detail and the differences between the propensity-score
matching methodology and the standard multivariate regression analysis.
5
  Three exceptions are Glick, Guo, and Hutchison (2006); Das and Bergstrom (2012); and Forbes, Fratzscher, and
Straub (2015).

                                                                                                                 2
variables, domestic vulnerabilities, country characteristics, and other recent policy decisions. The
models have a high degree of explanatory power, and most coefficients have the expected signs.
The estimates confirm that there are significant differences in the macroeconomic characteristics
between countries that use these policies and those that do not. The estimates also show that, in
some cases, the use of one policy may influence the likelihood of the subsequent use of another
one.
         In the next stage of the analysis, we use these estimates of the determinants of a country’s
policy responses to estimate propensity scores, the probability that each country adopts each
major policy response in each quarter. These propensity scores are then used to select control
groups using five different matching algorithms, matching controls for time-varying attributes,
such as the lagged values of other policies and outcome variables, as well as for relatively stable
country characteristics. A key result is provided in the set of independence tests that show that
the matched set of countries do not exhibit the selection bias on observables that would be
present if the entire sample served as a control group in a simple comparison of outcomes. The
matched sets of countries are used to estimate the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT),
the statistic that shows the effect of the four policy responses on key outcome variables while
controlling for selection bias in the quarter that the policy is undertaken as well as in the
subsequent six quarters.6
         The estimates suggest that none of these four policies yield significant improvements in
growth, unemployment and inflation; instead, several yield negative consequences. Substantial
increases in interest rates and new controls on capital outflows appear to have particularly
negative effects, as they generate sharp and significant decreases in GDP growth with no benefit
in terms of reducing inflation or unemployment. Large currency depreciations appear to be most
likely to generate significant increases in GDP growth relative to the counterfactual, although the
positive effects do not occur for at least six quarters, are often preceded by a contraction in GDP
growth, and are often only marginally significant. A series of robustness tests generally confirms
these results. Extensions suggest that policies may have larger effects in non-OECD economies,
but these effects are often less precisely estimated. Extensions also suggest that during the
Global Financial Crisis, depreciations may have yielded a reduction in unemployment (relative

6
  Propensity score matching does not directly control for endogeneity. This is a potential concern for the ATT
statistic of the effect of the policy on the outcome variable in the quarter in which the policy is enacted. But the
ATT statistics in the six subsequent quarters consider the effect of the policy on subsequent outcomes and do not
have the same potential problem with endogeneity, especially given the exclusion restriction described below.

                                                                                                                       3
to the counterfactual), and the effects of interest rate increases differed than during the 1990s—
but all of these extensions are only suggestive as they are based on small samples that limit the
effectiveness of the estimation technique.
        These results suggest that during a crisis and contraction in capital flows, there is no
miracle cure of a policy response. Neither a major reserves sale, sharp currency depreciation,
large increase in the interest rate, nor new controls on capital outflows will be able to
simultaneously generate stronger growth and lower unemployment while avoiding an increase in
inflation.
        The remainder of this paper is as follows: Section II defines the major policy responses
that are the focus of this paper and documents their incidence and joint occurrence over the two
crisis periods. Section III estimates a logit model predicting a country’s use of each policy in
each quarter. Section IV explains the propensity-score matching methodology and uses the
results from the logit regression to estimate propensity scores and create control groups using
different matching algorithms. Section V then uses these results to estimate the effect of different
policies on GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation, including a number of robustness checks
and extensions to the base-case analysis. Section VI concludes.


II.     Policy Responses During Crises
        Countries can, and do, deal with economic crises using a variety of policy tools.
In this section, we document the policy choices undertaken in our sample of 85 countries for two
four-year periods which include crises affecting multiple countries and contractions in global
capital flows, from 1997 to 2001 and 2007 to 2011. To simplify terminology, we will refer to the
earlier period as the 1990s crises and the later window as the 2000s crises. We focus on four
different policy responses: major sales in foreign exchange reserves, sharp depreciations of the
nominal exchange rate, substantial increases in policy interest rates, and new controls on capital
outflows.
        These are four of the primary policy responses that a government might quickly
undertake when faced with different exogenous shocks. For example, as described in Blanchard,
Das, and Faruqee (2010), an increase in perceived risk that reduces capital flows, or a decrease in
foreign output that leads to a decrease in domestic exports, often leads to currency depreciations.
Depreciations can further reduce output through balance sheet effects. Policy efforts to forestall a
depreciation could include selling reserves, raising interest rates, or implementing controls on

                                                                                                     4
capital outflows. The cost of these policies, however, might be lower output than would
otherwise occur with the depreciation. As Blanchard et al. write, “If the policy implications
seem complicated, it is because they are” (p. 276).
         We focus on episodes of relatively large and infrequent changes in these four policy
choices for a broad sample of 85 countries.7 For our base case, we define large policy responses
as occurring in only 5% of the country-quarter observations during the two crisis windows.
More specifically, using these thresholds, major reserve sales are defined as quarters during
which international reserves (relative to GDP) fall by at least 13.4 percentage points, compared
to the previous year.8 Large depreciations are defined as quarters in which there is at least a 22.6
percent depreciation over the previous year in the country’s exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar.
A substantial increase in interest rates is defined as a quarter in which there has been an increase
in the policy interest rate of at least 200 basis points over the past year.9 To avoid episodes when
large depreciations or interest rate hikes primarily reflect a response to inflation, we exclude
country-quarters in which the annual rate of inflation is more than 10 percent. We exclude
countries that are currently members of the euro zone from the sample of countries that can have
a large change in reserves, exchange rates, or interest rates due to the constraints on these
countries as members of this currency union.
         Finally, to define changes in controls on capital outflows, it is necessary to use a different
approach. Because there are no good measures of the intensity of different capital controls, we
are unable to use the 5% sample threshold to define a “major” change. Instead, we define
adjustments in capital controls as years in which new controls on capital outflows were added,



7
  The countries are listed in the Appendix and include all “Advanced Economies” (as defined by the International
Monetary Fund as of October 2012) and all “Emerging Markets” and “Frontier Economies” (as defined by Standard
& Poor’s BMI indices). Countries in this list are included in the final analysis if data on all four of the policy
responses is available. Details on sources and definitions for the data are in the Appendix.
8
  There are a variety of ways to measure reserve loss in order to obtain an indicator of a “major” change; for
example, in an earlier version of this paper we considered a threshold change in reserves combined with a
requirement that reserves-to-GDP meet or exceed a minimum level (there were 52 instances of large reserve losses
using that method, versus 62 with our current method). We have chosen our current approach because GDP is an
appropriate variable for directly scaling reserves. But, as with any approach, there are potential concerns; for
example, the percentage change in reserves-to-GDP could be large and negative (and count as a major reserve loss)
if GDP growth is especially large and reserves are not repleted (this is the case in about 8 of the 62 instances of
major reserve loss). Also, we would not count as a major reserve loss an instance where there is a large drop in
reserves in a time when GDP growth has a large negative value (although, given that we have more instances of
major reserve loss with this method than with our former approach, this might not be an important concern).
9
  The policy interest rate is the interest rate related to monetary policy for each country. If the policy rate is not
available, we use the short-term interest rate. Interest rate information is from Global Insight, accessed 10/1/13.

                                                                                                                     5
based on the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.10
This capital control data is only available on an annual basis, in contrast to the other data which
are available on a quarterly basis.11 Using this measure, controls on capital outflows were added
in about 3 percent of the country-year observations during the two crisis periods. As a result,
there is a slightly lower incidence of the use of controls on capital outflows relative to the other
three policy responses in our sample.
        In the following analysis, we want to avoid counting a major policy change which
persists over several quarters as multiple events. Therefore, we also impose the condition that
we do not score a policy change until at least four quarters after the occurrence of a policy
change of the same type. As a result, there can be at most one policy change in each of the four
categories per year for each country. This does not preclude us from finding major changes in
other types of policies at the same time (or within three quarters).
        Tables 1a and 1b report the incidence of these major changes in reserves, exchange rates,
interest rates, and capital controls for the two crisis periods. The numbers on the diagonal of the
tables represent changes in each policy that did not occur within one quarter of a change in any
of the other three policies. The numbers in the upper triangular part of the matrix represent pairs
of policies that occurred either in the same quarter or within one quarter of each other; for
example, element (2,3) in Table 1a shows that there were eight episodes in which a substantial
increase in interest rates occurred contemporaneously, or within one quarter of, a large
depreciation. The numbers in the boxes that span more than two cells indicate triplets or
quadruplets of policies that occurred contemporaneously or within one quarter; for example,
there was one episode in the 1997-2001 period when a country had a large depreciation, a
substantial increase in interest rates, and the addition of capital controls all within one quarter of
each other (Indonesia in the third quarter of 1997) and one other episode in which a country
undertook all four policies (Brazil in the first quarter of 1999). The last column of each table
shows the total number of each of the large policy changes.
        One important point that emerges from these tables is that the majority of the policy
changes occur in isolation (represented by the diagonal elements) rather than occurring


10
   The data on capital controls is from an expanded version of the data set in Klein (2012), and we use his approach
of including changes in controls on all asset categories except foreign direct investment. This measure of capital
controls (as well as most others) only captures when a new control is first added or removed, and not any subsequent
modifications to the specific control.
11
   We count a control as being put in place in the third quarter of the year.

                                                                                                                  6
simultaneously, or within one quarter of, different policies. Countries chose only one of these
policies 54 percent of the time (53 of 98 major policy changes) in the 1997-2001 period and 64
percent of the time (64 of 100 changes) in the 2007-2011 period. Another important point is the
relative incidence of the different policy responses across the two periods. Major increases in
interest rates occurred more frequently during the earlier crisis period window than during the
later period (36% versus 17% of the total policy responses, respectively). In contrast, major
reserve sales were used more frequently in the latter period (44% of policy responses) than in the
earlier period (18% of policy responses). Major exchange rate depreciation and new capital
controls occurred in roughly the same percentages of total policy responses across the two
periods.
         Figures 1a and 1b present the time series of the use of these four policies for the 1997-
2001 and the 2007-2011 periods, respectively.12 Figure 1a shows that, during the earlier crisis
window, interest rates were most often increased sharply in 1997, 1998, and 2001, and used
more than any of the other policies during these three years. The incidence of major
depreciations increased fairly steadily from 1997 through 2001. Figure 1b shows that large
reserves sales was by far the most common policy response during 2008, although the use of all
three policies were at or close to their peak incidence in the same year. Major policy responses
were used less often in 2009 and 2010, but then 2011 shows an increased use of reserve sales,
interest rate increases, and sharp depreciations.


III.     Explaining Policy Choices
         The previous section documented the use of four different policies during crisis periods:
selling reserves, currency depreciations, increasing interest rates, and adding new capital
controls. But what determines which of these policies, if any, a country chooses, and when? To
answer these questions, this section estimates the probabilities of each of these policies being
employed during the crisis periods in the late 1990s and late 2000s. These estimates not only
contribute to our understanding of why countries use these policies, but also are the basis for the




12
  Only countries with information for all four policy responses for each year in the given crisis period are included
in these figures, so that the sample of countries is constant across time within each graph (although not across
graphs). As a result, the incidence of the use of each policy differs relative to Tables 1a and 1b. In these graphs, the
episodes are converted from a quarterly frequency to an annual frequency.


                                                                                                                       7
analysis in the next section that uses propensity scores to estimate how these policies affect key
outcome variables such as economic growth.
         We estimate the likelihood of a major change in each of the four policies (as defined
above) in each quarter using a logit model for our panel data of 85 countries (listed in the
Appendix) over the periods 1997Q1 to 2001Q4 and 2007Q1 to 2011Q4. There are a large
number of potential covariates that could predict the use of these four policies—but as discussed
in the sensitivity tests in Section V.D, the key results in this paper are robust to the choice of
different variables. Therefore, for our base case we begin by selecting a wide set of variables
which are available for a large sample of countries at (preferably) a quarterly frequency and that
research has highlighted as important in predicting vulnerability to crises (e.g., Frankel and
Saravelos, 2012; Rose and Spiegel, 2010; and Claessens, Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven, 2010),
sudden stops in capital flows (e.g., Forbes and Warnock, 2012; Calvo, 1998; and Calvo,
Izquierdo, and Mejía, 2008), and the use of capital controls (e.g., Forbes, Fratzscher, and Straub,
2015, and Aizenman and Pasricha, 2013). We also draw on the framework of explanatory
variables used in other work using propensity-score matching at higher frequencies than annual
data (e.g. Forbes, Fratzscher and Straub, 2015). The Appendix includes details on all of these
variables—including definitions, sources, and coverage.
         The full set of covariates can be roughly divided into four categories, recognizing that
some variables could be placed in more than one group. One set of covariates controls for
changes in the global environment: an indicator of global risk and uncertainty (the VXO), the
change in the U.S. interest rate, and the log of a commodity price index.13 This category also
includes a dummy variable equal to 1 for observations in the 1997QI-2001QIV period in order to
distinguish the earlier crisis period from the latter period. A second category includes variables
capturing domestic vulnerabilities: changes in real GDP growth, changes in gross capital
outflows (relative to GDP), changes in gross capital inflows (relative to GDP), the country’s
current account balance as a percent of GDP, changes in CPI inflation, the change in private
credit (relative to GDP), and a commodity exporter dummy interacted with the commodity
price.14 A third category represents domestic characteristics that vary more in the cross section

13
   The VXO is the Volatility Index calculated by the Chicago Board Options Exchange and is similar to the VIX
(with a correlation of 99%), except the VIX is only available starting in 1990. The U.S. interest rate is the policy
rate. The commodity price index is the Economist All-Commodity dollar index.
14
   Capital flow data are from the dataset created in Forbes and Warnock (2012) and from the IMF’s Balance of
Payments. Private credit is measured by private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to
GDP and reported in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine, Cihak, and Feyen (2013). The commodity interaction term is

                                                                                                                       8
than in the time series for any particular country. This set includes the logarithm of income per
capita, an indicator of institutional quality15, capital-account openness as measured by the Chinn-
Ito KAOPEN variable, the level of reserves relative to GDP, whether the exchange rate is
pegged16, and a dummy equal to 1 if the country is a member of the euro zone at any time in the
sample. The fourth and final category of covariates captures any changes over the previous year
in the four policies on which we are focusing: changes in reserves (as a share of GDP), changes
in the country’s policy interest rate relative to the U.S. rate, the percent change in the nominal
exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar, and the addition of any new controls on capital outflows.
All these covariates enter the regression lagged by one quarter, or by one year if only annual data
is available.17
        We first estimate a base-case logit model for each of the four policies, using a
specification that can be represented as


                         1

                               ,                          ,                      ,                    ,       (1)


where pcit is an episode dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i adopts a major
policy change in quarter t (reserve sale, currency depreciation, interest rate increase, or new
control on capital outflows), and                ,    ,              ,    ,             , and

   ,              are vectors of variables measuring global conditions, country vulnerabilities,
other country characteristics, and recent changes in related policies for country i, respectively, all
lagged by one quarter. All standard errors are robustly estimated.
        Given this wide set of variables in the initial regression, it is natural to find that many of
the coefficients are not significant. In the first-stage regression used for propensity-score
matching, however, including variables that are irrelevant (in the sense that they do not influence
the policy choice) will increase the variance of the estimates in the second stage and can make it




defined as the product of the log of the commodity price index (defined above) multiplied by a dummy equal to 1 if
a country is a major commodity exporter.
15
   Institutions are measured using an index based on the ICRG measures of institutional quality compiled by the
World Bank.
16
   From Klein and Shambaugh (2013).
17
   Details on the definitions and sources for all of these variables are available in the appendix.

                                                                                                                 9
more difficult to find appropriate matches.18 Therefore, for our base case we estimate regressions
which only include the explanatory variables that are significant at least at the 20% level in the
initial estimates. The resulting estimates are presented in Table 2.
         The estimates in Table 2 show that the logit model best explains large currency
depreciations (with a pseudo-R2 of 0.39) and major reserve sales (with a pseudo-R2 of 0.41). The
logit model is least successful in predicting new controls on capital outflows (with a pseudo-R2
of 0.08).19 The coefficients on a number of the covariates representing global variables are
significant, indicating that global variables can influence the choice and timing of the four major
policy responses. For example, an increase in global risk is associated with a higher likelihood of
a large depreciation in the subsequent quarter, an increase in commodity prices with a higher
likelihood of a major interest rate increase, and, in a less intuitive result, an increase in U.S.
interest rates are associated with a lower likelihood of large reserve sales. The coefficient on the
dummy variable for the 1990s crisis window shows that major interest rate increases are more
likely in the earlier crisis period than in the later one, a finding consistent with the unconditional
statistics presented in Tables 1a and 1b. Domestic vulnerabilities can also significantly affect the
choice and timing of the policy responses. For example, a country is more likely to have a large
currency depreciation in the quarter after slower growth and is more likely to increase interest
rates sharply after an increase in capital outflows.
         The estimates in Table 2 also show that a number of country characteristics, such as
reserve holdings, institutional quality, and the exchange rate regime, are significantly associated
with most policies. For example, countries with higher reserves (as a share of GDP) are more
likely to have large reserve sales and less likely to have large currency depreciations. Countries
that are more open are less likely to have large reserves sales, major currency depreciations, or
large interest rate increases. Finally, previous policy changes affect the likelihood of major
policy changes in the current period. For example, a decrease in reserves over the previous year
is associated with a lower likelihood of a subsequent major reserve sale, current depreciation, or
interest rate increase. In contrast, a depreciation against the dollar over the previous year is



18
   See Heinrich, Maffioli, and Vázquez (2010). Including irrelevant variables will make it more difficult to satisfy
the common-support condition, as explained below. The sensitivity analysis also reports results when the full set of
covariates is included in the first-stage regression.
19
   Even though the R² statistic is low in the probit explaining capital controls, statistics presented in Table 3 below
indicate that no variables fail the independence. If, in fact, the addition of capital controls is not correlated with
other variables, then sample selection issues are less pronounced.

                                                                                                                     10
associated with a greater likelihood of a subsequent major depreciation and reduced likelihood of
large reserve sale.
       We have conducted a number of robustness tests for the results in Table 2. One set of
these tests includes additional variables, such as the country’s debt to GDP, fiscal balance as a
share of GDP, stock market capitalization relative to GDP, changes in the real exchange rate, a
dummy for high income countries (as defined by the World Bank), and/or a dummy for major
financial centers. The inclusion of many of these additional variables shrinks the sample size,
especially the number of “treated” observations in which a country makes one of the four major
policy changes. Substantial reductions in sample size make it impossible to estimate the effects
of these policies with any precision. Robustness tests which maintain a reasonable sample size
(including the number of treated observations) can yield different estimates for the first-stage
regressions based on which variables are included in the regression, but do not alter the key
results reported below on the impact of the four policy responses.
       The estimates presented in Table 2 suggest that selection bias is not just a hypothetical
concern when analyzing the impact of different policy responses. Selection bias can occur when
countries that adopt certain policies have different domestic characteristics and vulnerabilities
than those that do not. The estimates show, for example, that countries with lower levels of
reserves and with floating exchange rates in the previous period are more likely to undergo sharp
currency depreciations. Similarly, differences across time also affect the likelihood of major
policy changes; for example, sharp currency depreciations are more likely at times when global
risk is high and interest rate increases are more likely after commodity prices increase. These
estimates indicate the presence of selection bias (an assessment which is confirmed by the more
rigorous independence tests presented below), and therefore the importance of addressing this
issue through techniques such as propensity score matching.


IV.    Propensity-Score Methodology and Matching Results
A.     An Overview of Propensity-Score Methodology
       Countries which undertake a particular policy at a particular time may differ from
countries which do not undertake that policy in ways that affect outcomes beyond the effects of
the policy itself. This raises the possibility that an analysis comparing the outcomes of countries
depending upon whether or not they implement a policy may capture selection bias as well as the
impact of that policy. One means of addressing this issue is through the use of propensity score

                                                                                                    11
matching. This technique represents an effort to isolate the effects of policies from other,
confounding effects correlated with the likelihood of their implementation. This section
discusses propensity score matching, which has only recently been used in macroeconomics,
monetary economics, and international economics, although it has been a staple in other fields
such as labor economics for several decades.20
         To illustrate the issue of selection bias, we define the adoption of the treatment or policy
(such as a major increase in interest rates) by the ith country as Di = 1, and the absence of this
action as Di = 0. The outcome variable (such as the change in GDP) is Y1,i for the ith member of
the treated group and Y0,i for the ith member of the untreated (control) group. Summing over
members of each group, we are able to observe E[Y1,i|Di=1] and E[Y0,j|Dj=0]. The observed
difference between the outcomes for these two groups is


         E[Y1,i|Di=1] – E[Y0,i|Di=0] = E[Y1,i – Y0,i|Di=1] + {E[Y0,i|Di=1] – E[Y0,i|Di=0]}. 21                   (2)


         We are interested in E[Y1,i – Y0,i|Di=1], which is the effect of the policy relative to the
outcome the members of the treated group would have had in the absence of that policy. As
noted in the introduction, this is called the average effect of the treatment on the treated, or ATT.
The observed difference in outcomes between the two groups, however, consists of both the ATT
and {E[Y0,i|Di=1] – E[Y0,i|Di=0]}, which represents a selection bias. Selection bias occurs if the
treatment is not randomly assigned and if there are differences in outcomes solely because of
pre-treatment differences between the treated and control groups.
         The effect of sampling bias could be easily minimized if there were a large set of
countries that differed along only one or two discrete and observable dimensions with respect to
the likelihood of undertaking a policy.22 In this case, countries could be readily apportioned to a

20
   Propensity-score matching is discussed in Dehejia and Wahba (2002), Angrist and Pischke (2008, chapter 3) and
Heinrich, Maffioli, and Vazquez (2010). Recent research in macroeconomics that has used this technique includes
analyses of monetary policy (Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011), Angrist, Jordá, and Kuersteiner (2013) and Ehrmann
and Fratzscher (2006)), the effect of openness on growth (Das and Bergstrom (2012)), financial liberalization (Das
and Bergstrom (2012), and Levchenko, Rancière, and Thoenig (2009)), foreign ownership of firms (Chari, Chen,
and Dominguez (2011)), the response of economies to crises (Glick, Guo, and Hutchison (2006)), fiscal policy
(Jordà and Taylor (2013)) and the effects of capital controls and macroprudential measures (Forbes, Fratzscher and
Straub (2015)).
21
   Angrist and Pischke (2008) show the full derivation of these equations. The observable outcomes are Yi = Y0,i
+(Y1,i – Y0,i)Di. The expected values conditional on Di are E[Yi|Di=1] = E[Y1,i|Di=1], E[Yi|Di=0] = E[Y0,i|Di=0], and
E[(Y1,i – Y0,i)Di|Di=0] = 0. Thus, E[Y1,i|Di=1] – E[Y0,j|Dj=0] = E[Y1,i – Y0,i |Di=1] + E[Y0,i|Di=1] – E[Y0,i|Di=0].
22
   In this discussion, to illustrate propensity score matching, we focus on differences across countries and, for
example, the vector Xi for the ith country. Our empirical analysis focuses on differences across countries and across

                                                                                                                   12
small number of “cells” reflecting all differences along these dimensions. It would be
straightforward to calculate the differences between the treated and the untreated in each cell
(providing there are enough observations in each cell), and take a weighted average of those
differences in order to estimate the effect of different treatments. In practice, however, there are
many, multidimensional differences across countries and across time, and it is impossible to
simply match treated and control observations with identical macroeconomic characteristics.
         It may be possible, however, to match treated countries to control countries based on a set
of observable country characteristics, represented by the vector Xi for the ith country. If this
matching takes into account the differences in the treated and untreated groups that affect
outcomes, then the sampling bias (or at least any bias that is captured in the vector Xi)
disappears, and E[Y0,i|Xi,Di=1] – E[Y0,i|Xi,Di=0] = 0. This could still leave a multidimensional
problem. This problem can be resolved, however, because it is sufficient to match treated and
control observations based on a “propensity score,” p(Xi), which is the probability that country i
receives the treatment (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1985). This single propensity score reduces the
number of dimensions over which observations must be matched.23
         The propensity score is the conditional probability of adopting the treatment (in our case,
the policy response) given pre-treatment characteristics, Xi. Continuing to define the adoption of
the treatment as Di = 1 (and not adopting the treatment as Di = 0), the propensity score is


         p(Xi) = Pr[Di=1|Xi] .                                                                                        (3)


In the context of our model, propensity scores are the likelihoods that a country undertakes a
major increase in the policy interest rate, currency depreciation, or reserve sale, or introduces
new controls on capital outflows. The propensity scores, based on the function p(X), can be
generated using logit regressions like those reported in Section III.24


time, so that the appropriate vector is Xi,j, representing variables’ values for the country i in year j. Thus, rather than
pair a particular country with one or more other countries identified through propensity score matching, we will pair
a particular country-year observation with one or more other country-year observations.
23
   Rubin and Thomas (1992) show that it is possible to estimate these propensity scores based on the vector of
observable characteristics.
24
   In our analysis, we consider the change in a variable (e.g. GDP growth) before and after the treatment. For
example, if Gw,I,z = GDP growth for the ith observation which is either treated (w = 1) or untreated (w=0), either after
(z = After) or before (z = Before) the policy, we consider E[G1,i,After - G1,i,Before|Di=1] – E[G0,i,After - G0,i,Before |Di=0].
Following the algebra in Equation (2), and using matching to generate a probability function p(X) in order to select
the untreated observations to compare with the treated observations, we can show that

                                                                                                                             13
         After the propensity scores have been calculated, there are several algorithms that can be
used to match each treated observation with one or more untreated observations (i.e. controls)
with similar propensity scores. We consider five matching algorithms: nearest-neighbor without
replacement, five-nearest neighbors with replacement, radius with caliper, kernel, and local-
linear matching. Each of these has advantages and disadvantages, and some techniques may not
satisfy key requirements based on the specific data set and problem analyzed.25 Using different
matching methodologies is important to be able to assess which technique performs best as well
as to assess the robustness of the results. This is especially important because even if several
techniques all satisfy the necessary tests, the significance of key results can still depend on the
matching method used and corresponding construction of the control group.
         There are several criteria and tests that can be used to evaluate the performance of
matching algorithms. To begin, it is useful to compare the differences in the mean propensity
scores between the treated observations and both the untreated observations and the control
group observations. By construction, the difference in mean propensity scores should be larger
between the treated and untreated groups than for the treated and control groups, and comparing
mean propensity scores helps gauge the relative performance of various matching methods and
extent of selection bias before the matching. Another check is whether the propensity scores of
treated observations are between that of the minimum and maximum propensity scores for the


         ATT = E[G1,i,After|Di=1] – E[G0,i,After|p(X),Di=1] – {E[G1,i,Before|Di=1] – E[G0,i,Before |p(X),Di=1]}.
The term in curly brackets does not equal 0, even if GDP growth is one of the elements used in the p(X) function,
because p(X) is matching country-year observations based on the likelihood of treatment, not the commonality of the
outcome variable before the treatment (and, of course, the selection is for the same country-year observations for
both the Before and After periods). Thus, in our analysis, the ATT consists of differences between GDP growth
between the treated and control observations for both the periods before and after the treatment.

25
   All these methods use the propensity score of each treated observation and propensity scores of untreated (control)
observations. Nearest-neighbor selects the single control observation with the closest propensity score, and “without
replacement” refers to the fact that any control observation can be matched to only one treated observation. Five-
nearest neighbors uses more observations from the control group and allows replacement. The radius method
includes all nearest neighbors within a maximum radius (referred to as the caliper). The kernel and local-linear
matching algorithms each calculate a weighted average of all observations in the control group and assign higher
weights (which differ between these two methods) to control observations closer to the treated observation. Nearest
neighbor is straightforward, easy to implement, and minimizes bad matches with control observations that have little
in common with the treated observation. It is also straightforward to check which country is matched as the nearest
neighbor in a control group. But this method ignores useful information from other countries in the control group.
Radius, kernel, and local-linear matching use more information and therefore tend to have lower variances, but at
the risk of including bad matches. Radius matching is less sophisticated than kernel and local-linear matching since
it does not place greater weight on closer matches. Local-linear matching has several advantages over kernel
matching, such as a faster rate of convergence near boundary points and greater robustness to different data design
densities.

                                                                                                                   14
untreated observations, which is called “on support”. If the propensity score of a treated
observation is not in the range of any of the untreated observations, it is called “off support”. We
will report the number of off-support observations for each of the four policies and drop any such
treated observations because the untreated observations are not useful comparisons for treated
off-support observations. This procedure is also known as imposing a “common support
condition” and can help reduce the effect of bad matches.
        An important criterion to assess if a matching methodology is valid is to verify that the
matching removed any significant differences in observable variables between the treated and
control groups. This test of “balancing” or the “independence assumption” requires that:


                             D   ┴   X | p(X,).                                                     (4)


This is implemented by calculating the t–statistic of the difference in means for each variable
between the treated and control group (as identified by one of the matching methods). A
successful matching would remove any differences in observables between the treated and the
control group.
        It is instructive to mention how this propensity score matching compares to the more
familiar regression analysis.26 Both matching and regression methodologies estimate the partial
correlation of the treatment with the outcome variable conditional on the values of covariates.
One difference between these two methods is the weighting of the covariate-specific differences
between the treated and the untreated (i.e. control) groups. Some type of weighting is needed to
calculate the average effect for the whole sample. In propensity-score methodology, the weights
are based on the distribution of covariates among the treated, with the greatest weights put on
cells representing the highest likelihood of being treated, i.e., the observations that are most
similar to the treated but were untreated. In contrast, in regression analysis, the greatest weights
for the comparison group are placed on cells where the conditional variance of treatment status is
larger; roughly speaking, those cells with equal likelihood of its elements being treated or
untreated. These different weighting strategies can lead to large differences between regression
and propensity-score matching results.



26
  Angrist and Pischke (2008, Chapter 3) and Imbens (2014) present excellent discussions of the similarities and
differences between regression analysis and propensity-score matching, including their relative advantages.

                                                                                                                  15
         Propensity score matching also differs from regression analysis in its greater emphasis on
modeling the policy change (i.e., raising interest rates) rather than the specific functional form
that links the policy change to the outcome (i.e., how raising interest rates affects GDP growth).
This reduces challenges related to simultaneity and choosing an appropriate lag length. It also
easily incorporates the use of a large set of variables to estimate the propensity score. This is
useful when there is only vague theoretical guidance on the set of variables to be included in the
model.
         Propensity score matching, however, also has several disadvantages relative to regression
analysis. The requirement for a sufficient number of “similar” observations for matching can be
difficult to meet when using an annual, cross-country panel, as is typical in macro and
international economics.27 Satisfying the balancing assumption, as discussed above, is also
difficult in some macroeconomic studies, showing the challenges in creating a set of untreated
observations that are not significantly different than the treated observations. Even when all of
these criteria are satisfied, different matching methodologies can yield different results, so it is
important to check for the robustness across the various matching methods to ensure that results
are not just an artifact of the matching methodology. Also, it is important to note that matching
methodologies that involve panel data cannot effectively estimate effects over long periods of
time because, even if the technique creates an accurate control group at the point of the treatment
(policy change), this does not control for subsequent events that may make the treatment and
control groups less similar over time.
         Finally, two additional potential concerns related to this time dimension of the
propensity-score methodology merit discussion.28 As noted above, we lag the variables used in
the first-stage logit estimates to reduce the likelihood that a policy that is undertaken affects the
determinants of that policy (e.g., a major interest rate increase is not likely to have caused a
change in GDP in the previous period). In the subsequent estimates of the ATTs, there is the
possibility of endogeneity in the initial period (e.g., of correlation between an interest rate
increase and GDP in the same period), but any such endogeneity is less likely to be an issue in
the subsequent six quarters on which we will largely focus our discussion and evaluation of
different policies. Also, if a country adopts an additional policy response after the initial

27
   This is one reason why propensity-score matching has been more widely adopted in labor economics, where
papers often have larger samples of individuals that provide more degrees of freedom for effective matching.
28
   Most papers using propensity-score matching have focused on the cross-section effects of policies and not
included a time-dimension.

                                                                                                               16
treatment or in the same quarter, this is not directly controlled for in the analysis. Tables 1a and
1b, however, suggest that this does not occur frequently as the preponderance of major policy
responses (as defined in the paper) do not occur within the same quarter or in the quarter before
or after. The logit estimates used for the matching also control for some cases of the use of
multiple policies because one set of variables controls for previous policy actions and is therefore
part of the calculation used to match treated and control observations.


 B.     Results of Propensity-Score Matching
        We use the estimates from the logit model in Table 2 to calculate separate propensity
scores for each of the four policies (reserve sales, currency depreciations, interest rate increases,
and new controls on capital outflows) for each quarter during our crisis periods (1997-2001 and
2007-2011). We then use these estimated propensity scores to match treated observations with
control observations using the five matching algorithms discussed above.29 In order to avoid
using a country that is about to make or has just made one of these policy changes as a control
variable for that same policy change, we continue to include an “exclusion window” for the 3
quarters before and the 3 quarters after a major policy change. During this exclusion window, a
country cannot be included as a control observation for that same type of policy, although it
could serve as a control for a country that undertook a different policy change. A country can
also serve as its own control, albeit not within the period of the exclusion window.
        Before turning to formal tests of the performance of the different matching algorithms, it
is useful to examine the “nearest neighbor” matches obtained to get an intuitive understanding of
the types of matches obtained using this methodology. An examination of these nearest
neighbors indicates that although some matches seem more intuitive than others, they are
generally matched across time and to countries that are similar according to measurable statistics.
For example, focusing on several well-known events, Korea’s large devaluation in 1997Q4 is
matched with the Czech Republic in 1997Q4, and Brazil’s large devaluation in 2001Q1 is
matching with Latvia in 2001Q1. Continuing with Brazil, Brazil’s large interest rate increase in
2001Q3 is matched with Turkey in 1998Q2, Indonesia’s interest rate increases in 1997 Q3 is
matched with Argentina in 1997Q4, and Iceland’s in 2007Q1 is matched with the Netherlands in
2008Q3. The matches for large reserve sales are often not as intuitive, undoubtedly reflecting the
29
   We apply these matching algorithms with the Stata module PSMATCH2, developed by Leuven and Sianesi
(2003). The number of treated observations is lower than reported in Table 1 because data are not available for the
all of the covariates needed to estimate propensity scores for all observations.

                                                                                                                  17
limited set of countries with large reserve stockpiles that are not depleted during periods that
other countries with large reserve holdings decide to sell large shares of those reserve sales. For
example, Singapore’s large reserve sales in 2007Q1 are matched with China in 2007Q3.
        Moving next to more formal tests of the matching technique, diagnostics of the different
matching algorithms are presented in Table 3. The first row in each of the four panels, which
correspond to the four policies, reports the number of observations in the treatment group and
unmatched control group in the first two columns. The columns to the right report in parentheses
the number of observations that are off-support after using each matching algorithm.30 These
statistics show that in most cases, almost all treatments are on support—with between zero and
two observations off support for each of the policies and each of the matching algorithms. The
only exceptions are with radius and kernel matching for major reserve sales, which have nine and
eight off-support observations, respectively. Radius and kernel matching also have one more
observation off support relative to the other techniques for large interest rate increases. The
second row in each panel reports how many variables fail the independence tests for each policy
response and matching algorithm. These independence tests evaluated if the matching was able
to remove any significant differences in observable variables between the treated and control
groups. This shows that the matching techniques all perform very well, with no cases in which
any variables fail the independence test when evaluated at the 5% significance level. There is
only one case when the test fails at the 10% level: when local-linear matching is used for reserve
sales, two variables fail.
        In order to further explore the performance of these independence tests, and the one case
when it shows weaker results at the 10% significance threshold, Table 4 reports the underlying
results of tests of the independence assumption for large currency depreciations. The first two
columns report the mean values for the treated group (μT) and control group (μC) for the
unmatched samples for each of the covariates used to estimate the propensity scores. The third
column reports t-statistics for tests of the hypothesis that the mean of each variable in the
treatment group is equal to the mean in the control group (H0: μT = μC). There are significant
differences (at the 95 percent confidence level) between the treated and unmatched control
groups for nine of the 13 variables used in the logit regression. The remaining columns of Table
4 report results of the same t-tests, except now for the difference in means between the treated

30
  The numbers in the treated group are less than the numbers in Tables 1a and 1b because not all of the variables
used in the logit regressions are available for all countries for all years.

                                                                                                                    18
group and control groups after matching (using each of the five techniques). In contrast to the
results for the unmatched control group, there are no longer significant differences for any of the
variables between the treatment and matched control groups at the 95% significance level. (With
local-linear matching, there is only a significant difference for 1 variable at the 90% significance
level.)
          Tables similar to Table 4 for the other policy responses (reserve sales, large increases in
interest rates, and increased capital controls) are not reported but yield similar results. In each
case, there are significant differences between the variables in the treated group and unmatched
control group according to several variables, but these differences are removed after using each
of the propensity-score matching techniques. These results are also summarized in the second
row on each panel in Table 3. The last two rows in each panel in Table 3 report the mean
absolute bias of the treatment group relative to the unmatched control group and control groups
using each of the matching algorithms. In each case, the matching reduces the mean absolute
bias by a substantial amount relative to that of the control group. Different matching methods
yield mean propensity scores closest to that for the treated group, with the local-linear matching
yielding the closest scores for two of the four policy responses. Therefore, given that local-linear
matching has a number of stronger theoretical advantages than the other techniques (as discussed
above) and performs at least as well (if not better) than the other techniques according to each of
the test criteria, we will focus on these results in the discussion below (but also include other
results if they differ significantly).


V.        Effects of Policy Choices: Average Treatment Effects on the Treated (ATT)
          This section uses the matched control groups to analyze the average treatment effect on
the treated (ATT) of large reserve sales, sharp currency depreciations, major increases in interest
rates, and new controls on capital outflows on real GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment.
We use bar graphs to present the ATT on outcome variables at each quarter over a one-and-a-
half-year period, beginning with the quarter that the major policy response (the treatment) occurs
and over each of the next six quarters. This allows us to evaluate both immediate and medium-
run effects. (We do not consider longer-term effects because the matching algorithms become
less accurate.)
          The heights of the bars in the graphs represent the effects of each of the policies relative
to the counterfactual, estimated as the change in each of the outcome variables relative to the

                                                                                                      19
average over the two years before the policy change occurred. For example, after a policy
change such as a major increase in interest rates, we calculate real GDP growth during the
quarter of the policy change (which we denote as t=0), relative to average GDP growth over the
previous eight quarters (t-1, t-2, … t-8). For the next six post-treatment periods, we calculate the
change in GDP growth in the respective periods relative to average GDP growth over the same
eight quarters before the initial major policy change.31 This allows us to capture any differential
effects of major policy responses over different time periods rather than choosing, a priori, the
time period on which to focus. This is a ceteris paribus approach in that it does not incorporate
any adjustment for changes in post-treatment covariates. The black line on each graph is the
fitted line for the average treatment effect. The color of the bars in the graphs indicates the
statistical significance of these results; black indicates that the ATT for that quarter is significant
at the 95% confidence level (or greater), medium-blue indicates significance at the 90% to 95%
level, and light blue indicates that the effect is statistically insignificant. The standard errors
used to calculate these levels of significance must be calculated through bootstrapping methods
because the propensity scores are estimated.32


A. Base Case Results
        Figures 2 through 4 present bar graphs summarizing the estimated effects of each of the
four policies on GDP growth, unemployment, and CPI inflation, respectively. Figure 2 indicates
that major interest rate increases, major currency depreciations, and adding controls on capital
outflows all initially have negative and significant effects on GDP growth. There is no evidence
of a significant effect of reserve sales on GDP growth. Increasing interest rates initially has the
strongest effect, with an estimated decrease in GDP growth of three to four percentage points in
the three quarters after interest rates were increased, although fading sharply afterwards. Adding
new controls on capital outflows also has a large significant effect, peaking at a reduction in
GDP growth of almost six percentage points in the second quarter after the controls were added,
with the negative effect still significant (although falling to just under four percentage points)
after five quarters. Large currency depreciations are estimated to initially have a smaller effect,
peaking at GDP growth about three percentage points lower in the second quarter, and this effect
quickly fades and even appears to reverse so that GDP growth increases by about two percentage
31
   As a robustness check, we also consider the ATT of GDP growth without reference to the pre-treatment values;
see Section F below. These results are very similar to the base case results presented in this section.
32
   See Lechner (2002) for the appropriate methodology. We use 500 repetitions for the bootstrap.

                                                                                                                  20
points in the sixth quarter after the depreciation. This estimated impact of a large depreciation is
consistent with the standard J-curve effect as well as a balance-sheet effect, in which a
depreciation increases liabilities denominated in foreign currency relative to assets denominated
in domestic currency. This result also suggests that a policy that is typically believed to be
expansionary over time may initially have contractionary effects.
        Figure 3 presents results for the average treatment effects on unemployment. In contrast
to the significant effects on growth in Figure 2, none of the policy responses generate a
significant impact on unemployment at the 95% confidence level or greater. (In fact, the only
result that is significant at the 10% level is possibly a negative effect of a major depreciation on
unemployment for the period t = 0). This lack of significant estimates, despite the significant
results found for GDP growth, is consistent with the generally lagged and muted response of
unemployment to GDP. Furthermore, another possible source of the imprecision of these
estimates is the large differences in the institutions and employment practices across countries
that determine how changes in policies and GDP affect unemployment.
        Figure 4 shows the estimated effects of each of the four policies on CPI inflation.
Inflation appears to increase after major increases in interest rates, major currency depreciations,
and increased controls on capital outflows. Inflation appears to decrease after major reserve
sales. The only estimated effect that is significant, however, is the rise in inflation beginning
three periods after a major increase in interest rates. The magnitude of most of these estimated
effects on inflation is also large.
    The results presented in Figures 2, 3, and 4 show that different policy responses to crises can
yield very different outcomes. Large currency depreciations appear to be the only policy
response supporting GDP growth relative to the counterfactual, although the benefits are lagged,
may only arrive after an immediate reduction in GDP growth, and may generate an increase in
inflation. Benefits from any of these policies in terms of reducing unemployment are usually not
significant. Sharp increases in interest rates and controls on capital outflows appear to yield the
least benefit in terms of the criteria evaluated, as they correspond to significant and economically
meaningful reductions in GDP growth, while yielding no benefits in terms of significantly
reducing inflation or unemployment. Countries responding to crises and contractions in global
capital flows therefore have no ideal policy response that yields positive outcomes for all three of
these key measures of economic performance.



                                                                                                      21
B. Extension: ATTs for Emerging and Non-OECD Economies
        As a first extension of our analysis, we repeat the base-case estimation focusing on a
subsample of countries that excludes high-income OECD economies (based on World Bank
classifications, which vary each year). High-income OECD economies may face a different set
of tradeoffs in their choice of policy responses to crises for a number of reasons. First, they are
more likely to hold a reserve currency, for which demand would more likely increase instead of
decrease during crises. Second, they may have a greater ability to lower (instead of increase)
interest rates during crises since they are less reliant on capital inflows (obviously excluding
individual members of the euro zone). Third, they may have less ability to enact new capital
controls if they have large and highly sophisticated financial sectors, or have signed agreements
limiting their ability to use capital controls.
        The ATTs from this exercise estimating the effect of large reserve sales, major
depreciations, substantial interest rate increases, and new capital controls on growth,
unemployment and inflation for emerging markets (and non-OECD economies) are presented in
the twelve graphs in Figure 5 in which the rows represent treatments and the columns represent
outcomes. We continue to focus on results based on local-linear matching to facilitate
comparability with the base-case results and also as this continues to perform as well as or better
than other techniques according to the tests discussed above. Many of the results correspond to
those for the larger sample, which includes high-income OECD economies. Major increases in
interest rates, new capital controls, and large depreciations continue to be correlated with higher
inflation and lower GDP growth relative to the counterfactual—at least initially.
        But there are also noteworthy differences between the results presented in Figure 5 and
those presented in Figures 2 through 4. Many of the estimated effects of these policies are larger
in magnitude for the emerging markets than the full sample. For example, capital controls are
now estimated to be correlated with inflation that is 8% higher (instead of 4.5% for the full
sample) and major depreciations are correlated with inflation that peaks at 3.5% higher (versus
1.5% in the base case). The estimated effects of capital controls and major depreciations on
GDP growth are also larger than in the full sample. Some of the estimates that were significant
for the full sample, however, are less precisely estimated for the sample of emerging markets and
non-OECD economies. For example, the initial negative effect of depreciations on growth is no
longer significant. The negative effect of capital controls on growth is also no longer significant.
These results may indicate that the diversity across emerging markets makes it more difficult to

                                                                                                      22
estimate a consistent effect of these policies, or that these policies are less effective in emerging
markets. The larger magnitude of the estimated effects, however, also indicates that policies can
have large—albeit imprecisely estimated—effects on growth, inflation, and unemployment in
emerging markets.


C. Extension: ATTs for Each Crisis Period
           As an additional extension, we estimate the effects of each of the four policies separately
for each crisis window, the “1990s crises” from 1997 to 2001 and the “2000s crises” from 2007
to 2011. While both crisis periods included increases in volatility and sudden stops in capital
flows, they also differed in ways that could affect the choices of policy responses and the
tradeoffs of using different policies; for example, the more global nature of the slowdown during
the GFC could reduce inflationary pressures and thereby reduce the costs of a policy such as a
sharp depreciation.33
           One difference between this exercise and the base case is that the matching algorithms
perform less well than for the full time period. Each of the techniques has a substantially larger
number of country-quarter observations that are off support. For example, four observations are
off support for each of the matching algorithms predicting large reserve losses during the 1990s
crises. Between seven observations (for nearest neighbor, five-nearest neighbor and local-linear
matching) and 10 or 11 observations (for radius and kernel matching) are off support when
predicting major currency depreciations in the 2000s window. In contrast, no more than two
observations were ever off support in the base case, which combined the two crisis periods using
any of the matching methods (except for radius and kernel matching predicting reserve losses).
The matching algorithms also more often fail the tests of the independence assumption.
           With these important caveats that the propensity score matching methodology yields
inferior performance in these more limited samples, Figures 6.A, 6.B, and 6.C graph the ATTs
for GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation, respectively, for just the period from 1997 to
2001 (the left column in each of these figures) and just the 2007-2011period (the right column).
In general, the estimated direction of the effects of the different policy responses agrees with
those reported in the base case and other sensitivity tests. During the 1990s, the effects of various
policies on inflation appear to be somewhat larger (relative to the base case and the 2000s),
which is consistent with the theory that inflation expectations may have been less firmly
33
     Claessens and Kose (2014) discusses similarities and differences across crises.

                                                                                                     23
anchored during this period. Major depreciations are no longer estimated to provide any
significant boost to growth over the longer term as found in the full sample, but depreciations are
estimated to generate a significant and sustained reduction in unemployment during the 2000s.
        The most noteworthy differences in results across the two periods and relative to the base
case for the full sample are the effects of major increases in interest rates. Higher interest rates
are positively and significantly correlated with unemployment in the 1990s, but negatively and
significantly correlated in the 2000s. Higher interest rates are also no longer correlated with a
significant decline in GDP growth in the 2000s (although they continue to have a negative and
significant relationship in the 1990s as found in the full sample). These different results for
interest rate policy may reflect changes in monetary policy relationship related to the zero-lower
bound or to the massive contraction in credit related to the global nature of the financial crisis.
Given the small sample sizes and corresponding limits to the use of the propensity-score
methodology with this limited variation, it is impossible to draw any strong conclusions from
this set of results for the individual crisis periods.


D. Sensitivity Tests: ATTs Based on Different Covariates in the Logit Regressions
        As discussed in Section III, the selection of covariates to include in the first-stage logit
regressions used to estimate the propensity scores is difficult due to the large number of variables
that could be included and the lack of clear theoretical guidance on which variables are most
important. In order to evaluate if the base-case results reported above are sensitive to the choice
of covariates, this section discusses results when different control variables are included in the
logit regressions.
        To test for the impact of using a broader set of covariates in the logit regression, we use
the full set of covariates listed on the left of Table 2 rather than the subset of variables that were
significant at the 20% level (in a regression with the full set of covariates). Most of the results
are similar to those in the base case in terms of direction and magnitude, but in some cases
results which were previously significant at the five-percent level are no longer significant. For
example, the estimated positive relationship between sharp increases and interest rates is no
longer significant and some of the estimated effects of capital controls and depreciations on
growth (in certain quarters) are both insignificant under some matching methodologies. This
reduced significance is as expected as a larger set of covariates than in the base case would be
expected to generate less precise estimates with fewer significant estimated ATTs.

                                                                                                       24
         We have also attempted to estimate an augmented version of this analysis that includes
variables such as budget balances relative to GDP, government debt to GDP, and financial
market size. These additional variables are not available for the full sample of observations
included in the base case, however, and their inclusion reduces the sample size and, importantly,
the number of treated observations to the point that the matching methodology no longer works
well.


E. Sensitivity Tests: Major Policy Responses Defined Based on Looser Thresholds
     In Section II, we discussed the criteria used to identify changes in reserve holdings, exchange
rates, and interest rates as “major” policy responses. In order to focus on large and infrequent
policy responses, we established a threshold to qualify as a “major” response based on the
criteria that it occurred in only 5% of the country-quarter observations during the two crisis
windows. As an additional sensitivity test, we use looser criteria for a policy to qualify as a
“major” policy response and instead set the threshold at 10%.
     Applying this looser threshold to the same sample of countries, and making no other changes
to the sample construction or additional criteria to qualify as a major policy change, yields the
resulting cutoffs. Major reserve sales are defined as quarters during which international reserves
(relative to GDP) fall by at least 7.8 percentage points compared to the previous year (versus
13.4 percentage points in the base case).34 Large depreciations are defined as quarters in which
there is at least a 16.1 percent depreciation over the previous year in the country’s exchange rate
versus the U.S. dollar (versus 22.6 percent in the base case). A substantial increase in interest
rates is defined as a quarter in which there has been an increase in the policy interest rate of at
least 133 basis points over the past year (versus 200 basis points in the base case).35 All other
requirements and criteria are unchanged. The threshold to qualify as using new controls on
capital outflows is unchanged, as any additional controls qualified as adopting this policy
response and there was no numerical threshold.
     After establishing these looser definitions of major policy responses, we re-estimated the
logit regression with the full set of covariates listed on the left of Table 2. Then, following the
methodology in the base case, we included only variables that were significant at the 20%
significance level to calculate the final logit and corresponding propensity scores. We then used
34
  Details on sources and definitions for the data are in the Appendix.
35
  The policy interest rate is the interest rate related to monetary policy for each country. If the policy rate is not
available, we use the short-term interest rate. Interest rate information is from Global Insight, accessed 10/1/13.

                                                                                                                         25
each of the four matching methodologies to estimate the impact of the four policy responses on
growth, unemployment and inflation. The results are very similar to those in the base case, and in
many cases strikingly so (and therefore not reported). One noteworthy difference is that the
magnitude of the estimated effect is slightly smaller in some cases, such as for the effect of
different policies on inflation. This is not surprising given that weaker policy responses are now
included as treatments. The only other noteworthy change is that depreciations are correlated
with a small and significant increase in unemployment after about a year based on local-linear
matching and five-nearest neighbor matching, but this result reverses and suggests a small and
significant decrease based on kernel matching (and is insignificant at the 5% level based on
radius matching).


F. Sensitivity Tests: Real GDP Growth without Reference to Pre-Treatment Values
    The ATT effects for real GDP growth presented in the four panels of Figure 2 control for
pre-treatment differences in real GDP growth between the treated observations and their
respective controls, that is:


ATT={E[G1,i,After|Di=1] – E[G0,i,After|p(X),Di=1]} – {E[G1,i,Before|Di=1] – E[G0,i,Before |p(X),Di=1]}.


This is appropriate for considering the relative performance of the treated and control
observations relative to a trend, as represented by the two-year average of GDP growth before
the treatment. An alternative specification is one in which the ATT represents the direct
difference in real GDP growth between the treated observations and their respective controls,
without reference to the respective trends, that is:


                ATT′ = {E[G1,i,After|Di=1] – E[G0,i,After|p(X),Di=1]}.


One could argue that this is the more appropriate specification, since the ATT includes
E[G1,i,Before|Di=1] – E[G0,i,Before |p(X),Di=1]}, but the focus of the analysis should not be altered
by pre-treatment differences between the treated and control groups.
        As an additional robustness test, we use this alternate specification and measure the ATT′
for real GDP growth that does not consider real GDP growth relative to trend. In other words,
instead of testing for differences between the treated and untreated groups in growth rates

                                                                                                        26
relative to each country’s trend, we simply compare the growth rates across these two groups.
The results using local-linear matching are shown in the four panels of Figure 7, and can be
compared to the four bar graphs presented in Figure 2 (which are based on changes in growth
relative to trends). The two sets of graphs using the different growth measures are very similar
based on their patterns and magnitudes. Which bars are significant, however, varies somewhat
across specifications (as often occurs with different matching techniques).
        More specifically, major increases in interest rates and increased controls on capital
outflows continue to reduce growth, especially in the quarters immediately after the policy is
adopted, although these results are more often significant in the original specification in Figure 2.
Major currency depreciations continue to initially slow growth, and then to raise growth over
time (following a J-curve effect), but the later boost to growth is more often significant in the
newer specification in Figure 7. Results based on large reserve sales are insignificant in each
case.


VI.     Conclusions
        For years, economists have debated how best to respond to periods of sudden stops in
global capital flows. This debate is likely to continue for many more years. This paper
contributes to this debate by proposing a new approach for analyzing the consequences of
different policy responses by using a propensity-score matching methodology. This methodology
helps address the challenge that countries which adopt certain policy responses are generally
different than countries which do not choose these policies, and that they adopt these policies at
specific times in response to changes in specific variables. Propensity-score matching takes these
econometric issues seriously when evaluating the effects of policy responses to crises.
        The results indicate that none of the traditional responses to crises will yield significant
and meaningful improvements in GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation relative to the
counterfactual. Instead, large interest rate increases, major reserve sales, large currency
depreciations, and new controls on capital outflows are ineffective at improving these three
outcome variables and often imply substantial tradeoffs. More specifically, sharp increases in
interest rates and new controls on capital outflows appear to significantly reduce GDP growth,
have no consistent effect on unemployment, and are correlated with higher inflation. Large
depreciations also appear to initially reduce GDP growth and be correlated with higher inflation,
but there is some evidence that they can yield a lagged improvement in growth and reduce

                                                                                                       27
unemployment, especially during the 2000s. Major reserve sales generally have insignificant
effects and even the estimated direction of these effects fluctuates across time for each of the key
outcome variables. There is some evidence indicating that all of these policy responses have
larger, but more imprecise, effects on emerging markets and that changes in interest rates had
different effects during the 1990s than the 2000s. But both of these results should be interpreted
cautiously due to the limitations resulting from small sample sizes.
       Countries responding to crises and contractions in global capital flows therefore have no
ideal policy response that yields positive outcomes for growth, unemployment, and inflation.
Policy makers must “pick their poison” and face challenging trade-offs during crisis periods.




                                                                                                  28
                                          References

Aizenman, Joshua and Gurnain Pasricha. (2013). “Why Do Emerging Markets Liberalize Capital
Outflow Controls? Fiscal Versus Net Capital Flow Concerns.” NBER Working Paper 18879.

Angrist, Joshua, Òscar Jordà, and Guido Kuersteiner. (2013). “Semiparametric Estimates of
Monetary Policy Effects: String Theory Revisited.” NBER Working Paper 19355.

Angrist, Joshua and Guido Kuersteiner. (2011). “Casual Effects of Monetary Shocks:
Semiparametric Conditional Independence Tests with a Multinomial Propensity Score.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 725-747

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt , Ross Eric Levine , Martin Cihak and Erik H.B. Feyen.
(2013). Financial Development and Structure Dataset (updated April 2013). Available at:
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:206
96167~pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html

Blanchard, Olivier, Mitali Das and Hamid Faruquee. (2010). “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on
Emerging Market Countries,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (Spring): 263 – 307.

Calvo, Guillermo. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics (Nov): 35-54.

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. (2008). “Systemic Sudden
Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects and Financial Integration.” NBER Working
Paper 14026.

Chari, Anusha, Wenjie Chen, and Kathryn Dominguez. (2011). “Foreign Ownership and Firm
Performance: Emerging Market Acquisitions in the United States.” Unpublished mimeo.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. (2015). “This Time IS Different: East-Asian Lessons for a
Post-Crisis World.” Mimeo.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito. (2008). “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis 10(3, September): 309-322. Dataset updated as of 04/24/2103
available at: http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn‐Ito_website.htm

Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan and Luc Laeven. (2010). “Global Linkages
and Global Policies.” Economic Policy (April): 267 - 293.

Claessens, Stijn and Ayhan Kose. (2014). “Financial Crises: Explanations, Types and
Implications.” In Claessens, Stijn, Ayhan Kose, Luc Laeven and Fabian Valencia, eds.,
Financial Crises: Causes, Consequences and Policy Responses, International Monetary Fund.
                                                                                             29
Claessens, Stijn, Ayhan Kose, Luc Laeven and Fabian Valencia, eds. (2014). Financial Crises:
Causes, Consequences and Policy Responses, International Monetary Fund.

Das, Kuntal, and Katy Bergstrom. (2012). “Capital Account Liberalization, Selection Bias, and
Growth.” Mimeo.

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba. (2002). “Propensity-Score Matching Methods for
Nonexperimental Causal Studies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1):151-161.

Dominguez, Kathryn. (2013). “Exchange Rate Implications of Reserve Changes.” Unpublished
mimeo.

Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher. (2006). “Global Financial Transmission of Monetary
Policy Shocks.” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 616 (April).

Fischer, Stanley. (2004). “The IMF and the Asian Crisis.” Chapter 3 in IMF Essays from a
Time of Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roland Straub (2015). “Capital-Flow Management
Measures: What are they Good For?” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock. (2012). “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and
Retrenchment.” Journal of International Economics 88(2, Nov.): 235-251.

Frankel, Jeffrey and George Saravelos. (2012). “Can Leading Indicators Assess Country
Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International
Economics 87(2, July): 216-231.

Glick, Reuven, Xueyan Guo, and Michael Hutchison. (2006). “Currency Crises, Capital-Account
Liberalization, and Selection Bias.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4, Nov.): 698-714.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld. (2012). “Stories of the Twentieth Century for
the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1, January): 226 – 265.

Heinrich, C., A. Maffioli and G. Vázquez. (2010), “A Primer for Applying Propensity-Score
Matching.” Technical notes No. IDB-TN-161, Inter-American Development Bank.

Imbens, Guido, “Matching Methods in Practice: Three Examples,” NBER Working Paper
#19,959, March 2014.

Jordà, Òscar, and Alan Taylor. (2013). “The Time for Austerity: Estimating the Average
Treatment Effect on Fiscal Policy.” NBER Working Paper 19414.

                                                                                                30
Klein, Michael (2012). “Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, (2, Fall): 317–355.

Klein, Michael and Jay Shambaugh (2013). “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma:
Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy,” N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 19461, September.

Lechner M. (2002). “Some practical issues in the evaluation of heterogeneous labour market
programmes by matching methods.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 165 (2):
59-82.

Leuven, E. and B. Sianesi. (2003). “PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis and
propensity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance testing.”
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html.

Levchenko, Andrei, Romain Rancière, and Mathias Thoenig. (2009). “Growth and Risk at the
Industry Level: The Real Effects of Financial Liberalization.” Journal of Development
Economics 89: 210-222.

Obstfeld, M., J. Shambaugh and A. Taylor. (2010). “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and
International Reserves,” American Economic Association Journal – Macroeconomic, 2(2, April):
57 – 94.

Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel. (2010). “The Causes and Consequences of the 2008 Crisis:
International Linkages and American Exposure.” Pacific Economic Review 15(3, August): 340 -
363.

Rosenbaum, Paul and Donald Rubin. (1985). “Constructing a Control Group Using Multivariate
Matched Sampling Methods that Incorporate the Propensity Score.” The American Statistician
39(1): 33-38.

Rubin, Donald and Neal Thomas. (1992). “Characterizing the Effect of Matching Using Linear
Propensity Score Methods with Normal Distributions.” Biometrika 79 (4): 797-809.

Shambaugh, Jay (2004), “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119(1): 300–351.




                                                                                               31
                                  Table 1a: Policy Changes, 1997 – 2001
                                RS           ER           IR            CFM                           Total
Foreign Reserve                 9            2            6             0                             18
Sales (RS)
Exchange Rate                                    14                8                  1               27
Depreciation (ER)
Interest Rate Increase                 1                           17                 2               35
                                                           1
(IR)
Capital Flow                                                                          13              18
Management (CFM)
Reports instances of major policy changes (see below). Numbers in diagonal cells represent policy
change that occurred with no other policy change between one quarter before and one quarter after that
change. Off-diagonal elements represent pairs of policy changes that occurred within the same three
quarter period (i.e. one policy was matched by another that occurred between one quarter before and one
quarter after that one). Overlay boxes represent triplets or quadruplets of policy changes that occurred
within plus or minus one quarter.




                                  Table 1b: Policy Changes, 2007 - 2011
                                RS           ER           IR            CFM                           Total
Foreign Reserve                 33           6            2             2                             44
Sales (RS)
Exchange Rate                                    13                2                  1               24
Depreciation (ER)                        1
Interest Rate Increase                                             9                  2               17
(IR)                                                       1
Capital Flow                                                                          9               15
Management (CFM)
Reports instances of major policy changes (see below). Numbers in diagonal cells represent policy
change that occurred with no other policy change between one quarter before and one quarter after that
change. Off-diagonal elements represent pairs of policy changes that occurred within the same three
quarter period (i.e. one policy was matched by another that occurred between one quarter before and one
quarter after that one). Overlay boxes represent triplets or quadruplets of policy changes that occurred
within plus or minus one quarter.


Notes on Thresholds for Defining Major Policy Changes: Major policy changes defined as occurring in only 5%
of the country-quarter observations in the full sample of crisis years (1997-2001 and 2007-2011). Large reserve sales
are based on the reserve-to-GDP ratio. The sharp depreciation and large interest rate changes are only counted in
quarters in which annual inflation did not exceed 10% or more. New capital controls are new controls on capital
outflows (as described in the text). Countries are not included in the criteria used to evaluate large reserves sales,
exchange rate depreciations, or interest rate increases during years for which they are members of the euro zone. We
include an exclusion restriction such that a major policy change cannot occur more than once in four consecutive
quarters.




                                                                                                                   32
                   Table 2: Probability of Adopting Policies During Crises (Limited Set of Covariates)

                                                                        Reserve                Currency                  Interest Rate            New Capital
                                                                         Sales                Depreciations                Increases               Controls
Global                        Global risk                                0.030                  0.071***                                             -0.054
Measures                                                                (0.023)                  (0.021)                                            (0.028)
                              U.S. interest rate                       -0.469***                  -0.355
                                 (ch)                                   (0.169)                  (0.227)
                              Commodity price                                                     2.760                     4.321***
                                Index (log)                                                      (1.826)                     (0.999)
                              1990s crisis                                                        1.963                     4.866***                   0.614
                                  dummy                                                          (1.417)                     (0.966)                  (0.459)
Domestic                      Real GDP growth                                                  -0.072***
Vulnerabilities                 (ch)                                                             (0.025)
                              Capital outflows,                                                -6.682***                    3.053***                  -1.319
                                  % of GDP (ch)                                                  (1.964)                     (1.156)                  (0.914)
                              Capital inflows,                           0.713                  6.231***
                                  % of GDP (ch)                         (0.607)                  (2.334)
                              Current account                                                                                -1.276*
                                  % of GDP                                                                                   (0.750)
                              Inflation (ch)                             0.085                                                                        -0.043
                                                                        (0.063)                                                                      (0.030)
                              Private credit, %                                                                                                       0.010
                                of GDP (ch)                                                                                                          (0.017)
                              Commodity index *                         1.240**                                             1.567***                 1.042**
                                 Comm.. exporter                        (0.505)                                              (0.402)                 (0.416)
                              Income per capita                                                   -0.438*
Country                        (log)                                                              (0.250)
Characteristics               Institutions index                         0.514                                              -2.491**                  -1.146
                                                                        (1.619)                                              (1.099)                 (0.762)
                              Reserves as %                            2.122***                  -2.897***                    -0.227
                                of GDP                                  (0.301)                    (0.819)                   (0.326)
                              Peg dummy                                                           -2.667**
                                                                                                   (1.175)
                              Openness                                 -0.553***                  -0.277**                  -0.350**                  -0.061
                                                                         (0.205)                   (0.140)                   (0.139)                 (0.165)
Recent Policy                 Reserves as %                           -21.022***                 -9.427***                 -4.465***
Changes                         of GDP (ch)                              (5.073)                   (3.141)                   (1.650)
                              ER vs. U.S.                              -0.084***                 0.085***
                                 $ (pch)                                 (0.022)                   (0.022)
                              Interest rate vs.                         -0.164**                                            0.133***
                                  U.S. rate (ch)                         (0.071)                                             (0.039)
                              Capital controls                                                                                                       0.930*
                                (ch)                                                                                                                 (0.572)
Observations                                                              1079                      1060                      1539                    1454
Pseudo R²                                                                 0.41                      0.39                      0.22                     0.08
   Notes: Covariates included in each regression if they are significant at the 20% level (or less) in regressions that use full set of covariates. “Ch”
   denotes change and “Pch” is percentage change. Constant not reported. * is significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
   Includes robust standard errors.


                                                                                                                                                       33
                                                                         Table 3
                                                  Summary Statistics for Different Matching Algorithms
                                                              Unmatched                    Matched Control Group Based on Matching Algorithm:
                                           Treatment           Control               Nearest Neighbor  5 Nearest                            Local-
                                                                                                                     Radius     Kernel
                                            Group               Group                (no replacement)  Neighbors                            Linear
   Major Reserve Sales
    Observations (off support)1                  38               1041                         (2)                   (2)               (9)              (8)             (2)
         Variables failing
                                                                                                0                     0                 0                0               0
        independence test2
     Mean Propensity Score3                    599.6              392.7                      459.9                  431.7            424.1            424.2           472.1
      Mean Absolute Bias3                                          34.7                      12.3                   11.6              7.8              8.7            19.3
   Sharp Currency Depreciations
    Observations (off support)1                  39               1021                         (2)                   (2)               (2)              (2)             (2)
         Variables failing
                                                                                                0                     0                 0                0               0
        independence test2
     Mean Propensity Score3                    405.8              440.6                      421.6                  428.4            411.5            415.3           426.8
      Mean Absolute Bias3                                          57.2                      13.9                    8.3             10.2             11.5            14.9
   Large Interest Rate Increases
    Observations (off support)1                  37               1566                          0                     0                (1)              (1)              0
         Variables failing
                                                                                                0                     0                 0                0               0
        independence test2
     Mean Propensity Score3                    404.0              407.5                      408.9                  477.6            466.2            463.6           484.4
      Mean Absolute Bias3                                          40.8                      12.6                    4.1              9.3              9.5            14.6
   New Controls on Capital Outflows
    Observations (off support)1                  26               1428                         (1)                   (1)               (1)              (1)             (1)
         Variables failing
                                                                                                0                     0                 0                0               0
        independence test2
     Mean Propensity Score3                    435.5              391.0                      351.9                  414.0            408.5            409.6           431.3
      Mean Absolute Bias3                                          27.5                      20.8                    7.9             12.4             12.2            20.8

Notes: Results from matching based on regression results reported in Table 2. (1) Observations in the treatment and control groups reported in the first two columns. Observations
that are off-support based on each matching method are reported in the right-hand columns in parentheses. (2) The number of variables that do not satisfy the independence test at
the 5% significance level—as shown for the case of major depreciations in Table 4. (3) Reports the mean propensity score and mean absolute bias for the treatment group and
control group for each matching algorithm listed at the top.



                                                                                                                                                                                34
                                                           Table 4
           Sharp Currency Depreciations: Means for Treatment and Control Groups using Different Matching Algorithms

                       Mean:            Mean:              t-            5 Nearest Neigh.                   Radius                       Kernel                       Local-linear
                     Treatment        Unmatched        Statistics         Mean:                        Mean:                         Mean                          Mean
                      Group            Control         (H0: μT =                     t-stat                       t-stat                       t-stat                            t-stat
                                                                         Matched                      Matched                       Matched                       Matched
                        (μT)             (μC)             μC)             Control                     Control                       Control                       Control
Global Risk              32.6             24.3          6.30***            30.6       0.89              30.8       0.82              30.6       0.91               28.7          1.88*
∆U.S. interest
                         -1.19            -0.38         4.72***            -0.99        0.50            -0.93         0.65            -0.92         0.66             -1.02        0.42
rate
Commodity
                         4.68             4.79           1.75*             4.66         0.33            4.68          0.07             4.68         0.05             4.65         0.48
prices
1990’s crisis
                         0.51             0.44            0.91             0.59         0.65            0.54          0.22             0.54         0.21             0.62         0.93
dummy

∆Real GDP
                         -5.93            0.43          4.55***            -5.10        0.43            -4.75         0.63            -4.53         0.75             -3.76        1.15
growth
Capital
                        -0.045           0.022           1.80*            -0.050        0.11           -0.037         0.18            -0.030        0.35            -0.042        0.08
Outflows
Capital Inflows
                        -0.055           0.022          2.20**             -0.06        0.05           -0.046         0.21            -0.038        0.40            -0.057        0.05


Income per
                         8.22             8.36            0.69             8.07         0.56            8.15          0.26             8.14         0.33             8.16         0.24
capita
Reserves/GDP             0.39             0.73          2.81***            0.40         0.14            0.45          0.68             0.46         0.72             0.38         0.24
Peg dummy                0.027            0.24          3.17***            0.027        0.00            0.06          0.72             0.07         0.79             0.27         0.00
Openness                 0.90             1.37          2.43***            0.70         0.58            0.64          0.74             0.62         0.80             0.26         1.75

∆Reserves/GDP           -0.038           0.053          3.91***           -0.040        0.08            -0.02         0.57            -0.02         0.68            -0.04         0.12
%∆ER/U.S.$               10.49            0.18          7.05***            10.96        0.20            9.91          0.26            10.17         0.14            12.18         0.76

    Notes: Reports difference in means between treatment and control groups, with control group created based on regression results reported in Table 2 and matching performed
     using algorithms listed at top of table. See Appendix for detailed variable definitions. * indicates significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                  35
Notes: Reports annual time series of major policy changes. Criteria to qualify as a “major” policy change is set to equal 5% of the sample
for reserve sales, sharp depreciations, and interest rate increases. Using this threshold, large reserve sales are at least a 13.4 percentage
point decrease in reserves (relative to GDP) between one quarter and that quarter in the previous year. Sharp depreciations are at least a
22.6% deprecation in the nominal exchange rate versus the U.S.$ between one quarter and that quarter in the previous year (with annual
inflation below 10%). Major increases in interest rates are at least a 200 basis points increase between one quarter and that quarter in the
previous year (with annual inflation below 10%). New capital controls are new controls on capital outflows (as described in the text).
Only countries with information to calculate changes in all of the four policy responses for each year in the given period are included—so
that the sample of countries is constant across time within each graph (although not across graphs). While a member of the euro zone,
countries are excluded from the sample able to have large reserve sales, sharp depreciations, or interest rate increases.


                                                                                                                                          36
  Figure 2: Average Treatment Effects on Real GDP Growth using Local Linear Matching




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.




                                                                                                                           37
    Figure 3: Average Treatment Effects on Unemployment using Local Linear Matching




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.




                                                                                                                           38
    Figure 4: Average Treatment Effects on Inflation (CPI) using Local Linear Matching




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.




                                                                                                                           39
 Figure 5: Average Treatment Effects for non-OECD and EMEs using Local Linear Matching

           GDP Growth                                    Unemployment                                     Inflation
Interest Rate Increase




Exchange Rate Depreciation




Add Capital Controls




Reserve Sales




 Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.


                                                                                                                            40
      Figure 6A: Average Treatment Effects for GDP Growth using Local Linear Matching

                      1997-2001                                                          2007-2011




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.


                                                                                                                           41
     Figure 6B: Average Treatment Effects for Unemployment using Local Linear Matching

                 1997-2001                                                    2007-2011




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.

                                                                                                                           42
         Figure 6C: Average Treatment Effects for Inflation using Local Linear Matching
                 1997-2001                                      2007-2011




Note: ATE measured as the change in the relevant quarter relative to the two-year average before the treatment occurred.


                                                                                                                           43
Figure 7: ATT of Real GDP Growth, Not Relative to Average Pre-Treatment values




                                                                                 44
                                             Data Appendix:

                                         Countries in the Sample

     Argentina            Ecuador             Jamaica              Namibia                Slovenia
      Australia            Egypt                Japan            Netherlands            South Africa
       Austria            Estonia              Jordan           New Zealand                 Spain
       Bahrain            Finland           Kazakhstan             Nigeria                Sri Lanka
     Bangladesh            France              Kenya               Norway                  Sweden
      Belgium            Germany               Korea                Oman                 Switzerland
      Botswana             Ghana              Kuwait               Pakistan                Taiwan
        Brazil            Greece               Latvia              Panama                 Thailand
      Bulgaria          Hong Kong             Lebanon                Peru            Trinidad & Tobago
       Canada             Hungary            Lithuania           Philippines               Tunisia
        Chile             Iceland           Luxembourg              Poland                 Turkey
        China               India            Malaysia              Portugal                Ukraine
      Colombia           Indonesia           Mauritania             Qatar           United Arab Emirates
    Cote d’Ivoire            Iran            Mauritius            Romania             United Kingdom
       Croatia            Ireland             Mexico                Russia              United States
   Czech Republic          Israel            Moldova              Singapore               Vietnam
      Denmark               Italy            Morocco           Slovak Republic             Zambia




                                    Variable Definitions and Sources

Variable         Definition                                                Data Source and Frequency
Reserves         International Reserves, includes IMF loans, SDRs,         IMF, IFS CD-ROM, June
                 some SWFs, and drawn swap lines. Excludes gold            2013.
                 for calculations of policy responses. Expressed as a
                 share of GDP. Millions of U.S.$. (Q)

Nominal          Units of local currency per dollar, end-of-period.        IMF, IFS, accessed 07/09/13.
exchange rate    (Q)

Interest rates   The interest rate most closely related to monetary        Global Insight, accessed
                 policy for each country; is the policy interest rate if   10/1/13.
                 available; if not available, is the short-term interest
                 rate. (Q)
New controls     A dummy equal to 1 if there is an increase in the         Changes are based on data
on capital       average level of controls on capital outflows,            from Klein (2012), which is
outflows         including controls on any types of capital flows          based on information in the
                 (equities debt securities, collateralized investments,    IMF, AREARS.
                 and commercial credits) except FDI. (A)
Global risk      Measured by the VXO or Volatility Index                   Global Financial Data,
                 calculated by the Chicago Board Options
                 Exchange. This index measures implied volatility

                                                                                                           45
                  using prices for a range of options on the S&P 100      accessed 07/11/13.
                  index.
U.S. interest     The policy interest rate. (Q)                           Global Insight, accessed
rate                                                                      10/1/13.

Commodity         The Economist All-Commodity Dollar index.               Global Financial Data,
price index       Measured at the end-of period and expressed in          accessed 07/11/13.
                  logs. (Q)
Real GDP          Real GDP growth, measured q-o-q. (Q)                    Global Insight, accessed
growth                                                                    10/2/13.


Capital           Total Capital outflows or inflows in million of         IMF, BOP as of 09/13 for data
outflows,         U.S.$; expressed as share of GDP. Capital outflows      from 2005-2012; Forbes and
Capital inflows   are reported with a positive sign (unlike BOP           Warnock (2012) for data from
                  accounting). Data for 1995-2005 uses the old
                                                                          1995-2003.
                  balance-of-payments definitions, so there is a series
                  break between the two crisis periods in order to
                  avoid inconsistencies in the changes calculated
                  over time. (Q)
Current           Current account balance in millions of U.S.$,           IMF, WEO database, accessed
account           expressed as share of GDP. (A)                          07/17/13.
balance

Inflation         The percent change in the consumer price index          IMF, IFS, accessed 07/09/13.
                  relative to the previous year. Data for Hong Kong
                  and Chile is annual. (Q)
Private credit    Private credit by deposit money banks and other         Beck , Demirguc-Kunt ,
                  financial institutions as a percent of GDP. The         Levine , Cihak and Feyen
                  annual data is smoothed across quarters. If data on     (updated April 2013).
                  private credit is not available, bank credit is         Available at:
                  substituted.
                                                                          http://econ.worldbank.org/WB
                                                                          SITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/E
                                                                          XTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK
                                                                          :20696167~pagePK:64214825
                                                                          ~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:4
                                                                          69382,00.html

Commodity         The interaction of the log of the commodity price   Calculated based on export
index             index (defined above) with a dummy equal to 1 if a data from World Bank’s, WDI,
interacted with   country is a major commodity exporter. Major        accessed 10/8/13.
                  commodity exporters are countries for which
Commodity
                  ((food exports + fuel exports)/merchandise exports)
exporter          >30%. (A)
Real GDP per      Real GDP per capita. Expressed on a quarterly           Quarterly data from IMF, IFS,
capita            basis, but if quarterly data is not available than      accessed 07/09/13; annual data
                  fitted annual data is used. (Q)                         from IMF WEO database,

                                                                                                           46
                                                                          spring 2013.

Institutions       The log of an index of institutional strength, with    Based on ICRG data compiled
index              higher values representing stronger institutions.      by the World Bank; List of
                   Index is calculated as the average of the 6 ICRG       variables and definitions:
                   institutional variables, with each weighted by the     http://www.prsgroup.com/Va
                   maximum value of the variable. The variables are:      riableHelp.aspx
                   legal strength, law and order, investment profile,
                   government stability, corruption and bureaucracy
                   quality. (Q)

Peg dummy          A dummy variable equal to 1 if country has an          Klein and Shambaugh (2013),
                   exchange rate pegged at +/- 2%. (A)                    updating Shambaugh (2004).

Openness           The KAOPEN measure of capital account                  Chinn and Ito (2013), with
                   openness, which is calculated as the principal         data updated as of July 2013
                   component of four binary variables from the IMF’s      on their website.
                   AREARs. The four variables are: (1) capital
                   account openness; (2) current account openness;
                   (3) the stringency of requirements for the
                   repatriation and/or surrender of export proceeds;
                   and (4) the existence of multiple exchange rates for
                   capital account transactions. Higher values indicate
                   greater openness. (A).

Euro member        A dummy equal to 1 if a country is a member of
dummy              the euro area at any point in the sample.

Change in          The sum of any increase in controls on capital         Changes are based on data
capital controls   inflow or outflows, except for FDI, over the           from Klein (2012), which is
                   previous year.                                         based on information in the
                                                                          IMF, AREARS.

Unemployment       Unemployment rate. (Q)                                 IMF, IFS, accessed 07/09/13.




                                                                                                         47
