NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CULTURE, ETHNICITY AND DIVERSITY
Klaus Desmet
Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín
Romain Wacziarg
Working Paper 20989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20989

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

The authors acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economics and Competitiveness
(grants ECO2011-27014 and ECO2013-46091-P) and the UCLA Anderson Center for Global Management.
We thank Georgy Egorov, James Fearon, Paola Giuliano, Wolfgang Keller, Keith Krehbiel, Giacomo
Ponzetto and seminar participants at Stanford, Northwestern, Alicante, Pompeu Fabra, Bocconi, the
London School of Economics, the Université Catholique de Louvain, the Paris School of Economics
and the NBER Summer Institute for useful comments. Any remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Klaus Desmet, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín, and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Culture, Ethnicity and Diversity
Klaus Desmet, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín, and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 20989
February 2015
JEL No. D74,J15,P48,Z10
ABSTRACT
We investigate the empirical relationship between ethnicity and culture, defined as a vector of traits
reflecting norms, attitudes and preferences. Using surveys of individual values in 76 countries, we
find that ethnic identity is a significant predictor of cultural values, yet that within-group variation
in culture trumps between-group variation. Thus, in contrast to a commonly held view, ethnic and
cultural diversity are unrelated. We explore the correlates of cultural diversity and of the overlap between
culture and ethnicity, finding that the level of economic development is positively associated with
cultural diversity and negatively associated with the overlap between culture and ethnicity. Finally,
although only a small portion of a country's overall cultural heterogeneity occurs between groups,
this does not imply that cultural differences between groups are irrelevant. Indeed, we find that civil
conflict becomes more likely when there is greater overlap between ethnicity and culture.

Klaus Desmet
SMU
Department of Economics
3300 Dyer, Suite 301
Dallas, TX 75205
kdesmet@smu.edu
Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín
Universidad Carlos III
28903 Getafe
Madrid
Spain
iortuno@eco.uc3m.es

Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Are ethnic cleavages associated with deep di¤erences in culture between groups? Many people think so.
In poor countries, often characterized by a high level of ethnic diversity, concerns arise that groups with
heterogeneous values, norms and attitudes - the broad set of traits that we will refer to as "culture" may be unable to agree on policies, the provision of public goods and the broader goals of society. In
rich countries, debates rage over multiculturalism and whether population movements brought about
by globalization and modernity will result in cultural divisions and the breakdown of social consensus.
Underlying these debates is an assumption that people agree within groups and disagree across groups,
so that cultural heterogeneity and ethnic heterogeneity are two sides of the same coin. Yet, there is little
quantitative research on the links between ethnicity and culture.
In this paper we conduct a systematic investigation of the links between culture and ethnicity. In
doing so, we aim to answer the following questions: Is an individual’s ethnolinguistic identity a predictor
of his norms, values and preferences? Are ethnolinguistic heterogeneity and cultural heterogeneity highly
correlated? What is the degree of overlap between both measures of diversity? Finally, is the relationship
between ethnicity and culture important to understand salient political economy outcomes, such as civil
con‡ict?
We start by exploring the relationship between ethnolinguistic identity and culture, using individuallevel data from various surveys such as the World Values Survey. We seek to explain answers on norms,
values and preferences using a respondent’s economic and demographic characteristics, among which are
ethnic and linguistic indicators, and to evaluate the joint statistical signi…cance of the latter. We …nd that
ethnicity dummy variables are jointly signi…cant predictors of responses for about half of the questions,
although this average masks signi…cant heterogeneity across countries. Thus, ethnic identity appears to
be an important determinant of cultural norms, values and preferences.
Although this suggests a strong link between ethnicity and culture, a very di¤erent picture emerges
when we analyze the relation between cultural fractionalization and ethnic fractionalization. To get a
measure of cultural fractionalization, we compute the probability that two randomly drawn individuals answer a randomly drawn question from the World Values Survey di¤erently. In contrast to many
observers’priors, we …nd that heterogeneity in norms, values and preferences is uncorrelated with ethnolinguistic fractionalization across countries. Taken together, these results show that even though culture
does di¤er across ethnolinguistic groups, cultural fractionalization and ethnolinguistic fractionalization
are not related. Ethnic fractionalization can therefore not readily be taken as a proxy for overall cultural
and preference heterogeneity.
How can these seemingly contradictory results be reconciled? Within-group heterogeneity in culture
may account for the low correlation between cultural heterogeneity and ethnolinguistic diversity, without
precluding the possibility that ethnic identity has predictive power for cultural attitudes: the degree

1

of between-ethnic group cultural heterogeneity could be small relative to total heterogeneity, yet have
signi…cant predictive power for various political economy outcomes. To explore this possibility, we propose
new indices of the degree of overlap between ethnicity and culture, derived from a simple model of social
antagonism. The …rst is a

2

index that captures the average distance between the answers of each ethnic

group and the answers in the overall population. A low value of the index indicates that groups re‡ect the
countrywide distribution of answers, while a high value indicates a lot of group-speci…city. The second
index, developed in the context of population genetics, is known as a …xation index, or FST . It captures
the between-group variance in answers to survey questions as a share of the overall variance. A value of
zero indicates that there is no informational content to knowing an individual’s ethnic identity, while a
value of one indicates that answers can be perfectly predicted based on knowing an individual’s ethnic
identity.
Using

2

and FST , we …nd that the degree to which cultural and ethnic cleavages overlap is very

small. In particular, we …nd that only on the order of 1

2% of the variance in cultural norms is between

groups. That is, the vast share of the variance is within groups. This explains the close-to-zero correlation
between cultural heterogeneity and ethnic heterogeneity. The low share of between-group variance is not
a simple consequence of the type of questions asked in the World Values Survey: when taking countries,
rather than ethnicities, as the relevant groups, we …nd that the between-country share of the variance in
cultural values is about …ve times larger. Furthermore, in spite of the small degree of overlap between
culture and ethnicity, there is substantial variation across countries in the FST and

2

measures, and this

variation is related in meaningful ways to some salient cross-sectional characteristics of countries.
Does cultural diversity between ethnic groups, though of a small magnitude, matter for our understanding of political economy outcomes? To analyze whether the overlap between culture and ethnicity
is relevant, we explore the e¤ect of ethnic heterogeneity, cultural heterogeneity and the degree of overlap
between the two on the onset and incidence of civil con‡ict. In principle, civil wars could arise when
there is a high degree of cultural heterogeneity, when there is a high degree of ethnic diversity, or when
culture and ethnicity reinforce each other. Empirically, we …nd that both cultural and ethnic diversity
have weak e¤ects on civil con‡ict. If anything, cultural diversity has a pacifying e¤ect. However, the
degree of overlap between cultural attitudes and ethnic identity has a strong and robust e¤ect on civil
wars: when culture and ethnicity reinforce each other (i.e. for high values of FST or

2)

violent con‡ict

becomes more likely.
This paper is related to various strands of the literature on ethnolinguistic diversity. The …rst strand
studies the relationship between ethnolinguistic diversity and socioeconomic outcomes, using conventional
measures of diversity such as fractionalization (for instance, Easterly and Levine, 1997, Alesina, Baqir
and Easterly, 1999, Alesina et al., 2003, Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005, among many others). Our
paper is related to this literature as we examine the e¤ect of ethnic and cultural fractionalization on a
particular outcome, civil con‡ict. By explicitly considering cultural diversity and its relation with ethnic
2

heterogeneity, we cast light on the mechanisms that led to the empirical regularities uncovered in the
earlier literature.
The second strand seeks to advance the measurement of diversity by considering alternative measures
that improve on simple fractionalization. These measures take di¤erent forms, accounting for distance
between groups (Esteban and Ray, 1994, 2004, Bossert, d’Ambrosio and La Ferrara, 2011), looking
at income inequality between ethnic groups (Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2012) or the
historical depth of ethnic cleavages (Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg, 2012). Our paper is related
to this measurement literature because we propose a new measure of heterogeneity in cultural attitudes
and new measures of the degree of overlap between culture and ethnicity. These measures shed new light
on the complex empirical relationship between culture and ethnicity.
A third strand of the literature examines the relationship between culture and economic outcomes.
This literature usually examines the e¤ect of a particular historically-determined trait on current outcomes, rather than the e¤ect of cultural diversity as we do. This is, again, a vast literature, but salient
examples include Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) on the historical legacy of the heavy plough on
values a¤ecting fertility and female labor force participation; Giuliano (2007) on the e¤ect of culture on
living arrangements; Fernandez and Fogli (2009) on culture, fertility and female labor force participation;
Luttmer and Singhal (2011) on culture and the taste for redistribution; Tabellini (2010) on cultural traits
and economic performance across the regions of Europe; and Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2009) on
trust and bilateral trade. In contrast to this literature, we study the e¤ect of cultural heterogeneity
rather than the e¤ect of a speci…c cultural trait.
Finally, a recent literature seeks to relate genetic di¤erences - a measure associated with cultural
di¤erences - with political and economic outcomes, including con‡ict. For instance, Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009) look at the e¤ect of genetic distance between countries on the di¤usion of the Industrial Revolution
and Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013) study the e¤ect of genetic distance between countries on interstate
con‡ict and war. While these two studies also use FST as a measure of distance between groups, this
FST is based on genetic rather than cultural data, and it is used to study interactions between pairs of
countries rather than between groups within countries. Ashraf and Galor (2013) investigate the e¤ect
of genetic diversity, used as a broader measure of diversity in both cultural and biological traits within
countries, on historical and contemporary economic performance. In Arbatli, Ashraf and Galor (2013),
the same measure of genetic diversity is found to have a positive e¤ect on the probability of civil con‡ict.
In contrast to these papers, we measure cultural diversity directly using responses to surveys on norms,
attitudes and preferences, rather than using genetic data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we use individual level data from surveys
of cultural attitudes to explore the relationship between ethnic identity and cultural attitudes. In Section
3, we introduce a simple model of social antagonism leading to three classes of measures of heterogeneity
hypothesized to a¤ect socioeconomic outcomes. We show how to operationalize these theoretically derived
3

measures using data on ethnicity and cultural traits. In Section 4, we introduce our new measures of
heterogeneity, compute them using the World Values Survey, and describe their interrelationships and
determinants. In Section 5, to illustrate the uses of these new measures, we explore empirically the e¤ect
of cultural and ethnic heterogeneity on civil con‡ict. Section 6 concludes.

2

Identity and Culture

2.1

Methodology

In this section we use the World Values Survey to examine the relationship between ethnic identity and
cultural attitudes. The exercise requires individual level data on answers to questions on norms, values
and preferences, and corresponding data on the respondent’s ethnic or linguistic identity. We examine the
joint statistical signi…cance of indicators of ethnolinguistic identity as determinants of survey responses,
proceeding question by question and country by country and controlling for observable individual characteristics. In principle, 5% of the questions should feature a signi…cant joint e¤ect of ethnic identity if
the statistical criterion is 95% con…dence and there was in fact no association between cultural attitudes
and ethnicity. We ask whether the share of questions for which there is a signi…cant e¤ect of ethnicity
is actually higher, and …nd that it is in fact much higher. We also examine whether the importance of
identity for culture varies in systematic ways across question types, countries, continents, etc.
For each question and each country, we estimate the following speci…cation:
Qm =

+

S
X

s
s Dm

+

0

X m + "m

(1)

s=1

where m denotes a respondent, s = 1; :::; S indexes ethnolinguistic groups, Qm is individual m’s answer to
s is equal to one if respondent m is part of group s, zero otherwise,
the question under consideration, Dm

and Xm is a vector of controls. Estimation is by least squares.
We test for the joint signi…cance of the

s

parameters using conventional F-tests. We do so for all

questions and countries, and then examine the share of questions for which ethnolinguistic identity is
a signi…cant predictor of cultural attitudes at the 5% level. We compute these shares over di¤erent
categories of questions, for each country separately, and for di¤erent regions. We also examine how much
additional explanatory power ethnicity dummies bring to the regression, by comparing the simple R2
statistic from running the speci…cation in (1) to the one obtained when running the same regression
without ethnicity dummies. This is meant to capture the magnitude of the joint e¤ect of ethnicity on
answers to cultural questions.

4

2.2

Data

Our main source is the Integrated World Values Survey-European Values Survey (WVS-EVS) dataset
covering 1981 to 2008 and …ve survey waves. In order to examine the relationship between ethnicity and
culture in a systematic way, we choose to focus on the broadest set of available questions without casting
judgment on which ones are more representative of attitudes and preferences: we let the dataset largely
guide our choice of questions, as opposed to making ad hoc choices ourselves. In the WVS-EVS integrated
dataset, there is a total of 1; 031 …elds, or questions. Some of these …elds are not survey questions but
instead refer to socio-demographic characteristics of the respondent or the interviewer, and some have
zero observations. We con…ne attention to survey questions identi…ed by the survey itself as pertaining
to norms, values and attitudes (these come grouped by the survey organization into question categories
labelled from A to G), and with a nonzero number of respondents. Among those, in very rare cases some
questions were asked in a slightly di¤erent manner in some countries (Colombia, Hong Kong, Mexico,
Iraq), and those were dropped (19 questions). We also dropped questions that asked about circumstances
speci…c to a given country, i.e. questions that could not conceivably be asked in more than one country
(74 questions). In the end we were left with 808 questions.
Among these remaining questions, there were three types: those with a binary response (yes/no,
agree/disagree: 252 questions), those with an ordered response (where answers are on a scale of, say, 1
to 10: 496 questions), and those with strictly more than two possible responses that are not naturally
ordered (60 questions). The …rst two categories can be used readily as dependent variables. For the
third category, we cannot directly estimate the joint e¤ect of ethnicity on unordered responses, so we
transformed each possible response into a series of binary response questions.1 Thus, the 60 questions
with unordered responses resulted in 193 new binary questions, leading to a total of 941 questions. Of
course, not every one of these questions was asked in every country, or in every wave. We keep all
questions irrespective of where or when they were asked. In the end, out of 941 questions, on average 294
were asked in each country (the number of questions per country varied between 81 and 447 - Appendix
Table A1 provides the exact count, country by country). When combined across all waves, the average
number of respondents across the countries in the sample, and across all questions, was 1; 497. There is
some heterogeneity around this number as some questions were asked in more waves than others, and
the number of surveyed individuals varies across countries and waves.
An important aspect of our exercise is to correctly code ethnolinguistic identity in order to estimate the
joint e¤ect of ethnicity dummies on responses. To do so, we have to de…ne ethnicity. The WVS/EVS asks
1

For instance, question C009 asks "Regardless of whether you’re actually looking for a job, which one would you, person-

ally, place …rst if you were looking for a job?" and o¤ers the following choices: "a good income", "a safe job with no risk",
"working with people you like", "doing an important job", "do something for community". We de…ne 5 binary response
questions, where, for instance, for "a good income", the response value is 1 if the respondent answered "a good income" to
question C009, and zero otherwise, and so on for the other answer categories.

5

respondents to report both their ethnicity and language. In some cases, the reported ethnic categories do
not appropriately capture ethnic identity. For many African countries the WVS/EVS integrated survey
reports ethnicities as White / Black. For instance in Zambia, 99:47% of respondents are Black, while
there are 0:27% Asians and 0:27% Whites. Most ethnographers agree that for Africa, language is a better
measure of ethnic identity than race. For Zambia, WVS/EVS respondents speak 18 separate languages,
the largest of which (Bemba) represents 36:6% of the respondents. The opposite problem exists in Latin
America, where language is not usually used as a measure of ethnic a¢ liation, and race de…nes ethnic
identity instead. For instance, in Venezuela 100% of respondents report speaking Castilian. However the
largest racial group is coded as "Colored (light)", representing 42:7% of respondents.
To correctly characterize ethnic identity in a systematic way, we again rely on existing classi…cations
rather than on our own judgement. We examine the ethnic and linguistic classi…cations in the integrated
WVS/EVS …le and see which one is closest to either the Alesina et al. (2003) or the Fearon (2003)
classi…cations, which are widely used in the literature.2 We choose either ethnic identity or linguistic
identity depending on which one gives us a classi…cation and a distribution of individuals across groups
that most resembles the Alesina et al. and Fearon classi…cations. In the above example, ethnic identity
in Zambia is coded using the language spoken at home variable, while ethnic identity in Venezuela is
coded as the ethnic group to which a respondent belongs. The idea is that a measure of ethnolinguistic
fractionalization computed from the resulting group shares in the WVS/EVS dataset should be highly
correlated with fractionalization measures derived in Alesina et al. (2003), and Fearon (2003). Indeed our
ethnic classi…cation results in fractionalization measures that are 74% correlated with fractionalization
in Alesina et al., and 73% correlated with fractionalization according to Fearon - this despite the data
coming from very di¤erent sources (a survey for WVS/EVS, mostly census for the other two sources).
Finally, control variables in the WVS/EVS dataset consist of the respondent’s age (question x003), sex
(x001), highest educational level attained (x025) and household income (x047).

2.3

Results

The results for the WVS/EVS dataset are presented in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1 presents the overall
share of regressions where ethnicity dummies are jointly signi…cant at the 5% level and the R2 with and
without ethnicity dummies, breaking down these results by region. Table 2 presents a breakdown by
question category (using the classi…cation of questions provided by the WVS/EVS) and by question type
(binary, scale, and binary constructed from multiple response questions). Additionally, Appendix Table
A1 presents the results country by country.
Interesting …ndings emerge. First, the average number of questions for which ethnicity dummies are
2

The WVS/EVS question on ethnic group is question x051 while the language spoken at home question is g016. These

are the two questions we use to code a respondent’s ethnic identity.

6

jointly signi…cant, across all countries, is 43%. Thus, ethnic identity is an important determinant of
responses to many questions.
Second, this average masks interesting variation across regions. In South Asia, East Asia and SubSaharan Africa, the shares are much higher, respectively 67%, 63% and 62%. In Latin America and
Western Europe, the shares are much lower, at 17% and 31% respectively. The small share in Latin
America could be due to the fact that, despite racial heterogeneity, linguistic and religious identity in
Latin America is much more homogeneous than in places where ethnic identity is a stronger predictor
of culture, for instance Africa. The Latin American exception does not extend to the New World as a
whole, as North America (de…ned here as Canada and the US) displays a relatively high share (51%).
The results for Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa are con…rmed when analyzing alternative datasets
for these regions - Latinobarómetro and Afrobarometer, respectively (these results appear in Appendix
1).
Third, the breakdown by question category shows little variation. We …nd that ethnic identity matters
a bit more for questions pertaining to religion and morals, as well as (predictably) for those pertaining to
national identity, and a bit less for questions related to work. Otherwise, there is substantial homogeneity
across categories. We conducted the same breakdown by question category continent by continent, …nding
again little variation in the share of regressions with signi…cant ethnic dummies. These …ndings suggest
that the choice of questions is not very material to the issue of whether ethnic identity a¤ects norms,
values and preferences, as regional patterns are stable across question categories.3
Fourth, the explanatory power of the regressions is usually quite low. The average R2 when excluding
the ethnicity dummies is only 2:7%, and when including the ethnicity dummies it rises to 4:1%. Thus, it is
usually di¢ cult to predict a person’s response to WVS/EVS questions using the most obvious observables,
yet the addition of ethnic dummies does increase the explanatory power of the regression by about 50%.
These averages again mask interesting heterogeneity across regions, which largely mirrors heterogeneity
in the share of signi…cant joint F-tests across countries. Moreover, these results suggest that the extent
to which ethnic identity can explain cultural attitudes is a small share of the overall cultural variance, a
theme to which we will return at length below.

3

Measuring Heterogeneity

This section is about measurement. We present a simple model of social antagonism to guide the choice of
functional forms for the heterogeneity measures used in the empirical investigation that follows. Starting
from various assumptions about the source of heterogeneity giving rise to antagonism, the model yields
3

Similarly, we …nd little variation across types of questions - binary, scale or binary constructed from unordered response

questions. Ethnicity predicts answers to scale questions slightly more frequently than for binary questions, but the di¤erence
is not large. This again suggests that the speci…c choice of questions is not very material to our results.

7

indices of ethnic diversity, cultural diversity and their overlap:

2.

We also propose a closely related

index, FST . We then show how to operationalize these theoretical indices using data.
In a nutshell, we assume that individuals feel antagonism towards people who are di¤erent from them.
Social antagonism is the sum of all the individual levels of antagonism in society, as in the alienation
framework of Esteban and Ray (1994). We adopt a broad interpretation of what antagonism captures.
It could represent feelings of alienation felt toward groups with di¤erent cultures or di¤erent ethnicities.
Antagonism could also stem from barriers that prevent fruitful interactions between groups, for instance
due to an inability to communicate or trust each other. We consider three distinct types of societies
depending on how various dimensions of heterogeneity give rise to antagonism. For each type of society
we derive an index measuring the level of social antagonism. Later, we will calculate these indices and
relate them to the probability of civil con‡ict.
It is useful to start with some notation. A country is composed of n individuals characterized by
the ethnic group to which they belong and by their cultural values or preferences. There are S ethnic
groups, indexed by s = 1; :::; S. The share of each ethnic group in the population is ws . Cultural values
(or traits) are the answers to the q questions in the WVS (or any other survey of cultural attitudes), each
indexed by i = 1; :::; q. Each question i has r(i) di¤erent possible answers, indexed by j. Focusing on
s is the
a given country, wij is the share of the population that gives answer j to question i. Finally, wij

share of individuals from ethnic group s that gives answer j to question i.
The type of an individual, k, is given by his ethnic group s and his answers to the q questions. We
de…ne a vector ! k of dimension 1 + q where the …rst component is a number from f1; 2; :::; Sg and denotes
his ethnic group, and the remaining q components represent the answers to each of the q questions. For
example, if there are two ethnic groups, S = 2, and three questions, q = 3, and each question has two
answers, r(i) = 2, the vector ! 1 = f1; 2; 1; 1g characterizes the type of an individual (i.e. type 1) who
belongs to the …rst ethnic group and who gives answers 2; 1; 1 to the …rst, second and third question,
respectively. Since we have a …nite number of individuals, n, as well as a …nite number of questions
and answers, the total number of di¤erent types of individuals is …nite. We denote by K the number of
P
di¤erent types and by nk the number of individuals of type k, so K
k=1 nk = n. The population share
PK
of individuals of type k is denoted by wk = nk =n, where of course k=1 wk = 1. We denote as (k; i)

the answer given by an agent of type k to question i, and as s(k) the ethnic group of a type k agent:
! k = (s(k); (k; 1); (k; 2); :::; (k; q)).

3.1

The Cultural Heterogeneity Channel

We …rst assume that only cultural values matter for antagonism. Belonging to a di¤erent ethnic group s
does not generate any antagonism per se. An individual’s antagonism is given by the share of individuals
in society with preferences di¤erent from his. More formally, the antagonism of an agent of type k depends,

8

for each of the q questions, on how many people respond in the same way as him. The population share
of individuals that give the same answer to question i as agent of type k is wi;

(k;i) .

We give the same weight to all the q questions. Thus, for an agent of type k the average share, over the
P
q traits, of individuals giving the same answer as him is 1q qi=1 wi; (k;i) . Hence, his level of antagonism,

vk , is given by:

q

vk = 1

1X
wi;
q

(2)

(k;i)

i=1

Here, individuals feel antagonism if they live in the same society as other individuals who have di¤erent
cultural characteristics. Ethnicity does not matter. In this case vk measures the average probability,
over all questions, that a randomly chosen citizen disagrees with the answers given by an agent of type
k. Social antagonism v is the summation of all the individual levels of antagonism vk , normalized by the
population size n. Appendix 2A shows that v can be rewritten as the following easy-to-calculate index
of cultural fractionalization (CF ):
CF =

q
1X

q

i=1

0

@1

r(i)
X
j=1

1

2A
wij
:

(3)

The cultural fractionalization (CF ) index measures the average probability that two randomly drawn
individuals from a population give di¤erent answers to a randomly drawn question from the WVS/EVS.
Thus, if we believe that antagonism is driven exclusively by di¤erences in preferences and cultural values,
the index of cultural fractionalization, CF , should matter for political economy outcomes.

3.2

The Ethnic Heterogeneity Channel

Alternatively, we assume that antagonism stems only from ethnic di¤erences, not from cultural di¤erences.
This antagonism could come from animosity vis-à-vis other ethnic groups (racial hatred and prejudice)
or from barriers that impede interactions between groups because of lack of communication or trust. The
probability that a randomly chosen individual belongs to the ethnic group s(k) is ws(k) . We postulate
that in this society the level of antagonism of an individual of type k is:
ws(k) :

vk = 1

(4)

Thus, under this assumption individual antagonism is just the probability that a person meets or is
matched with another person from a di¤erent ethnic group. Social antagonism, v, is the average of this
probability over all individuals. Appendix 2B shows that v in this case is just the common ELF index
of ethnic fractionalization:

S
X

ELF = 1

(ws )2 :

(5)

s=1

Thus, if we believe that antagonism is driven purely by ethnic animosity or barriers between ethnic groups,
without any role for cultural di¤erences, the conventional index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization, ELF ,
9

should matter for socioeconomic outcomes. Such is the case in research where antagonism can stem from
ethnic di¤erences per se rather than any underlying cultural di¤erences.

3.3
3.3.1

The Overlap Channel
Deriving a Measure of Overlap Between Ethnicity and Culture

As a third alternative, we assume that an individual’s antagonism depends on how culturally di¤erent
her group is from other ethnic groups. An individual does not experience any antagonism if people from
other ethnic groups answer the questions in the WVS in the same way as people in her own ethnic group.
Ethnicity only matters if ethnic groups di¤er in their cultural values. In this society cultural di¤erences
between the members of the same ethnic group do not increase the level of antagonism.
Take agent of type k and question i. Suppose …rst that type k only interacts with agents of her own
ethnic group s(k). Remember that we denote by (k; i) the answer that agent of type k gives to question
i. In this case, by de…nition the share of people within group s(k) with the same answer to question i as
s(k)
(k;i) .

agent of type k is wi;

In other words, this is the probability that a randomly chosen agent from the

ethnic group s(k) agrees with an agent of type k on question i.
Now assume that an agent of type k is equally likely to interact with anybody in society. In this
case the probability an agent of type k agrees on question i with a randomly chosen individual in society
is wi;

(k;i) .

If the probability wi;

(k;i)

s(k)
(k;i) ,

is equal to wi;

an agent of type k does not see any di¤erence

between her own ethnic group and society overall.4 However, if the proportion of people in society overall
answering (k; i) is lower than the corresponding proportion within her own ethnic group, the agent
experiences antagonism. In particular we assume that antagonism for question i and an agent of type k,
vik depends on the (relative) di¤erence between these two shares:
vik =
s(k)
(k;i)

Notice that if wi;

< wi;

(k;i)

s(k)
(k;i)

wi;

wi;

wi;

(k;i)

(6)

(k;i)

the individual experiences negative antagonism, i.e. she is happy to

interact with people in society who give the same answer as she does in greater proportion than people
in her own group. Suppose that I trust people, and that 50% of those in my ethnic group trust people. I
feel antagonism toward the rest of society if the share of people in the rest of society that trust people is
20%, but I am quite happy if the share of people in the rest of society that trust people is 60%.
Averaging vik over all the q questions, giving the same weight to all of them, individual antagonism
is:

s(k)

q
1 X wi; (k;i) wi;
vk =
q
wi; (k;i)

(k;i)

i=1

4

Here we assume that the agent takes all other ethnic groups as being a unique group.

10

(7)

Notice that if all ethnic groups are identical, i.e., if for each question the distribution of answers is
independent of the distribution of ethnic groups, we have that vk = 0. We add up the individual levels
of antagonism across k, weighing by the population shares of each type k, to obtain social antagonism:

v=

PK

k=1 vk nk
=
n

PK

1
k=1 q

Pq

s(k)
(k;i)

wi;

wi;

(k;i)

wi;

i=1

(k;i)

nk
(8)

n

Again, if the distribution of answers within each group is the same as the distribution of answers in
society overall, v = 0. If, on the contrary, culture and ethnicity overlap strongly, then v will be large.
To operationalize the v measure as a measure that can be calculated from data, Appendix 2C shows
that it can be rewritten as:
r(i)

2

=

q
S
s )2
1 X X X ws (wij wij
q
wij

(9)

i=1 s=1 j=1

Thus, if we believe that antagonism is driven purely by di¤erences in culture across ethnic groups, we
2

should observe a relationship between the

index of overlap and socioeconomic outcomes. De…ning and

using this index to measure the overlap between culture and ethnicity is an important contribution of
this paper.
3.3.2

2

Heuristic Discussion of the

Index

To complement the discussion above, it is useful to give a heuristic sense of the meaning of the
2

2

index.

is based on comparing the distribution of average answers for a given group to the distribution of

answers in the overall population. If the distribution of answers in a given ethnic group is exactly the
same as in the entire population, then knowing a person’s ethnic identity conveys no information about
his cultural attributes. If instead the distributions are distinct, then there is overlap between ethnic
identity and cultural attributes.
To measure the overlap between ethnolinguistic diversity and preference diversity we can compare the
distribution of answers across groups. This is what the

2

accomplishes.5 Let nsij be the number of indi-

viduals who belong to ethnic group s and give answer j to question i. We write nsi = fnsi1 ; nsi2 ; :::; nsir(i) g.
Under independence, the expected number of individuals that belong to ethnic group s and give answer j
to question i should be wij ns , while the observed frequency is nsij . The

2

index is based on the di¤erence

between the observed number of individuals of an ethnic group s that give answer j and the corresponding
expected number of individuals under the assumption of independence between ethnicity and answers.
So for each question i:
2
i

=

r(i)
S X
X
(wij ns

wij ns

s=1 j=1

5

nsij )2

(10)

For previous uses of this index, see Selway (2010) who examines the overlap between religion and ethnicity and Alesina

and Zhuravskaya (2011) who analyze the overlap between geography and ethnicity as a way of measuring segregation.

11

2
i

The value of

depends on the group sample sizes ns . Since di¤erent countries have di¤erent sample

sizes and we want to compare di¤erent values of

2
i

across countries, it is better to work from group

shares than from the number of individuals in each group. Thus, we can divide the

2
i

index by n to

obtain a normalized index:
2
i

=

r(i) s
S X
X
n (wij

s )2
wij

nwij

s=1 j=1

=

r(i)
S X
X
ws (wij

s )2
wij

(11)

wij

s=1 j=1

where ws = ns =n.
2
i

If we combine the

from the di¤erent questions, we obtain the Chi-squared index derived above,

2 :6
r(i)

q

2

1X
=
q

2
i

2

(12)

i=1 s=1 j=1

i=1

Thus, the

q
S
s )2
1 X X X ws (wij wij
=
q
wij

s and the expected
index depends on the average di¤erence between the observed shares wij

shares wij that we would observe if the distribution of ethnicity and the distribution of culture were
independent. This index has a minimum value of zero when there is no overlap. The maximum value
depends on the number of ethnic groups, S, and the number of answers of each question, r(i).7
3.3.3

An Alternative: The Fixation Index or FST

An alternative to the

2

index is FST , an index commonly used in population genetics to measure genetic

di¤erentiation or distance between groups (see Wright, 1949, and Nei, 1973).8 In genetics, FST is a
measure of relative heterogeneity: it is the ratio of between-group heterogeneity in genetic characteristics
to total heterogeneity. Analogously, here we compute a cultural FST - the ratio of between-group cultural
heterogeneity to total heterogeneity: when FST is 0, ethnic identity conveys no information about cultural
attitudes, norms and values. In contrast, if FST is equal to 1, knowing someone’s ethnolinguistic identity
allows a perfect prediction of their cultural attributes. FST is therefore a measure of overlap between
6

Strictly speaking, the index we use is

2

not

2

. However, for simplicity we will use the term

based on population shares rather than number of individuals.
7

An alternative to this index is Cramér’s V, which is de…ned as V =

q

2

n t

2

in referring to the index

, where t is the smaller of the number of ethnic

groups minus one and the number of answers minus one (Cramér, 1946). The index V is always between zero and one, and
corrects for the di¤erent number of ethnic groups or answers. However, this index is hard to interpret as it does not derive
from our model. Another alternative to

2

is the Mutual Information Index, originating from the concept of entropy in

information theory. In our case this is a measure of the amount of information that ethnicity contains about values, i.e., the
reduction in the uncertainty about how an individual answers the questions due to the knowledge of his ethnicity. It can
be shown that

2

is up to an order of approximation equal to the Mutual Information Index (Cover and Thomas, 2006, p.

400).
8

Another alternative is the more conventional index of cross-cuttingness used in the political science literature (Rae and

Taylor, 1970, Selway, 2011). Appendix 3 provides a detailed discussion of this index and its relationship with

12

2

and FST .

cultural values and ethnolinguistic identity. An added advantage of FST is that it relates neatly to the
already described measures of cultural diversity in terms of functional form - namely, it isolates the part
of the variation in overall cultural diversity that occurs between groups.
De…nition of FST : To de…ne FST , we start from the probability that two randomly drawn individuals
from ethnic group s give a di¤erent answer to question i (the within-group cultural diversity of group s):
CFis

=1

r(i)
X

s
wij

2

(13)

j=1

The population-weighted average of the within-group cultural fractionalization for question i can be
written as:
CFiW =

S
X

ws CFis =

s=1

S
X
s=1

0

w s @1

r(i)
X
j=1

1

s 2A
wij

(14)

The share of the total population’s cultural fractionalization that is not due to within-group fractionalization for each question i is then:
FSTi =

CFi

CFiW
CFi

(15)

This is, for each question, the ratio of between-group cultural fractionalization divided by total fractionalization. Averaging over all questions gives us Wright’s …xation index, FST (Wright, 1949, Nei,
1973):9
q

FST =

1X
FSTi
q

(16)

i=1

The FST index measures the share of between-group heterogeneity in total cultural heterogeneity. If
all ethnic groups were as heterogeneous as the total population, FST would be equal to 0, and there
would be no between-group heterogeneity. In that case, cultural cleavages and ethnolinguistic cleavages
cross-cut. Knowing someone’s ethnolinguistic identity would give no information about his preferences
or culture. Instead if all ethnic groups were to be homogeneous (CFis = 0), FST would be equal to 1, and
all heterogeneity would be between groups. In that case, cultural cleavages and ethnolinguistic cleavages
would be reinforcing.
The advantage of FST is that it is well-known and captures intuitively a simple concept, as it represents
how much one can predict answers to questions on norms, attitudes and preferences simply by knowing
a respondent’s ethnolinguistic identity. In the case of two ethnic groups and one question with only two
possible answers this index ranges from 0 to 1. With two groups and more than two possible answers,
or more generally when the number of answers exceeds the number of groups, there is always some
within-group fractionalization and the index cannot reach 1.
9

There are of course many ways to average across questions. For instance, Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) separately average

the numerator and the denominator of equation (15), and then take the ratio. We adopt the simpler method of averaging
i
the question by question FST
.

13

Drawbacks of FST . While the FST index is very commonly used in population genetics, it does have
some drawbacks, as explained for example in Jost (2008), Meirmans and Hedrick (2011) and Jakobsson
et al. (2013). The most important drawback, outlined in Jost (2008), relates to the properties of the
decomposition of within and between fractionalization in a context where these measures are bounded
above by 1. To illustrate this potential problem, let us denote between-group fractionalization by Di for
question i. Such between-group fractionalization is de…ned by subtracting within-group fractionalization
CFiW from total fractionalization CFi , i.e., Di

CFi CFiW . Thus, this approach relies upon the additive

decomposition of total fractionalization, but CFiW and Di are not independent because we always have
that Di + CFiW

1.10 This constraint implies that Di declines with within-group fractionalization CFiW

regardless of the degree of cultural di¤erentiation of ethnic groups.
A numerical example is useful to illustrate this drawback. Suppose that there is just one question and
two ethnic groups of the same size. The question has four possible answers, a; b; c and d. The vector of
answers for individuals from the …rst ethnic group is f0:1; 0:9; 0; 0g, i.e., 10% of them answer a, and 90%
answer b. For the second ethnic group the vector of answers is f0:9; 0:1; 0; 0g. It is easy to check that in
this society, FST = 0:64: Suppose a second society where those two vectors of answers are f0:5; 0:5; 0; 0g
_ It is clear that in this society culture and ethnicity overlap more strongly than in the
and f0; 0; 0:5; 0:5g.
…rst society. However, in this case we have FST = 0:33.11 The reason is that the second society displays
a much higher degree of within-group heterogeneity than the …rst (a high CF W ), which drives down FST
in spite of the higher degree of overlap between culture and ethnicity.
Our …rst overlap measure,

2,

is not subject to this drawback, but as we will see empirically, it does

not matter which index we use: while the
empirically

2

2

index comes out directly from our model of antagonism,

and FST are almost perfectly correlated (in our sample the correlation is 97%, a result

that also holds in simple simulations).12
Uses of FST in the past literature.

We conclude this conceptual section by discussing a few papers

that have used FST to measure between-group cultural heterogeneity, noting that their goals and methods
are very di¤erent from ours. Bell et al. (2009) study inter-group competition and analyze whether there
is more scope for selection based on cultural traits rather than on genetic traits. They use the WVS to
compute a cultural FST measure between 150 pairs of neighboring countries. They show that this measure
is an order of magnitude larger than an analogous measure of FST based on genetic data, suggesting a
10

Jost (2008, pp 4018) provides a complete explanation of this constraint and its implication: "Additive partitioning of

heterozygosity does not produce pure within-and between-subpopulation components; it is an incomplete partitioning". In
our case cultural fractionalization is a parallel concept to heterozygosity in population genetics.
11

A similar numerical example appears in Wright (1978).

12

In the case of a question with two possible answers FST and

Details of our simulations are available upon request.

14

2

coincide exactly (see Workman and Niswander, 1970).

greater scope for cultural rather than genetic selection. In contrast to our approach, they measure cultural
heterogeneity between countries rather than between groups within countries. In another paper, Ross
et al. (2013) compute a measure of cultural FST based on between-group variation in folktales across
di¤erent European ethnic groups. Again they are interested in comparing patterns of cultural FST to
those of genetic FST , …nding some similarities between the two. In contrast to our work, neither of these
papers is interested in using cultural FST to measure the degree of overlap between ethnicity and culture,
or in understanding how cultural FST relates to overall cultural heterogeneity and overall ethnolinguistic
diversity. Instead, their focus is on the importance of cultural FST , relative to genetic FST . Finally,
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009, 2013) use a genetic FST as a measure of intergenerational divergence in
a wide range of human traits transmitted culturally or biologically, in order to estimate the e¤ects of
barriers between populations on political and economic outcomes. In contrast to our approach, their FST
is based on neutral genes, not cultural attitudes, and it measures distance between countries rather than
between ethnic groups within countries.

4

Ethnic Heterogeneity and Cultural Diversity

In this section we empirically calculate the measures of heterogeneity derived in Section 3, and describe
their properties and correlates. We show that, contrary to the assumption of much of the past literature,
measures of ethnic diversity and cultural diversity are uncorrelated with each other. At the same time,
we know from Section 2 that ethnic identity does help to predict cultural attitudes. To reconcile these
seemingly contradictory results, we show that although between-group heterogeneity in cultural attitudes
is small compared to total heterogeneity, the overlap between culture and ethnicity shows considerable
variation across countries, variation that mirrors that found in Section 2. We explore the correlates of
these new measures, uncovering interesting patterns concerning characteristics of countries with a high
degree of cultural diversity as well as those with a relatively high degree of overlap between culture
and ethnicity. Finally, we examine the robustness of our results to calculating the various measures for
di¤erent question categories and types.

4.1

Cultural Diversity and Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization

Before describing the indices, some comments on the data are in order. First, we use the same baseline set
of questions from the integrated WVS/EVS dataset as in Section 2. Second, not all WVS/EVS questions
are asked in all countries. In our benchmark analysis we drop questions that are not asked in at least
50 countries, to ensure cross-country comparability of the indices.13 Third, since we are interested in
13

The list of questions used to compute the heterogeneity measures, as well as their breakdown by question category and

type, appears in Appendix Table A6.

15

relating cultural fractionalization to ethnolinguistic fractionalization, we focus exclusively on countries in
the WVS/EVS for which we have ethnolinguistic information.14 Taken together, this gives us information
on 76 countries. Finally, there is no need here to convert questions that admit multiple unordered answers
into series of binary questions to calculate our various indices.
Figure 1 shows a world map with the values of cultural heterogeneity in the 76 countries in our sample,
and Panel A in Table 3 displays some simple summary statistics.15 Darker-colored countries are more
culturally diverse than lighter-colored ones. The most culturally diverse country is Zambia (CF = 0:602),
and the least culturally diverse country is Jordan (CF = 0:427). Other interesting data points are France
and India, with relatively high cultural heterogeneity, and Egypt, Indonesia and China, with relatively
low numbers (a high degree of cultural conformism). The average value of CF across countries is 0:529.
The standard assumption in the literature is that cultural heterogeneity (CF ) should be highly correlated with ethnolinguistic heterogeneity (ELF ). Comparing the map of ELF in Figure 2 with the
one of CF in Figure 1, it becomes immediately obvious that there are important di¤erences. Countries
such as Pakistan and Egypt have high levels of ethnolinguistic heterogeneity but low levels of cultural
heterogeneity. At the other extreme are countries such as Germany and South Korea, which are ethnolinguistically fairly homogeneous but culturally diverse. The lack of a relationship between both types
of heterogeneity is not limited to these few examples. The correlation between CF and ELF , displayed
in Panel B of Table 3, is essentially zero,

0:030 to be exact. Ethnolinguistic diversity is therefore not

associated with cultural diversity.
If cultural heterogeneity is not correlated with ethnolinguistic heterogeneity, what might it be related
to? Table 4 shows the correlation between cultural fractionalization and several variables. Five correlates
stand out: countries with a higher proportion of Muslims exhibit a lower CF (the correlation is

0:597);

partly re‡ecting the previous correlation, countries located in North Africa and the Middle East show a
similar negative correlation ( 0:529); more religiously diverse countries are also culturally more diverse
(correlation of 0:314); more democratic countries (measured by the Polity 4 index) have higher cultural
fractionalization (the correlation is 0:586); and countries with a high per capita income exhibit a greater
CF (the correlation is 0:382). The other correlations are mostly small and statistically insigni…cant.
Countries in North America, Europe and Central Asia, and countries farther away from the equator,
have, on average, greater cultural fractionalization.
14

In principle we could of course use data on ethnolinguistic fractionalization from sources other than the WVS. We refrain

from doing here so for two reasons. First, using the same data source makes the two indices, cultural and ethnolinguistic
fractionalization, more easily comparable. Second, we later analyze the overlap between culture and ethnicity. For that we
need to use ethnolinguistic identity and cultural values at the individual level, from the same source.
15

Table A5 in the Appendix presents the underlying values country by country.

16

4.2

The Overlap Measures

Figure 3 shows a map of the

2

index for all countries in our database, and Table 3 Panel A reports

summary statistics. Several observations are in order. First,

2

takes on low average values, indicating

that the relative di¤erence between the within-group heterogeneity and the overall heterogeneity is small
(the mean value of
2,

in

2

in our sample of 76 countries is 0:029). However, there is substantial variation

with Asia (especially South Asia and Southeast Asia) and Sub-Saharan Africa displaying high

values, while Europe, Russia and Latin America display relatively low values. Notable data points with
high

2

values include India, Thailand and Zambia. Countries with low values include Japan, Russia,

Poland and Italy. These patterns closely mirror those uncovered in Section 2. The regions where ethnicity
could signi…cantly predict responses to survey questions about values, norms and preference are the same
regions where the overlap measures take on higher values.16 These patterns help to explain why cultural
diversity and ethnic diversity are uncorrelated, even though ethnic identity helps predict a large share of
answers to questions on cultural attitudes: most of the heterogeneity is within groups.
Second, the ranking of countries is very similar across both the

2

and FST measures (Table 3, Panel

B). The correlation between the two is 0:981 (and so is the Spearman rank correlation). This gives us
con…dence, despite very di¤erent functional forms, that these two measures capture common features
of the data regarding the overlap between ethnicity and culture. In particular, the drawback of FST
identi…ed above does not seem very relevant empirically, since
2

is not subject to the drawback. As with

2,

2

and FST are very highly correlated, and

the mean value of FST is low: the share of between-group

variance in cultural attitudes relative to the overall variation is 0:012. A similar result is well-known
in population genetics, where within-group variation in genetic characteristics swamps between-group
variation (Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994).
Third, although the overlap values are small, one could ask the question: “small relative to what?”.
To compare these values to a benchmark, we recompute

2

and FST , but now take the groups to be the

di¤erent countries, rather than the di¤erent ethnicities within countries. We …nd values for

2

and FST of

0:162 and 0:074. These numbers are about six times larger than the ones we found before. Focusing on the
FST measure, 7:4 percent of the cultural heterogeneity in the world is between countries, whereas only 1:2
percent is between ethnic groups within countries.17 Even the country with the highest between-ethnic
16

In fact, if you consider, for each country in our sample, the share of WVS/EVS questions for which ethnicity dummies

are jointly signi…cant predictors of individual responses, and correlate this share across countries with our measures of

2

and FST , you obtain correlations of 0:73 and 0:77, respectively. These high correlations exist despite the vastly di¤erent
methodologies used in Section 2 and Section 4 to capture the degree of overlap between culture and ethnicity.
17

The results are consistent with the average cultural FST across neighboring countries reported by Bell, Richerson and

McElreath (2009). In fact, their reported FST (0:08) is remarkably close to ours (0:074). Our results are also in line with
those in Fischer and Schwartz (2010), where the authors also use surveys of values to analyze the variability of answers both
within and across nations using the Interclass Correlation Index, a measure closely related to FST .

17

group FST , India, has a lower value than the one observed between countries.
Fourth, reinforcing cleavages have a weak, positive correlation with cultural fractionalization. From
2

Table 3 Panel B, the correlation between

and cultural fractionalization is 0:219 (this correlation is

statistically signi…cant at the 10% level). The corresponding number for FST is 0:179 (this correlation
is not statistically signi…cant at the 10% level). An example of this positive correlation is Malaysia, a
country that is culturally heterogeneous (CF = 0:563) and where knowing someone’s identity is relatively
informative about that individual’s culture (

2

= 0:092). But other examples show the lack of a strong

relationship. Germany is culturally heterogeneous (CF = 0:576), but has a low

2

(

2

= 0:009).

Fifth, as expected, reinforcing cleavages are stronger in countries that are more ethnically diverse.
The correlation between

2

and ethnolinguistic fractionalization is 0:620 (statistically signi…cant at 1%);

and the corresponding …gure for FST is the same. This positive correlation can also be perceived by
comparing Figure 3 with Figure 2. Ethnolinguistically diverse countries such as India, Philippines or
Ethiopia also tend to have high levels of

2

or FST .

Finally, we investigate the correlates of our overlap measures. Table 4 displays the quantitative
magnitudes of the simple correlations of a set of country characteristics and our two overlap measures.
We …nd interesting descriptive patterns. Consistent with results in Section 2,
East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, and it is lower in Latin America.

2

2

is higher in South Asia,

is also higher in countries with

English legal origins, partly re‡ecting these spatial patterns. Per capita income is negatively associated
with

2,

as is latitude, indicating that poorer countries tend to display more overlap between culture and

ethnicity. Thus, economic development severs the link between ethnicity and cultural values. Among
variables describing the prevalence of various religions, only the percentage of Catholics is signi…cantly
(and negatively) correlated with
2

2,

although it is hard to disentangle this correlation from the fact that

is lower in Latin America than elsewhere.18

4.3

Breakdown of the Measures by Question Category and Type

One concern with our exercise so far is that we are calculating our measures on a broad and diverse
set of questions re‡ecting possibly di¤erent facets of culture. This was done to avoid arbitrarily picking
questions from which to calculate our measures, instead letting the World Values Survey itself de…ne the
universe of values, preferences and norms under consideration. However, some questions may have to do
with preferences over public policies, others with attitudes toward family, others with social trust, etc.
The patterns identi…ed above could be very di¤erent when looking at di¤erent categories of questions. For
instance, the degree of correlation between CF and ELF might be higher for some question categories.
18

One might think that our overlap measures may be picking up segregation: countries with higher levels of segregation

may have a greater overlap between culture and ethnicity. Using the data on ethnic, linguistic and religious segregation from
Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011), we indeed …nd positive correlations, but they are not statistically signi…cant.

18

Similarly, the ratio of between-group heterogeneity to overall heterogeneity could vary. We are also
concerned about the degree to which each question category yields measures that are correlated across
categories: for instance, is the degree of overlap between ethnicity and answers to questions pertaining
to identity highly correlated with overlap measures calculated for other question categories? If this is the
case, we can be more certain that results based on the broadest set of questions is representative of a
general pattern. If not, we can learn interesting facts about various dimensions of heterogeneity across
question categories.
We therefore calculated our measures separately for each of the question categories identi…ed by the
WVS/EVS (these are labeled A through G), and across question types (binary, scale, and unordered
response questions). The results are reported in Panels C through G of Table 3. In panel C we …nd,
on average, a higher degree of cultural heterogeneity (CF ) for questions related to public policy such as
relating to the environment and on politics and society (categories B and E), and lower heterogeneity for
questions relating to perceptions of life (category A). Re‡ecting results in Section 2, we also …nd a higher
degree of overlap between ethnicity and culture (

2)

for questions relating to religion and morale (category

F) and national identity (category G), relative to other categories. However, FST and

2

continue to

take on small magnitudes; for instance FST is comprised in a tight band between 1% and 1:7% across
categories. Despite these di¤erences, there is a remarkable degree of consistency in the magnitudes of
our heterogeneity measures across categories. Turning to correlations across categories, in Panel D we
…nd that there is substantial heterogeneity in patterns of CF obtained from di¤erent question categories.
The correlations are usually positive, except for question categories with few questions (such as category
G) where the measures could be more volatile due to imperfect measurement. On the other hand, there
2

is a much more substantial degree of correlation of
0:7

across categories, with correlations usually in the

0:9 range. To summarize, CF displays patterns that di¤er across categories,
We also examined the correlations between CF , ELF , FST and

2

2

less so.

category by category. The corre-

lation between ELF and CF , which was zero when CF was calculated across all questions, di¤ers across
categories. The correlation remains low in magnitude, varying between

0:26 (category F) and 0:30 (cat-

egory A), yet we do …nd a weak positive correlation between ethnic and cultural heterogeneity measures
for categories of questions re‡ecting perceptions of life and politics and society. All the other correlations
are negative, contrary to the view that ethnic heterogeneity "captures" cultural heterogeneity. We also
…nd that

2

and FST continue to be highly correlated with each other, category by category.

In addition to looking at di¤erent question categories, we also analyzed di¤erent question types - i.e.
whether a question admits binary answers, answers on an ordered scale, or multiple unordered responses.
Panel C reports some level di¤erences in CF and

2

across these types. Cultural fractionalization is

higher for unordered response questions and scale questions, compared to binary questions. This is not
surprising: when given more possible answers, measured heterogeneity tends to increase. For the overlap
measures, the FST are very similar across question types (on the order of 1%), whereas the
19

2

measures

are higher for scale and unordered response questions. Overall, focusing on binary questions has several
2

advantages. First, when questions have only two answers, FST and

are identical.19 Second, with

scaled questions one could argue that the distance between possible answers should be taken into account
when calculating heterogeneity metrics - no such concern exists for questions that have only two possible
answers. Third, there is some advantage in focusing exclusively on a subset of questions with the same
number of possible answers, since this avoids heterogeneity varying simply because of di¤erences in the
number of answers. Thankfully, our results are robust to focusing only on binary questions. For instance,
Panels F and G of Table 3 show that the correlation between ELF and CF is close to zero no matter the
question type. Moreover, the correlation between

2

and FST is above 0:98 for the scale and unordered

response questions, so the high correlation between our two overlap measures is not driven simply by the
inclusion of binary questions, for which they are identical.
Since we are interested in the general relation between culture and ethnicity, it is sensible not to
cherry-pick questions. However, many papers on the cultural determinants of economic outcomes focus
on a small set of questions that are deemed meaningful a priori, rather than taking a comprehensive
approach by focusing on the broad set of questions, as we do. To assess whether our main …ndings would
di¤er if we were to exclusively focus on a limited number of questions that have commonly been used
in the literature, we take nine questions relating to family values, child qualities, trust and beliefs.20 As
can be seen in Panel C and Panel H of Table 3, this does not change any of the main results. In fact,
it reinforces the …nding that ethnolinguistic diversity is not a good proxy for cultural fractionalization:
the correlation between ELF and CF is now negative, standing at

0:222. In addition, the correlation

between CF , when using the limited set of questions, and CF , when using all questions, is positive and
statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. This suggests that our results are not speci…c to our comprehensive
approach.
19

When questions have more than two possible answers, the equivalence of FST and

2

breaks down (although empirically

the two continue to be extremely highly correlated). In addition, when there are more than two possible answers,
longer bounded by 1. Normalizing

2

2

is no

so it does not exceed 1 would require dividing it by the minimum of the number of

answers and the number of ethnic groups. Since our theory provides no foundation for this normalization, we refrain from
it.
20

To be precise, the nine questions are: 1) Questions on family ties, used in Alesina and Giuliano (2013): a001 (family

important in life), a025 (respect and love for parents), a026 (parents’ responsibilities to their children). 2) Questions on
important child qualities, used in Tabellini (2010): a030, a035, a038, a042 (hard work, tolerance and respect for other people,
thrift, obedience). 3) Generalized trust, used in Algan and Cahuc (2010), among many others: a165 (most people can be
trusted). 4) Belief in hell, used in Barro and McCleary (2003): f035 (belief in hell).

20

5

Culture, Ethnicity and Civil Con‡ict

In this section we examine the relationship between our various measures of diversity and civil con‡ict, to
illustrate the possible uses of our measures. There remains a debate on whether ethnolinguistic diversity
in fact a¤ects civil con‡ict. Results seem to depend on which measures of diversity are used: using
fractionalization, Fearon and Laitin (2003) …nd little evidence of an e¤ect on con‡ict onset. Collier and
Hoe- er (2004), using a measure of social fractionalization that combines ethnic and religious dimensions,
…nd evidence that greater diversity reduces the probability of a civil war. In contrast, using a measure
of ethnic polarization, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005) …nd that it has a signi…cantly positive e¤ect
on civil war incidence. Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012), using di¤erent measures of diversity jointly,
found that they were signi…cantly associated with civil con‡ict. Of particular note, a recent paper by
Huber and Mayoral (2013) examines the role of income inequality between and within ethnic groups as
a determinant of civil con‡ict, …nding that within-group inequality a¤ects con‡ict positively. Our paper
shares with theirs a decomposition of overall di¤erences between and within ethnic groups, and also
uses survey data. However, the application is very di¤erent as their paper is interested in within- and
between-ethnic group income inequality, as opposed to cultural di¤erences.21
How might ethnolinguistic diversity a¤ect civil con‡ict in our framework? First, ethnolinguistically
heterogeneous societies may have more diverse preferences and values, leading to increased overall antagonism in society. Second, ethnolinguistic fractionalization may matter per se because of direct animosity,
hatred or barriers between di¤erent ethnolinguistic groups. Third, civil con‡ict may arise more frequently
when ethnic divisions and cultural di¤erences reinforce each other. To evaluate which of these channels
operates most strongly, we introduce measures of these three dimensions of heterogeneity simultaneously
in regressions explaining civil con‡ict. If the …rst explanation is valid, then cultural fractionalization
(CF ) should a¤ect civil con‡ict. If the second explanation is valid, then ethnolinguistic fractionalization
(ELF ) should matter. Finally, if the third explanation is valid, then the

5.1

2

(or FST ) should matter.

Data and Speci…cation

In our application, the aforementioned contributions to the study of civil con‡ict constitute the methodological starting point. Following the literature, we de…ne a dummy variable Cct equal to 1 if country
o
c experiences a civil war in year t (to explore con‡ict incidence). We also de…ne a separate dummy Cct

equal to 1 if in a given year a country experiences the onset of a new civil war (to study onset only). We
relate these outcomes to our three sets of measures of diversity, CF , ELF and
Cct =
21

0

+

1 CFc

+

2 ELFc

+

2
3 c

+

0

4 Zct

2

(or FST ):

+ "ct

The functional forms are also di¤erent as they use a decomposition of the Gini index, not fractionalization.

21

(17)

where Zct is a vector of control variables commonly used in the literature. In particular, we use an
expansive set of controls very close to the ones used in Fearon and Laitin (2003), Esteban, Mayoral
and Ray (2012) and Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg (2012). These include a variety of geographic
variables, lagged per capita GDP, as well as lagged con‡ict, legal origins, and dummy variables for major
geographic regions. These controls include most of the variables that were shown to be predictors of CF ,
2

and FST . Hence, any e¤ect of, for example,

2

on the probability of con‡ict is not proxying for the

e¤ects of these correlates.
The data on civil con‡ict and the control variables come from Fearon and Laitin (2003). In this
database, a country is coded as being in a civil con‡ict when the con‡ict overall killed over 1; 000 people,
with an average of at least 100 deaths a year and at least 100 deaths on both sides of the con‡ict. As
an alternative source of data we use a database from the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO), which
has been used in recent contributions (for instance, Esteban, Mayoral and Ray, 2012, and Huber and
Mayoral, 2013). There, a civil war is de…ned as "a contested incompatibility that concerns government
and/or territory where the use of armed force between two parties, of which at least one is the government
of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths." We also use a more stringent threshold of 1; 000
battle related deaths. When looking at con‡ict incidence, in our sample of countries, the correlation
between PRIO25 and the Fearon-Laitin variable is 0:69, while the correlation between PRIO1000 and the
Fearon-Laitin variable is 0:47 (the correlation between PRIO25 and PRIO1000 is 0:51).

5.2

Results

The results are reported in Tables 5 through 8. In Table 5 we examine the determinants of civil con‡ict
incidence, introducing cultural fractionalization, ethnolinguistic fractionalization and
and then jointly (columns 1 through 4). We …nd that, when introduced individually,

2,

…rst individually
2

is a signi…cant

predictor of con‡ict incidence (at the 1% level), and this continues to be the case when all three measures
are introduced jointly. In fact in that case the logit marginal e¤ect of

2

becomes twice as large (column

4): it is equal to 0:870. That implies that a one standard deviation change in

2

(equal to 0:025) raises

the probability of con‡ict by 2:175 percentage points. The baseline probability of being in a civil con‡ict
is 14:173% in the sample for this regression, so the standardized e¤ect of

2

amounts to about 15% of the

probability of con‡ict. Our interpretation of this result is that ethnic divisions matter for civil con‡ict,
but only when they overlap with cultural cleavages.
Another notable result from Table 5 is that cultural fractionalization (CF ) tends to reduce the
incidence of civil wars (even when controlling for several variables previously found to be correlates
of CF , such as democracy, per capita income and region dummies). In column 4, the marginal e¤ect
of CF is

0:391. The standard deviation of CF is 0:037, which means that a one standard deviation

increase in CF is associated with a 10% reduction in the probability of con‡ict. One interpretation of

22

this …nding is that cultural diversity is the sign of a society that is tolerant of a multiplicity of values
and preferences, and this tolerance reduces the incidence of civil con‡ict. A related interpretation is
that cultural diversity is the sign of a society that embraces modernity more generally, and modernity
is not fully captured by the included controls that correlate with CF . Ethnolinguistic fractionalization
is insigni…cant, and has an unstable sign across speci…cations, although it tends to bear a negative sign
when all measures of heterogeneity are entered together (columns 4-6). In columns (5) and (6) of Table
5 we add legal origins and GDP growth and its lag to the baseline speci…cation, with little e¤ect on the
estimates on

2

and CF . None of these results change much when using probit rather than logit.22

Table 6 breaks down these results by question category and type. In Panel A we see that the baseline
results are quite robust across categories: CF enters negatively in 6 of the 7 categories, although the
overall results appear to have been driven mostly by questions on perceptions of life and religion and
morale since CF based on other categories is not statistically signi…cant. Results for

2

are stronger,

with this variable entering with a signi…cantly positive sign for 5 of the 7 categories (for one of the
remaining categories, questions on the environment,

2

is based on only 4 questions, and may therefore

be a noisy measure). Overall these results suggest considerable robustness in the pattern of coe¢ cients
across question category, and also allow us to determine what categories of questions are important to
draw the overall inferences. In Panel B we also see robustness with respect to question type. As expected
the results are strongest for binary and scale questions, but

2

enters positively and signi…cantly in all

three cases.

5.3

Endogeneity of CF and

2

As in most of the literature on civil con‡ict, we have so far treated our heterogeneity measures as
exogenous to con‡ict. As long as we limit attention to ethnolinguistic fractionalization, and include a
suitably expansive set of controls, this can be justi…ed as ethnolinguistic fractionalization is very timepersistent and is unlikely to change very much as a result of con‡ict. The same cannot necessarily be
said of cultural heterogeneity and the overlap of culture and ethnicity. The experience of civil wars can
lead people to change their values and preferences, and respond di¤erently to questions from the World
Values Survey. This in turn can lead measures of cultural diversity such as CF to change as a result
of con‡ict (though it is not clear a priori in what direction, hence the sign of the endogeneity bias is
22

Moreover, Table A4 looks at the determinants of civil war onset. The results are very much in line with those for

incidence. Of course, con‡ict onset is a much rarer event than con‡ict incidence, with the percentage of country-year
observations featuring the onset of a civil war being equal to 1:780%. Given this fact, the marginal e¤ect of
onset is found to be 0:175, implying that a one standard deviation increase in

2

2

on con‡ict

reduces the probability of civil war onset

by 25%, a sizeable e¤ect. On the other hand, while it is still negative, the e¤ect of cultural diversity on con‡ict onset is
generally not signi…cant at the 5% level. Finally, the e¤ect of ethnolinguistic fractionalization continues to be insigni…cant,
in line with results on civil war onset in Fearon and Laitin (2003).

23

not clear). Similarly, civil war, especially when there is an ethnic component, can change the salience
of ethnic identity, leading ethnic groups to adopt values and attitudes that di¤er more than they did
prior to the war, or on the contrary can lead the victor to impose their values and preferences on the
vanquished, therefore a¤ecting the degree of overlap between ethnicity and culture (again in an ambiguous
direction).23 This could be a problem particularly in our setting as the questions from the World Values
Survey used to characterize preferences and values are from survey waves from 1981 to 2008, while our
main civil war dataset (from Fearon and Laitin, 2003) covers 1945 to 1999. We already partly address
this problem in the regressions shown so far as we adopt a dynamic speci…cation for the incidence of civil
wars, i.e., we include a term for lagged civil war on the right-hand side of the speci…cation, in keeping
with the usual practice in the literature (see in particular Fearon and Laitin, 2003, p. 84 and Esteban,
Mayoral and Ray, 2012, p. 1318). Since civil war incidence is highly autocorrelated, this purges CF and
2

of much of their variation attributable to past wars.
To deal with any remaining endogeneity, we adopt a three-pronged approach. First, we focus on

questions that display a high degree of persistence in cultural fractionalization across waves, and are thus
less likely than other questions to respond endogenously to external events such as civil wars. For each
question i, country c and WVS wave w, consider cultural fractionalization CFicw . For each question i
and each country c we compute the coe¢ cient of variation of CFicw across waves w, and average this
coe¢ cient of variation across countries for each question i. This gives a measure of persistence for each
question i. We then remove from consideration every question with a coe¢ cient of variation in excess
of 0:1, which leaves us with about 60% of the questions used previously - the ones with the most time
persistent value of CFicw . We reran our baseline speci…cation (the one in column 4 of Table 5) with CF
and

2

computed from this restricted set of questions. The results are presented in column (1) of Table 7.

The signs of our main e¤ects remain the same, namely CF a¤ects con‡ict negatively (albeit the e¤ect is
no longer statistically signi…cant at the 5% level) and

2

a¤ects con‡ict incidence positively and remains

signi…cant at the 5% level. The magnitude of the e¤ect falls slightly in standardized terms, with a one
standard deviation increase in

2

associated with a 10% increase in the probability of con‡ict.

Our second approach is to limit our sample to the post-1970 period. The idea is that if endogeneity
were a strong concern, we should …nd di¤erent results in this subsample compared to the full sample. The
argument could take various forms. On the one hand, if we limit attention to wars that occur closer to
the date when we observe values, there is perhaps greater potential for recent wars to a¤ect values, and
then in turn cultural diversity and

2.

On the other hand, if the lag with which war may a¤ect values is

substantial, by focusing on a recent sample, values may not yet have had time to change, and therefore
CF and

2

may not yet have changed in response to civil war. In either case, if reverse causality were

a concern we would observe di¤erent estimates of the e¤ect of CF and
23

This is a prevalent theme in constructivist approaches to ethnicity.

24

2

in the post-1970 sample and

in the whole sample. Column (3) of Table 7 presents the results, which are almost unchanged compared
to the baseline regression of Column 4 of Table 5. Indeed, the standardized e¤ect of

2

stands equal to

the one previously calculated, at 15%. The standardized e¤ect of CF on the probability of civil war also
remains equal to

10%. These results have the added advantage of showing the stability and robustness

of our estimated e¤ects to the sample period under consideration.
Out third approach is a variation on the previous one. Here, we limit attention to respondents born
before 1950 and to the post-1970 sample. The e¤ects could once again go in a variety of directions, but
the argument is again that the estimates would be di¤ erent if endogeneity were a big concern. On the
one hand, if respondents’values are formed in early adulthood and change little after that, since every
respondent in the sample would be at least 20 years old in the event of a civil war, their cultural values
may respond less than younger individuals to the event of a war. On the other hand, if one’s view was
that these individuals were the most likely to be a¤ected by a civil war because they were most likely to
be combatants or to be a¤ected by the war in adult age, their values may be most likely to be a¤ected
by the war. Either way, war would a¤ect values, and therefore potentially CF and

2

also (although,

again, in unknown directions). Column (4) of Table 7 presents the results, but once again we …nd very
little evidence of a di¤erent e¤ect of cultural diversity and
e¤ects of these two variables are, respectively,

2

on the probability of war: the standardized

9% and 13%, close to those in column (4) of Table 5.

While we do not want to place too much weight on any one of these tests in isolation, taken together
they do suggest that our main results are remarkably stable when looking only at the post-1970 sample,
when looking only at respondents born before 1950, and when including only questions for which questionby-question cultural diversity CFi is most stable across survey waves. Under reverse causality, if war had
a strong causal e¤ect on CF or

2,

we would have expected estimates under each of these modi…cations

to di¤er from the baseline. They do not di¤er materially.

5.4

Robustness Checks

In Table 8, we carry out a series of additional robustness tests. First, we estimate our baseline regression
using FST rather than

2

as the measure of overlap between culture and ethnicity (column 1). The

results do not change in any substantive way, as expected because FST is so highly correlated with
The standardized e¤ect of FST is 16% while the e¤ect of CF is

2.

10%. Second, we change our data source

for civil wars to data from PRIO. With the 25 battle deaths threshold (column 2), we …nd a standardized
e¤ects of

2

and CF that are much larger than in our baseline (respectively 27% and

20%). With

the 1; 000 battle deaths threshold (not reported here) the corresponding e¤ects stand at 14% and

10%,

respectively, very similar to the baseline. We conclude that the signs and signi…cance of the estimated
e¤ects are not sensitive to changes in the de…nition of a civil war.
In an additional robustness check, we focus on di¤erent sets of questions. We start by expanding

25

the number of questions included to calculate our measures of cultural diversity and overlap to those
that were asked in at least 30 countries, rather than the more stringent criterion of 50 countries used
previously. This expands the set of questions used in our calculations, at the cost of greater heterogeneity
across countries in the set of questions. The results appear in column (3) of Table 8. Reassuringly,
nothing changes much: the standardized e¤ects of

2

and CF are largely unchanged at 17% and

9%,

respectively.24 We next go the opposite way, and focus on a small set of nine questions often used in the
literature on culture and economics (the questions are those listed in footnote 20). Again, the results,
reported in column (4), are unchanged. This greatly increases our con…dence that our results do not
depend on the set of questions used to calculate cultural diversity and overlap.
As a last robustness check, we add linguistic polarization in our baseline regression.25 Montalvo and
Reynal-Querol (2005) have argued that polarization is an important predictor of civil con‡ict. As can be
seen in column (5), polarization is not statistically signi…cant when all other measures of heterogeneity
are also included. When comparing the coe¢ cients on our three variables of interest to those of column
(4) in Table 5, they are essentially identical. Taken together, the di¤erent robustness checks suggest
that our main …ndings continue to stand: neither ethnolinguistic heterogeneity nor cultural heterogeneity
increase the probability of con‡ict, but when culture and ethnicity reinforce each other, then con‡ict
becomes more likely.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we studied the complex relationship between ethnicity and culture, de…ned as a vector of
answers to a broad set of questions about norms, values and preferences. We uncovered novel results.
First, ethnicity does serve to signi…cantly predict cultural attitudes, to an extent that varies across
geographic regions. Second, the share of variation in culture that is explained by ethnicity is very small.
As a result, cultural diversity, de…ned as the average probability that two randomly chosen individuals
respond di¤erently to a question from the World Values Survey, is not correlated with ethnic diversity.
Thus, ethnic fractionalization cannot readily be taken as a proxy for diversity in values, attitudes and
preferences. Third, we derived and calculated several new indices measuring the extent of overlap between
culture and ethnicity, stemming from a simple model of social antagonism. These measures display
interesting geographic variation, with the degree of overlap being greatest in Sub-Saharan Africa and
Asia, and smallest in Latin America. Fourth, as an application we used our new measures of cultural
diversity and overlap to study the determinants of civil con‡ict, …nding that ethnic fractionalization
has no predictive power for civil con‡ict, but that cultural diversity has, if anything, a pacifying e¤ect.
24

Reassuringly, the correlation in our sample of 76 countries between CF using the 50-countries threshold and CF using

the 30-countries threshold is very high - at 0:95. Similarly, the two versions of
25

2

bear a 0:99 correlation with each other.

The linguistic polarization measure comes from Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg (2012).

26

Our new measures of overlap between culture and ethnicity,

2

and FST , have a positive e¤ect on the

probability of civil con‡ict onset and incidence, indicating that ethnic divisions matter for con‡ict when
they are associated with cultural di¤erences across ethnic groups. Hence, we have identi…ed the degree
of overlap between culture and ethnicity as a new and robust determinant of civil con‡ict.
Our results parallel a famous debate in population genetics on within-group versus between-group
genetic di¤erentiation, going back to Lewontin (1972). Lewontin pointed out that between-race genetic
variation was a very small part of overall variation, and that within-group diversity accounted for a
much larger share of overall genetic variation. This led Lewontin to question the validity of the very
concept of race. In a series of rejoinders, Edwards (2003), Dawkins (2005) and others argued that while
between-group variation was small, it could still be a relevant part of the variation: humans share up to
99% of their DNA with some animals, yet the 1% that di¤ers matters a lot to set the two groups apart.
Lewontin’s point on genetics mirrors our …nding that between-ethnic group cultural variation is a small
part of overall cultural variation, and that most of this variation occurs within-groups. Edwards’ and
Dawkins’argument also …nds an echo in our work, since we argue that between-group variation, while a
small share of the overall variation, matters greatly for civil con‡ict.
The question we posed here is also related to a continuing debate in the social sciences as to whether
ethnic, linguistic and religious identities are "constructed" or re‡ect "primordial" di¤erences between
di¤erent groups of humans. Each of these traditions re‡ects a variety of viewpoints on the persistence of
ethnic and cultural identities and a wide range of theories on the factors that gave rise to both ethnic
and cultural di¤erentiation. However, drawing a stark distinction between these two broad categories
of views helps bring into focus a fundamental di¤erence separating them: the primordialist view holds
that ethnolinguistic divisions re‡ect deep di¤erences between humans, the result of historical separation
which allowed for cultural drift over centuries and millennia, so that the resulting ethnic divisions are
associated with stark and persistent di¤erences in culture, norms, values and preferences.26 In contrast,
constructivists view ethnic identities as the endogenous result of shifting patterns of power, some very
recent, so that the association between ethnic identity and cultural di¤erences, if there is one at all, would
be context-dependent, malleable, and ‡eeting.
Our paper provides evidence consistent with a synthesis of both views: ethnicity is indeed associated
with fundamental di¤erences in values, attitudes and preferences, in line with a primordialist viewpoint.
Moreover, to the extent that ethnic divisions matter for con‡ict, they only do so when they overlap
with cultural cleavages, once again a result with primordialist connotations. However, there are many
other sources of variation in culture, not associated with ethnic identity: the magnitude of our

2

and

FST indices tends to be small, indicating that the extent to which ethnicity is informative for culture
26

See the voluminous and growing literature on ethnic heterogeneity in economics, among which the recent paper by

Michalopoulos (2012) constitutes an excellent illustration of the primordialist orientation of the economics approach to
ethnicity.

27

is limited, a result that is more in line with the constructivist view. Moreover, some regions like Latin
America feature a weak degree of association between culture and ethnicity, while others like Sub-Saharan
Africa and Asia feature more overlap. The degree to which ethnic classi…cations re‡ect deep di¤erences
in cultural attitudes varies across regions, so the extent to which ethnic identities are primordially given
or constructed varies across locations. Future work should continue to study the complex relationship
between ethnicity and culture, a subject that had so far remained missing from the economics literature
on ethnic heterogeneity.

References
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005), "Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance," Journal of Economic
Literature, vol. 43, pp. 762-800.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir and W. Easterly (1999), "Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 1243-1284.
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat and R. Wacziarg (2003), "Fractionalization,"
Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 155-194.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2013), “Family Ties,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S.
Durlauf (eds.), North Holland, Elsevier.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano and N. Nunn (2013), "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 469-530.
Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos and E. Papaioannou (2012), "Ethnic Inequality," NBER Working Paper
#18512.
Alesina, A. and E. Zhuravskaya (2011), "Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross Section
of Countries," American Economic Review, vol. 101, no. 5, pp. 1872-1911.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2010), "Inherited Trust and Growth," American Economic Review, vol. 100 no.
5, pp. 2060-92.
Arbatli, C. E., Q. Ashraf and O. Galor (2013), "The Nature of Civil Con‡ict," working paper, Brown
University.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013), "The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development," American Economic Review, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 1-46.
Barro, R. and R. McCleary (2003), "Religion and Economic Growth across Countries", American Sociological Review, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 760-781.
Bell, A., P. J. Richerson and R. McElreath, (2009) "Culture Rather than Genes Provides Greater Scope
for the Evolution of Large-Scale Human Prosociality," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 17671-17674.
Bossert, W., C. D’Ambrosio and E. La Ferrara (2011), "A Generalized Index of Fractionalization,"
Economica, vol. 78, no. 312, pp. 723-750.
28

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi and A. Piazza (1994), The History and Geography of Human Genes,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Central Intelligence Agency (2009), The World Factbook 2009, Washington, DC: CIA, 2009.
Collier, P. and A. Hoe- er (2004), "Greed and Grievance in Civil War," Oxford Economic Papers, vol.
56, no. 4, pp. 563-595.
Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas (2006), Elements of Information Theory, Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
Cramér, H. (1946), Mathematical Methods of Statistics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dawkins, R. (2005), The Ancestor’s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Evolution, New York: Houghton
Mi- in Harcourt.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín and R. Wacziarg (2012), "The Political Economy of Linguistic Diversity,"
Journal of Development Economics, vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 322-338.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (1997), "Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 112, no. 4, November, pp. 1203-1250.
Edwards, A. W. F. (2003), "Human Genetic Diversity: Lewontin’s Fallacy," BioEssays, vol. 25, no. 8,
pp. 798-801.
Esteban, J. M., and D. Ray (1994), "On the Measurement of Polarization," Econometrica, vol. 62, no.
4, pp. 819-851.
Esteban, J. M., and D. Ray (2004), "Polarization: Concepts, Measurement, Estimation," Econometrica,
vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 1737-1772.
Esteban, J., L. Mayoral and D. Ray (2012), "Ethnicity and Con‡ict: An Empirical Study," American
Economic Review, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 1310-1342.
Fearon, J. and D. Laitin (2003), "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War," American Political Science
Review, vol. 97, no. 1, February, pp. 75-90.
Fearon, J. (2003), "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country", Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 8, no.
2, June, pp. 195-222.
Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli (2009), “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 146–177.
Fischer, R. and S. Schwartz (2010), "Whence Di¤erences in Value Priorities? Individual, Cultural, or
Artifactual Sources," Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1–18.
Giuliano, P. (2007), "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?" Journal
of the European Economic Association, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 927-952.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2009), "Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?" Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 1095-1131.
Huber, J. D. and L. Mayoral (2013), "Inequality, Ethnicity and Civil Con‡ict," Barcelona GSE Working
Paper, no. 744.
29

Jakobsson, M., M. D. Edge and N. A. Rosenberg, (2013), "The Relationship Between FST and the
Frequency of the Most Frequent Allele," Genetics, vol. 193, pp. 512-528.
Jost, L. (2008), "GST and Its Relatives Do Not Measure Di¤erentiation," Molecular Ecology, vol. 17, no.
18, pp. 4015-4026, September.
Lewontin, R. (1972), "The Apportionment of Human Diversity," Evolutionary Biology, vol. 5, pp. 381–
398
Luttmer, E. F. P., and M. Singhal (2011), "Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, vol. 3, no. 1 pp. 157-79.
Meirmans P. G. and P. W. Hedrick (2011) "Assessing Population Structure: FST and Related Measures,"
Molecular Ecology Resources, vol. 11, pp. 5-18.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012), "The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity," American Economic Review, vol.
102, no. 4, pp. 1508–1539.
Montalvo, J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005), "Ethnic Polarization, Potential Con‡ict and Civil War,"
American Economic Review, vol. 95, no. 3, June, pp. 796-816.
Nei, M (1973) "Analysis of Gene Diversity in Subdivided Populations," Proceedings of the National
Academic of Sciences, USA, vol. 70, pp. 3321-3323.
Rae, D. W. and M. Taylor (1970), The Analysis of Political Cleavages, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Ross R. M., S. J. Greenhill and Q. D. Atkinson (2013), "Population Structure and Cultural Geography
of a Folktale in Europe," Proceedings of the Royal Society B, vol. 280.
Selway, J. (2010) "Cross-Cuttingness, Cleavage Structures and Civil War Onset," British Journal of
Political Science, vol. 41, pp. 111–138.
Selway, J. (2011) "The Measurement of Cross-Cutting Cleavages and Other Multidimensional Cleavage
Structures," Political Analysis, vol. 19, pp. 48-65.
Spolaore E. and R. Wacziarg (2009), "The Di¤usion of Development," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 124, no. 2, May, pp. 469-529.
Spolaore E. and R. Wacziarg (2013), "War and Relatedness," working paper, UCLA and Tufts University.
Tabellini, G. (2010), "Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,"
Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 677-716.
Workman, P. L. and J. D. Niswander (1970), "Population Studies on Southwestern Indian Tribes. II.
Local Genetic Di¤erentiation in the Papago," American Journal of Human Genetics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp.
24–49.
Wright, S. (1949). "The Genetical Structure of Populations," Annals of Human Genetics, vol. 15, pp.
323–354.
Wright, S. (1978), Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, Volume 4: Variability Within and Among
Natural Populations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

30

Table 1 – Joint Significance of Ethnolinguistic Dummies in Questions from the World Values /
European Values Integrated Surveys, by Region
Share of
R2
regressions w/
R2 with
without
jointly
ethnic
R2
ethnic
significant
dummies
dummies
ethnic dummies
Whole Sample
21,469
0.430
2.688
4.074
1.386
Africa
3,623
0.548
2.468
4.064
1.597
Of which: Sub-Saharan Africa
2,724
0.616
2.369
4.274
1.905
Of which: North Africa
899
0.344
2.766
3.430
0.663
Europe
7,769
0.373
3.045
4.144
1.099
Of which: Western and Southern Europe
2,369
0.313
3.567
4.399
0.832
Of which: Eastern and Central Europe
5,400
0.399
2.816
4.032
1.215
Asia
5,656
0.571
2.360
4.519
2.159
Of which: East and Southeast Asia
2,090
0.626
2.161
4.614
2.452
Of which: South Asia
852
0.667
2.899
6.363
3.463
Of which: Southwestern and Central Asia
1,511
0.479
2.223
3.391
1.168
Of which: Middle East
1,203
0.525
2.494
4.464
1.971
America
3,749
0.235
2.480
3.188
0.708
Of which: North America
741
0.513
3.157
4.075
0.918
Of which: Latin America and Caribbean
3,008
0.166
2.313
2.970
0.656
Oceania
672
0.342
3.669
4.509
0.840
Note: North America is defined here as Canada and the US. Mexico is included with Latin America and the
Caribbean. R2 is expressed in % terms.
# of
regressions

Table 2 - Joint Significance of Ethnolinguistic Dummies in Questions from the World Values /
European Values Integrated Surveys, by Question Category and Question Type

# of
regressions

Share of
regressions
with jointly
significant
ethnic
dummies

R2
without
ethnic
dummies

R2 with
ethnic
dummies

Breakdown by Question Category
A: Perceptions of Life
4,382
0.425
3.270
4.618
B: Environment
971
0.427
2.185
3.640
C: Work
2,409
0.398
2.404
3.546
D: Family
1,319
0.445
3.240
4.599
E: Politics and Society
9,046
0.409
2.407
3.717
F: Religion and Morals
2,316
0.516
3.268
5.043
G: National Identity
1,026
0.495
1.801
3.682
Breakdown by Question Type
Binary questions
4,551
0.426
2.854
4.248
Binary from unordered response questions
7,029
0.362
1.616
2.707
Scale questions
9,889
0.479
3.373
4.965
Note: This result does not change if you break it down by continent: there is little difference in shares of
questions with significant ethnolinguistic dummies when the breakdown by category is done continent by
continent. R2 is expressed in % terms.
31

R2

1.347
1.454
1.143
1.359
1.310
1.775
1.881
1.394
1.091
1.592

Table 3 – Summary Statistics for the Main Indices of Ethnic Heterogeneity,
Cultural Diversity, FST and .
Panel A: Summary Statistics
Mean
0.5291
Cultural Fractionalization
0.3896
ELF
0.0116
FST

0.0291

(Summary statistics based on 76 observations)

Standard
Deviation
0.0366
0.2584
0.0110
0.0254

Minimum

Maximum

0.4273
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.6024
0.8517
0.0588
0.1281

Panel B: Correlations
Cultural
Fractionalization
1

ELF

Cultural
Fractionalization
-0.0303
1
ELF
0.1787
0.6198**
FST
0.2191
0.6203**

(** Significant at the 1% level; correlations based on 76 observations)

FST



1
0.9813**

1

Panel C: Means of CF, FST and  by Question Category and Type
Cultural
FST
Fractionalization
Breakdown by Question Category
SECTION A: PERCEPTIONS OF LIFE
0.4137
0.0117
SECTION B: ENVIRONMENT
0.5955
0.0106
SECTION C: WORK
0.5493
0.0111
SECTION D: FAMILY
0.5156
0.012
SECTION E: POLITICS AND SOCIETY
0.6122
0.0106
SECTION F: RELIGION AND MORALE
0.5254
0.0143
SECTION G: NATIONAL IDENTITY
0.5777
0.0172
Breakdown by Question Type
BINARY
0.3548
0.0125
UNORDERED RESPONSE QUESTIONS
0.5740
0.0120
SCALE
0.5970
0.0108
Restricted Set of 9 Questions Used in Literature
9 QUESTIONS FROM LITERATURE
0.3454
0.0109

32


0.0196
0.0261
0.0264
0.0275
0.0311
0.0434
0.0468
0.0125
0.0262
0.0368
0.0125

Panel D: Correlations among Cultural Diversity and by Question Category
CF
Overall

0.4320
CF Category A
0.3858
CF Category B
0.7321
CF Category C
0.5957
CF Category D
0.7568
CF Category E
0.8559
CF Category F
-0.0091
CF Category G
(Based on 76 observations)

Overall

CF A

CF B

CF C

CF D

CF E

CF F

1
0.1400
0.1847
0.1219
0.3015
0.0771
-0.1324

1
-0.0397
0.3717
0.2767
0.2535
0.2337

1
0.2825
0.5652
0.6178
-0.3535

1
0.4767
0.4917
0.4105

1
0.4817
-0.1039

1
0.0740

 A

 B

 D

 E

 C

 F

0.9671
1
 Category A
0.7654
0.7163
1
 Category B

0.7978
0.7376
0.9228
1
 Category C
0.9206
0.9152
0.6849
0.6605
1
 Category D

0.9775
0.9183
0.7764
0.8075
0.8943
1
 Category E
0.9413
0.9031
0.6434
0.6812
0.8251
0.8755
1
 Category F

0.6317
0.5552
0.4493
0.4195
0.6637
0.6336
0.5535
 Category G
(Based on 76 observations)
Question categories are defined as follows: A: Perceptions of Life (42 questions); B: Environment (4
questions); C: Work (25 questions); D: Family (12 questions); E: Politics and Society (59 questions); F:
Religion and Morale (30 questions); G: National Identity (3 questions).

Panel E: Correlations among Cultural Diversity and by Question Type
CF Binary
CF Scale
CF Unordered

CF All
0.5988
0.9184
0.6032

CF Binary
1
0.5588
0.4672

CF Scale
1
0.507

 All
 Binary
 Scale
0.9442
1
 Binary
0.9958
0.9304
1
 Scale

0.9535
0.9299
0.9372
 Unordered
Binary: 38 questions; unordered response questions: 26 questions; scale: 100 questions

33

Panel F: Correlations between Diversity Measures by Question Category
Correlations with
Cultural
ELF
FST
Fractionalization
Question Category A
0.2958
1
ELF
0.4646
0.5643
1
FST
0.4570
0.5769
0.9859

Question Category B
-0.1176
1
ELF
-0.2786
0.5561
1
FST

-0.2277
0.5611
0.9891

Question Category C
-0.0333
1
ELF
0.1331
0.6232
1
FST
0.3019
0.5557
0.8898

Question Category D
-0.0715
1
ELF
0.0726
0.6291
1
FST
0.0863
0.6429
0.9769

Question Category E
0.1650
1
ELF
0.1981
0.6196
1
FST

0.2308
0.6367
0.9834

Question Category F
-0.2552
1
ELF
-0.0135
0.4767
1
FST
0.1193
0.4764
0.8922

Question Category G
-0.2210
1
ELF
-0.0126
0.4298
1
FST
0.1368
0.3587
0.9126

(Based on 76 observations)
Question categories are defined as follows: A: Perceptions of Life (42
questions); B: Environment (4 questions); C: Work (25 questions); D: Family
(12 questions); E: Politics and Society (59 questions); F: Religion and Morale
(30 questions); G: National Identity (3 questions).

34

Panel G: Correlations between Diversity Measures by Question Type
Cultural
ELF
FST
Fractionalization
Binary Response Questions
0.1345
1
ELF
0.2455
0.5506
1
FST
0.2556
0.5556
1

Unordered Response Questions
-0.2816
1
ELF
-0.0222
0.5422
1
FST

-0.0359
0.5671
0.9818

Scale Response Questions
0.1107
1
ELF
0.2674
0.6313
1
FST

0.2869
0.6260
0.9860

Binary: 38 questions; unordered response questions: 26 questions; scale: 100 questions

Panel H: Correlations between Diversity Measures for Restricted Set of 9 Questions

ELF
FST


Cultural
ELF
Fractionalization
Restricted Set of 9 Questions Used in Literature
-0.2215
1
0.0222
0.5508
-0.0225
0.5856

35

FST

1
0.9688

Table 4 – Correlations of Different Variables with CF, FST and 

ELF
Linguistic Diversity (Alesina et al., 2003)
Ethnic Diversity (Alesina et al., 2003)
Religious Diversity (Alesina et al., 2003)
Percentage Protestant
Percentage Catholic
Percentage Muslim
Absolute Latitude
Area
Roughness
Log Population 1990-2010
Log GDP per Capita 1990-2010
Sub-Saharan Africa
Middle East & North Africa
Europe & Central Asia
South Asia
East Asia & Pacific
North America
Latin America & Caribbean
Democracy
UK Legal Origin
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
Scandinavian Legal Origin
Ethnic segregation
Linguistic segregation
Religious segregation
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Cultural
Fractionalization
-0.0303
0.0184
-0.0781
0.3143**
0.2122
0.2578**
-0.5968**
0.1804
0.0971
0.0254
-0.1437
0.3819**
0.0831
-0.5286**
0.2670*
-0.2624*
-0.0264
0.1261
0.1118
0.5862**
0.0796
-0.1589
0.0592
0.1005
-0.2503
-0.2076
-0.2137

36

FST
0.6198**
0.5609**
0.3611*
0.0815
-0.0573
-0.2847*
0.0997
-0.3178*
-0.0787
0.0145
0.0581
-0.2644*
0.1664
-0.0682
-0.1577
0.2919*
0.2022
-0.0390
-0.2363*
-0.1414
0.4231*
-0.2190
-0.1351
-0.1245
0.1884
0.0668
0.2183


0.6203**
0.5785**
0.3824**
0.0864
-0.0436
-0.2643*
0.0821
-0.3547**
-0.0823
-0.0067
0.0751
-0.2869*
0.2342*
-0.0937
-0.1880
0.2630*
0.2193*
-0.0549
-0.2296*
-0.1491
0.4430**
-0.2258
-0.1582
-0.1050
0.2065
0.0581
0.1869

Table 5 - Incidence of Civil Conflict and Diversity
(Dependent Variable: Incidence of Civil Conflict)

Cultural
Fractionalization
Ethnolinguistic
Fractionalization
Chi Square
Lagged War
Log Lagged GDP
per capita
Log Lagged Population
% Mountainous Terrain
Non Contiguous
Oil
New State
Instability
Democracy Lagged
(Polity 2)
Latin America
and Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and Southeast
Asia
UK Legal Origin

(1)
Incidence
-0.187
[-1.60]

(2)
Incidence

(3)
Incidence

0.019
[1.09]

0.860**
[30.66]
-0.005
[-0.90]
0.011**
[3.69]
0.000*
[2.53]
0.025
[1.61]
0.020
[1.56]
0.200*
[2.14]
-0.009
[-1.00]
0.001
[0.90]
0.017
[0.98]
0.022
[0.90]
-0.008
[-0.68]

0.472**
[2.74]
0.864**
[33.33]
-0.007
[-1.47]
0.013**
[4.33]
0.000*
[2.34]
0.015
[1.16]
0.025
[1.80]
0.240*
[2.36]
-0.009
[-1.00]
0.000
[0.20]
0.018
[0.99]
0.000
[0.02]
-0.017*
[-2.25]

0.868**
[33.74]
-0.008
[-1.74]
0.012**
[3.98]
0.000*
[2.34]
0.017
[1.27]
0.021
[1.50]
0.222*
[2.29]
-0.009
[-0.94]
0.000
[0.56]
0.007
[0.48]
0.001
[0.05]
-0.010
[-1.12]

French Legal Origin
Socialist Legal Origin
GDP Growth

(4)
Incidence
-0.391**
[-3.33]
-0.037
[-1.77]
0.870**
[3.82]
0.840**
[27.88]
0.003
[0.62]
0.012**
[4.18]
0.000**
[2.60]
0.026
[1.60]
0.022
[1.62]
0.210*
[2.14]
-0.009
[-1.08]
0.000
[0.49]
0.058
[1.92]
0.051
[1.53]
-0.016
[-1.86]

(5)
Incidence
-0.472**
[-3.49]
-0.041
[-1.88]
0.992**
[4.00]
0.840**
[26.28]
0.005
[0.98]
0.015**
[4.32]
0.000
[1.84]
0.025
[1.61]
0.014
[1.34]
0.255*
[2.16]
-0.010
[-1.03]
0.001
[0.75]
0.042
[1.54]
0.064
[1.53]
-0.017
[-1.84]
0.009
[0.26]
0.032
[0.97]
0.010
[0.30]

(6)
Incidence
-0.417**
[-3.65]
-0.035
[-1.78]
0.840**
[3.96]
0.833**
[25.78]
0.003
[0.78]
0.011**
[4.32]
0.000*
[2.02]
0.025
[1.54]
0.015
[1.33]
0.143*
[2.11]
-0.010
[-1.34]
0.000
[0.47]
0.066*
[1.99]
0.060
[1.65]
-0.015
[-1.86]

-0.119**
[-3.50]
GDP Growth Lagged
-0.003
[-0.08]
Observations
2,921
2,921
2,921
2,921
2,705
2,850
Pseudo R-squared
0.752
0.752
0.754
0.758
0.754
0.771
Logit estimation, based on at most 69 countries from 1945 to 1999, standard errors clustered at country level.
The columns report marginal effects.
Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
37

Table 6 - Incidence of Civil Conflict and Diversity, by Question Category and Type
(Dependent Variable: Incidence of Civil Conflict)

Panel A – By Question Category
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
(42q)
(4q)
(25q)
(12q)
(59q)
(30q)
(3q)
Cultural
-0.200
0.025
-0.062
-0.123
-0.135
-0.119**
-0.035
Fractionalization
[-1.88]
[0.40]
[-1.06]
[-1.11]
[-0.91]
[-3.35]
[-1.38]
Ethnolinguistic
-0.016
0.021
0.011
-0.034
-0.028
-0.007
-0.000
Fractionalization
[-0.96]
[1.22]
[0.49]
[-1.60]
[-1.38]
[-0.44]
[-0.01]
Chi Square
0.756**
-0.009
0.075
0.843** 0.687** 0.394**
0.202*
[3.02]
[-0.07]
[0.60]
[3.29]
[3.26]
[3.19]
[2.47]
Observations
2,971
2,925
2,971
2,921
2,971
2,971
2,916
Pseudo R-squared
0.757
0.760
0.753
0.756
0.756
0.759
0.755
Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Logit estimation, based on 68 countries from 1945 to 1999, standard errors clustered at the country level. The
columns report marginal effects.
All columns include controls for lagged war, log lagged GDP per capita, log lagged population, %
mountainous terrain, non-contiguous country dummy, oil dummy, new state dummy, instability dummy,
democracy lagged (Polity 2), Latin America and Caribbean dummy, Sub-Saharan Africa dummy, East and
Southeast Asia dummy.
Question categories are defined as follows: A: Perceptions of Life (42 questions); B: Environment (4
questions); C: Work (25 questions); D: Family (12 questions); E: Politics and Society (59 questions); F:
Religion and Morale (30 questions); G: National Identity (3 questions).

Panel B – By Question Type
Binary
Scale
Unordered
(38q)
(100q)
(26q)
Cultural
-0.249**
-0.257*
-0.058
Fractionalization
[-2.73]
[-2.01]
[-0.58]
Ethnolinguistic
-0.011
-0.021
-0.017
Fractionalization
[-0.63]
[-1.04]
[-0.90]
Chi Square
1.257**
0.562**
0.585*
[4.59]
[2.95]
[2.57]
Observations
2,971
2,971
2,925
Pseudo R-squared
0.759
0.757
0.762
Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Logit estimation, based on 68 countries from 1945 to 1999, standard errors clustered at the country level. The
columns report marginal effects.
All columns include controls for lagged war, log lagged GDP per capita, log lagged population, %
mountainous terrain, non-contiguous territory dummy, oil dummy, new state dummy, instability dummy,
democracy lagged (Polity 2), Latin America and Caribbean dummy, Sub-Saharan Africa dummy, East and
Southeast Asia dummy.
38

Table 7 – Endogeneity of Chi-Square and Cultural Fractionalization
(Dependent Variable: Incidence of Civil Conflict)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Persistent
Non-Persistent
Post-1970
Post-1970
Questions
Questions
Cohort < 1950
Cultural
-0.222
-0.241**
-0.504**
-0.358**
Fractionalization
[-1.49]
[-3.87]
[-2.64]
[-2.74]
Ethnolinguistic
-0.014
-0.022
-0.022
-0.017
Fractionalization
[-0.76]
[-1.26]
[-0.64]
[-0.66]
Chi Square
0.458*
0.697**
1.071**
0.370**
[2.21]
[3.65]
[2.60]
[2.65]
Observations
2,677
3,078
1,785
1,636
Pseudo R-squared
0.758
0.758
0.793
0.796
Logit estimation, standard errors clustered at country level. The columns report marginal effects.
Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
All columns include controls for lagged war, log lagged GDP per capita, log lagged population, %
mountainous terrain, non-contiguous territory dummy, oil dummy, new state dummy, instability dummy,
democracy lagged (Polity 2), Latin America and Caribbean dummy, Sub-Saharan Africa dummy, East and
Southeast Asia dummy.

Table 8 – Robustness Tests
(Dependent Variable: Incidence of Civil Conflict)

Cultural
Fractionalization
Ethnolinguistic
Fractionalization
Overlap measurea

(1)

(2)

FST

PRIO25

-0.361**
[-3.20]
-0.038
[-1.85]
2.021**
[4.34]

-0.894**
[-3.27]
-0.058
[-1.34]
1.683**
[4.41]

(3)
Broader Set
Questions
-0.323**
[-2.80]
-0.035
[-1.66]
0.855**
[3.71]

(4)

(5)

9 Questions

Polarization

-0.387**
[-3.13]
-0.037
[-1.80]
0.864**
[3.61]
Polarization
0.003
[0.13]
Observations
2,921
2,834
2,921
3,078
2,921
Pseudo R-squared
0.758
0.591
0.757
0.756
0.758
Logit estimation, based on at most 69 countries from 1945 to 1999, standard errors clustered at country level.
The columns report marginal effects. Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
a: FST in column (1), Chi-square in all other columns.
All columns include controls for lagged war, log lagged GDP per capita, log lagged population, %
mountainous terrain, non-contiguous territory dummy, oil dummy, new state dummy, instability dummy,
democracy lagged (Polity 2), Latin America and Caribbean dummy, Sub-Saharan Africa dummy, East and
Southeast Asia dummy.

39

-0.217**
[-2.79]
-0.030
[-1.63]
1.293**
[3.45]

Figure 1: Cultural Fractionalization (CF)

Missing
0-0.47
0.47-0.52
0.52-0.55
0.55-0.58
More than 0.58

Figure 2: ELF

Missing
0-0.16

0.16-0.35
0.35-0.55
0.55-0.7

More than 0.7

Figure 3: Chi-Square

Missing

0-0.0125

0.0125-0.025
0.025-0.05
0.05-0.075

More than 0.075

40

Appendix to Culture, Ethnicity and Diversity
by Klaus Desmet, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín and Romain Wacziarg
February 2015
Appendix 1 - Ethnicity and Culture in Other Surveys
1. Afrobarometer.
We conduct an analysis similar to that in Section 2 using the 4th wave of Afrobarometer (2008).
The wave covers 20 Sub-Saharan African countries. There are 182 questions on values, norms and
preferences in this survey, 7 admitting a binary response, 155 where the response is on an ordered
scale and 20 which admit more than two unordered responses. These 20 questions were converted
into a set of 117 binary questions in the same way as was done for the WVS/EVS, resulting in
a total of 279 available questions for us to analyze. A speci…city of Afrobarometer is that most
questions were asked in every country, so there is little heterogeneity in the set of questions used
(the mean number of questions asked in each of the 20 surveyed countries is 271, with a standard
deviation of 5).
For ethnic identity, we relied entirely on the classi…cation provided by Afrobarometer (variable
Q79: "What is your tribe or ethnic group?"). The number of ethnic groups varies by country,
ranging from 5 to 38. Finally, the regression speci…cation includes as controls the respondent’s age
(Q1), gender (Q101) and present living conditions (Q4B) as a proxy for income (no measures of
human capital or direct measures of income are available).
Results obtained using the Afrobarometer survey are presented in Appendix Table A2. Con…rming results for Sub-Saharan Africa from the WVS/EVS, the share of questions for which ethnicity
signi…cantly predicts responses is high, on average 57% (versus 62% in the WVS/EVS). This average
masks interesting variation across countries. Some countries like South Africa and Nigeria display
very high shares (88% and 91%, respectively), while some small countries such as Lesotho and
Cape Verde display much smaller shares (respectively 10% and 20%).1 Interestingly, the results for
1

For Lesotho, the ethnic nomenclature provided by Afrobarometer is at the level of clans. Lesotho is considered

by ethnographers to be a very ethnically homogeneous country (99:7% of the population belongs to the Sotho ethnic
group, according to the CIA World Factbook, 2009). This homogeneity is re‡ected in the fact that di¤erent clans
do not seem to di¤er much in terms of values, norms and preferences. Despite the questionable ethnic classi…cation

41

South Africa and Nigeria mirror those from the WVS/EVS, where the corresponding shares were
88% and 84%, despite di¤erent survey questions, ethnic nomenclature, methods and samples.
2. Latinobarómetro.
We also use the Latinobarómetro, which covers Latin American countries. The survey asks a
question on ethnic identity only since 2007, so we are constrained to using waves for 2007, 2008, 2009
and 2010, covering 18 countries. The survey classi…es questions into categories, and we focus on the
categories that refer to values, opinions, and preferences. Among those, however, a few questions
about the factual situation of the respondent crept in, and we removed them from consideration.
We ended up with 231 binary response questions, 358 questions for which the response is on an
ordered scale, and 19 questions with more than two unordered response categories. The latter were
transformed into a series of 96 binary response questions, as before. We ended up with a total of
685 usable questions. As was the case for the Afrobarometer, the availability of questions across
countries did not vary much. The average country had 678 questions (with a standard deviation of
less than 2).
Ethnic identity is as de…ned by Latinobarómetro, and represents a classi…cation very similar to
the one we used for Latin American countries in the WVS/EVS. There are seven ethnic categories,
corresponding to the respondent’s race (the variable coding ethnicity is named A505206). The
categories are Asian, Black, Indigenous, Mestizo, Mulatto, White and other race. The regression
speci…cation includes ethnic dummies, sex (S01), age (S02), education (S51) and socioeconomic
level (S62) as a proxy for income.
Results obtained using the Latinobarómetro survey are presented in Appendix Table A3. The
share of questions for which ethnicity dummies are jointly signi…cant correlates of answers is 32:5%.
As in the WVS/EVS survey, this average does not seem to vary much across question categories or
question type (although, as before, the share is slightly smaller for binary questions created from
underlying unordered multiple response questions). There appears to be only limited variation
across countries. Argentina displays the lowest share in this sample (17:8%) while the Dominican
Republic displays the largest (60%), but most shares are comprised in a tight band between 20%
and 40%. The relatively low share obtained with Latinobarómetro is in line with results obtained
previously using the WVS/EVS.
proposed for Lesotho by the Afrobarometer, we chose to leave this country in our sample. Excluding Lesotho from the
Afrobarometer sample raises the average share of regressions where ethnicity signi…cantly predicts culture to 59:4%.

42

Appendix 2 - Theoretical Derivations
A. Proof that

v = CF:

We start with the de…nition of the level of antagonism of an individual of type k when only cultural
di¤erences matter:

q

1X
wi;
q

vk = 1

(1)

(k;i)

i=1

Summing over types and taking the population-weighted average:
!
q
K
X
1X
nk
v=
1
wi; (k;i)
:
q
n

(2)

i=1

k=1

To operationalize this measure of cultural antagonism, notice that (2) can be written as:
!
q
q
K
K
X
1X
1 XX
1
v=
wi; (k;i) wk = 1
wi; (k;i) wk :
q
q
i=1

k=1

i=1 k=1

Next, note that:
K
X

wi;

(k;i) wk

=

r(i)
X

X

wi;

(k;i) wk

=

j=1 k: (k;i)=j

k=1

r(i)
X

X

wij

j=1

wk =

r(i)
X

2
wij
:

j=1

k: (k;i)=j

Thus, v becomes the following easy-to-calculate index of cultural fractionalization (CF ):
0
1
r(i)
q
X
X
1
2A
@1
wij
:
CF =
q
i=1

B. Proof that

(3)

j=1

v = ELF:

We start with the de…nition of the level of antagonism of an individual of type k when only ethnic
di¤erences matter:
ws(k) :

vk = 1

(4)

Social antagonism, v, is the average of this probability over all individuals:
v=

K
X

ws(k) )wk :

(1

(5)

k=1

It is easy to see that this is just the traditional index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization. Indeed,
we have:
v=

K
X
k=1

(1

w

s(k)

)wk = 1

S
X
X

w

s(k)

wk = 1

s=1 k:s(k)=s

S
X
s=1

43

w

s

X

k:s(k)=s

wk = 1

S
X
s=1

(ws )2 :

(6)

Hence, v in this case becomes the common ELF index of ethnic fractionalization:
S
X

ELF = 1

(ws )2 :

(7)

s=1

C. Proof that
2

Recall that the

2:

v=

index is given by:
r(i)

2

q
S
s )2
1 X X X ws (wij wij
q
wij

=

i=1 s=1 j=1

We also have:
s(k)
(k;i)

q
K
X
1 X wi;

v=

k=1

q

i=1

wi;

wi;

s(k)

(k;i)

(k;i)

q
K
1 X X wi; (k;i) wi;
wk =
q
wi; (k;i)

(k;i)

wk

i=1 k=1

Thus, it is enough to show that:
s(k)
(k;i)

K w
X
i;
k=1

wi;

wi;

(k;i)

wk =

(k;i)

r(i)
S X
X
ws (wij

s )2
wij

wij

s=1 j=1

; for all i = 1; 2; :::; q

(8)

For each question i = 1; 2; :::; q the right-hand term in (8) can be written as:
r(i)
S X
X
ws (wij
s=1 j=1

s )2
wij

wi;j

=

r(i)
S X
X
ws (wij

s )(w
wij
ij
wij

s=1 j=1

=

r(i)
S X
X

s

w (wij

s
wij
)

=

s

w wij

s=1 j=1

=

(9)

r(i)
S X
s (w
X
ws wij
ij

r(i)
S X
X

w

s

r(i)
S X
s (w
X
ws wij
ij

s
wij

s=1 j=1

r(i)
S X
s (w
X
ws wij
ij

s)
wij

(10)

wij

s=1 j=1

s=1 j=1

r(i)
S X
X

s)
wij

wij

s=1 j=1

s)
wij

(11)

s)
wij

wij

s=1 j=1

and the left-hand term in (8) can be written as:
s(k)
(k;i)

K w
X
i;
k=1

wi;

wi;

(k;i)

wk =

(k;i)

S
X
X

s(k)
(k;i)

wi;

wi;

s=1 k:s(k)=s

=

r(i)
S X
X

X

wi;

(k;i)

s(k)
(k;i)

wi;

wi;

s=1 j=1 k:s(k)=s; (k;i)=j

=

r(i)
S X
s
X
wij
s=1 j=1

44

wij
wij

wk

(12)

(k;i)

X

wi;
(k;i)

k:s(k)=s; (k;i)=j

wk

(k;i)

wk

Notice that

P

k:s(k)=s; (k;i)=j

wk is the population share of individuals who belong to ethnic group

s and give answer j, thus:

X

s
wk = ws wij

(13)

k:s(k)=s; (k;i)=j

and from (12) and (13) we have:
s(k)
(k;i)

K w
X
i;
k=1

wi;

wi;

(k;i)

wk =

(k;i)

r(i)
S X
s
X
wij
(
s=1 j=1

wij
wij

s
)ws wij
=

r(i)
S X
s (w
X
ws wij
ij

s)
wij

wij

s=1 j=1

Thus, equality (8) holds for all questions i.

Appendix 3 - Relationship Between 2 , FST and Conventional Measures of
Cross-Cuttingness.
Our proposed indices of overlap capture how much someone’s ethnolinguistic identity reveals
about his culture or preferences. High values imply that ethnolinguistic and cultural cleavages are
reinforcing, whereas low values imply that they are cross-cutting. Our indices are thus related to an
existing literature in political science concerned with the measurement of cross-cutting cleavages,
starting with Rae and Taylor (1970, chapter 4). In what follows we start by discussing the Rae
and Taylor measure of cross-cuttingness, and we then discuss the similarities and di¤erences with
our indices of overlap.
Consider two cleavages. In our terminology the …rst cleavage could refer to ethnicity and the
second to culture (de…ned on a single dimension for now - say on a generic question i from the
WVS). Assume there are S ethnic groups and r(i) cultural groups. Fractionalization on cleavage
1 is ELF and fractionalization on cleavage 2 is CFi , as previously de…ned. In Rae and Taylor’s
de…nition, if all those from a given ethnic group are also in a given cultural group, cleavages are
perfectly reinforcing. They de…ne cross-cutting XC as the "proportion of all pairs of individuals
whose two members are in the same group of one cleavage but in a di¤erent group of the other
cleavage" (p. 92), and show that, for a large enough population, we can write:
XCi =

r(i)
X
j=1

2
wij

+

S
X

s 2

(w )

2

r(i) S
X
X

s
ws wij

2

r(i) S
X
X

s
ws wij

2

= 2Fic

CFi

ELF;

(14)

j=1 s=1

s=1

where
Fic

=1

j=1 s=1

45

:

(15)

Heuristically, Fic is fractionalization computed over all groups de…ned by both ethnicity and culture
(so, for example, if S = 3 and r(i) = 4, there are 12 distinct groups de…ned by heterogeneity in
both ethnicity and the answer to question i): Fic measures the probability that two randomly
chosen individuals answer question i in a di¤erent way or belong to a di¤erent ethnic group.
It is a measure of fractionalization where belonging to a di¤erent ethnic group or to a di¤erent
cultural group de…nes di¤erent groups of individuals symmetrically, with the same weight.2 With
the de…nition above, it can be easily seen that XCi is indeed the probability that two randomly
chosen individuals in the population belong to the same group on one cleavage but to a di¤erent
group on the other cleavage. XCi can be averaged over questions i to obtain an overall index XC.
Intuitively, being a measure of cross-cutting cleavages, XC should be negatively correlated
with the

2

index (as well as FST ) which are measures of reinforcing cleavages. However, both

types of indices are quite di¤erent conceptually. This was already noted by Rae and Taylor (1970)
and further discussed in Selway (2010, 2011). To put the distinction in stark focus with a simple
example, consider the following distribution of individuals over two ethnicities and three possible
answers to a cultural question:
(Entries are # of people)

Here both

2

Answer 1

Answer 2

Answer 3

Ethnic group 1

2

2

2

Ethnic group 2

1

1

1

and FST are obviously zero: both groups have the same distribution of answers

as the population overall, and the share of between-group variance in total variance is zero (i.e.
there is no between-group variance). However, FiC is 0:815, ELF is 0:444 and CFi is 0:667, so that
2

XCi equals 0:518. As expected, a low value of

(or FST ) corresponds to a high value of XC.

When we double the size of ethnic group 1 proportionally for each possible answer, the values of
2

and FST are unchanged, as expected: they continue to be zero, since doubling the size of ethnic

group 1 does not a¤ect how informative ethnicity is about culture. In contrast, XCi increases
from 0:518 to 0:560, because the probability of two individuals sharing one cleavage but not the
other increases. As this example illustrates, XC is sensitive to changes in group sizes that are not
associated with changes in the degree to which ethnicity is informative about a person’s cultural
attitudes, the concept we have sought to capture in this paper so far. In fact, the example shows
that XC has di¤erent properties from
2

2,

an index that comes out directly from a simple model

In contrast ELF gives no weight to cultural heterogeneity while CFi gives no weight to ethnic heterogeneity.

46

of social antagonism. Nevertheless, for completeness, in the empirical section we also compute the
XC index, and while it will not be the focus of our analysis, we will brie‡y discuss its empirical
properties.
In addition to empirically analyzing

2

and FST , we also calculated the XC index of Rae and

Taylor (1970) using our data. The correlations of XC with
and

2

and FST were, respectively,

0:45. Moreover, when using XC in our con‡ict regressions, instead of

2

0:43

or FST , we found

that XC has a negative e¤ect on the probability of civil war, as expected, but was not robustly
signi…cant across speci…cations corresponding to those in Table 5. However, as already noted, XC
has very di¤erent properties from our proposed indices and does not come out of our model of
antagonism. Since we have only micro-founded the
mainly on

2

2

index in our theory, in the paper we focus

and FST (the latter being perhaps easier to interpret and very highly correlated with

2 ).

47

Appendix Table A1 - Joint Significance of Ethnolinguistic Dummies in Questions from the World
Values / European Values Integrated Surveys, Country by Country

Country
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Canada
Chile
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Egypt
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Great Britain
Guatemala
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Malaysia
Mali
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway

# of Regressions
/ Questions
350
287
285
274
405
272
256
274
346
282
267
282
396
349
277
271
271
226
274
281
403
193
398
287
254
198
291
398
365
242
160
81
235
287
273
273
345
276
281
406
401
386
267
320
285

Share of Regressions
with Jointly Significant
Ethnic Dummies
0.109
0.296
0.379
0.255
0.437
0.665
0.141
0.336
0.676
0.106
0.352
0.585
0.639
0.186
0.650
0.059
0.089
0.624
0.701
0.712
0.231
0.233
0.445
0.206
0.748
0.369
0.210
0.990
0.770
0.603
0.825
0.642
0.149
0.551
0.407
0.282
0.739
0.699
0.306
0.259
0.546
0.215
0.199
0.838
0.225
48

R2
0.209
0.724
1.081
0.368
0.828
1.748
0.389
0.581
1.700
0.438
0.937
1.844
1.130
0.451
3.279
0.304
1.961
0.843
3.148
2.024
0.511
1.053
0.819
0.405
2.014
1.432
0.241
6.256
2.083
0.929
3.499
2.431
0.635
1.731
2.145
0.483
3.777
3.521
1.381
0.495
1.414
0.513
0.858
1.410
0.281

# of Ethnic
Groups
3
4
5
4
7
10
4
5
4
5
4
9
3
6
5
4
6
5
3
8
5
6
12
5
6
7
2
16
9
9
5
2
7
4
11
2
6
15
9
6
6
6
6
5
2

Share of Regressions
# of Ethnic
Country
with Jointly Significant
R2
Groups
Ethnic Dummies
Pakistan
198
0.697
1.824
8
Peru
245
0.269
0.784
7
Philippines
290
0.617
3.420
20
Poland
277
0.061
0.211
3
Puerto Rico
271
0.089
0.572
6
Romania
266
0.147
0.543
5
Russian Federation
322
0.522
0.611
4
Saudi Arabia
208
0.418
1.594
11
Serbia
276
0.370
1.401
7
Singapore
217
0.705
2.836
6
Slovakia
271
0.421
1.120
5
Slovenia
279
0.090
0.382
4
South Africa
447
0.884
2.004
12
Spain
431
0.548
1.140
5
Sweden
287
0.220
0.988
7
Switzerland
240
0.575
1.743
5
Taiwan
371
0.337
0.723
5
Tanzania
290
0.190
0.392
3
Thailand
287
0.976
5.064
7
Trinidad and Tobago
278
0.237
0.852
6
Turkey
280
0.493
1.306
5
Uganda
289
0.346
2.647
9
Ukraine
395
0.565
0.874
3
United States
345
0.368
0.675
6
Uruguay
398
0.106
0.486
6
Venezuela
217
0.078
0.523
6
Viet Nam
284
0.342
0.226
2
Zambia
280
0.782
3.481
18
Note: Using an alternative, more restricted set of questions, we find these shares to be remarkable stable. The
correlation between the two series is 98.84%, despite using only half the questions, and leaving out the
transformed multinomial questions.
Note that some countries have very small numbers because of a lopsided distribution of respondents across
ethnic groups. Examples include Czech Republic, Poland, Slovenia, where there are few groups and a very
small number of respondents in some groups.
# of Regressions
/ Questions

49

Appendix Table A2 - Afrobarometer: Overall Results and Breakdown by Country
Share of Jointly
# of Ethnic
Significant
Groups
Ethnic Dummies
Overall Sample
5,427
0.569
Binary response questions
138
0.522
Binary from unordered multiple response questions
2,200
0.441
Scale response questions
3,089
0.662
Benin
273
0.733
13
Botswana
273
0.505
24
Burkina Faso
273
0.509
22
Cape Verde
252
0.198
11
Ghana
271
0.609
25
Kenya
273
0.700
21
Lesotho
273
0.095
31
Liberia
268
0.463
16
Madagascar
273
0.692
21
Malawi
273
0.429
16
Mali
273
0.645
20
Mozambique
266
0.590
20
Namibia
273
0.546
20
Nigeria
277
0.906
31
Senegal
273
0.374
10
South Africa
272
0.879
14
Tanzania
272
0.647
38
Uganda
273
0.908
26
Zambia
273
0.516
31
Zimbabwe
273
0.403
13
th
Notes: 20 countries. Based on data from the 4 Afrobarometer wave only (2008).
Breakdown question category not available for this dataset; Afrobarometer does not break down questions
into categories.
Regression specification includes ethnic dummies, age (Q1), present living conditions (Q4B) as a proxy for
income, and gender of respondent (Q101).
# of
Regressions

50

Appendix Table A3 - Latinobarometer: Overall Results and Breakdown by Question Category,
Question Type and Country
# of Regressions

Share of Jointly
Significant
Ethnic Dummies
0.325

Across All Questions and Countries:
12,210
Breakdown by Question Category:
A: Democracy, Participation, Social Values, Trust
6,546
0.327
B: Public Policies, Corruption, Labor
3,497
0.326
C: Economics, Development, Entrepreneurship
1,099
0.354
D: Means of Communication
852
0.285
E: Political Developments
216
0.292
Breakdown by Question Type:
Binary
4,132
0.309
Scale
6,350
0.367
Binary from Unordered Multiple Response Questions
1,728
0.213
Breakdown by Country
Argentina
679
0.178
Bolivia
682
0.453
Brazil
677
0.236
Colombia
680
0.228
Costa Rica
676
0.249
Chile
677
0.297
Ecuador
680
0.415
El Salvador
679
0.432
Guatemala
680
0.296
Honduras
678
0.355
Mexico
679
0.199
Nicaragua
679
0.247
Panama
678
0.289
Paraguay
676
0.408
Peru
680
0.334
Uruguay
675
0.215
Venezuela
677
0.427
Dominican Republic
678
0.600
Notes: 18 countries. This is based on 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 waves of Latinobarometro, the only available
waves where the ethnicity question was asked.
Regression specification includes ethnic dummies, sex (S01), age (S02), respondent education (S51) and
socioeconomic level (S62) as a proxy for income.

51

Appendix Table A4 - Onset of Civil Conflict and Diversity
(Dependent Variable: Onset of Civil Conflict)

Cultural
Fractionalization
Ethnolinguistic
Fractionalization
Chi Square
Lagged War
Log Lagged GDP
per capita
Log Lagged Population
% Mountainous Terrain
Non Contiguous
Oil
New State
Instability
Democracy Lagged
(Polity 2)
Latin America
and Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and Southeast
Asia
UK Legal Origin

(1)
Onset
-0.024
[-0.62]

(2)
Onset

(3)
Onset

0.005
[0.94]

-0.006**
[-3.13]
-0.005*
[-2.49]
0.003**
[3.55]
0.000**
[2.94]
0.005
[1.08]
0.021**
[2.80]
0.075*
[1.98]
0.008*
[2.00]
0.000
[0.42]
-0.001
[-0.20]
-0.002
[-0.40]
-0.001
[-0.23]

-0.006**
[-3.22]
-0.005**
[-3.17]
0.003**
[3.79]
0.000**
[2.74]
0.004
[0.94]
0.021**
[2.73]
0.077*
[1.99]
0.008*
[2.04]
0.000
[0.26]
-0.002
[-0.47]
-0.004
[-1.19]
-0.001
[-0.17]

French Legal Origin
Socialist Legal Origin
GDP Growth

0.088
[1.82]
-0.007**
[-3.27]
-0.004**
[-2.85]
0.003**
[4.06]
0.000**
[2.92]
0.004
[0.92]
0.025**
[2.96]
0.080*
[2.01]
0.008*
[2.05]
-0.000
[-0.04]
-0.001
[-0.17]
-0.003
[-1.00]
-0.001
[-0.53]

(4)
Onset
-0.075
[-1.56]
-0.009
[-1.11]
0.175*
[2.05]
-0.007**
[-3.32]
-0.003
[-1.50]
0.003**
[3.69]
0.000**
[2.97]
0.006
[1.06]
0.024**
[2.79]
0.074
[1.91]
0.008
[1.93]
0.000
[0.02]
0.004
[0.44]
0.002
[0.33]
-0.002
[-0.55]

(5)
Onset
-0.120*
[-2.25]
-0.008
[-0.92]
0.254**
[2.95]
-0.008**
[-3.56]
-0.001
[-0.58]
0.004**
[3.70]
0.000
[1.73]
0.006
[1.15]
0.018**
[2.65]
0.081
[1.88]
0.009*
[2.10]
0.000
[0.41]
0.003
[0.36]
0.007
[0.77]
-0.003
[-1.00]
-0.006
[-0.75]
0.003
[0.26]
0.002
[0.17]

(6)
Onset
-0.090
[-1.91]
-0.008
[-1.11]
0.179*
[2.12]
-0.007**
[-3.05]
-0.002
[-1.14]
0.003**
[3.49]
0.000**
[2.77]
0.005
[1.01]
0.019*
[2.09]
0.060
[1.82]
0.006
[1.70]
0.000
[0.08]
0.006
[0.62]
0.003
[0.49]
-0.001
[-0.40]

-0.027*
[-2.30]
GDP Growth Lagged
-0.008
[-0.70]
Observations
2,921
2,921
2,921
2,921
2,705
2,850
Pseudo R-squared
0.147
0.148
0.153
0.158
0.157
0.165
Logit estimation, based on at most 69 countries from 1945 to 1999, standard errors clustered at country level.
The columns report marginal effects. Robust z statistics in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

52

Appendix Table A5 – Indices of Cultural Diversity, Ethnic Diversity and Overlap
Iso
Code

Country

ALB
DZA
AND
ARG
ARM
AUS
AZE
BGD
BLR
BIH
BRA
BGR
BFA
CAN
CHL
CHN
CYP
CZE
EGY
EST
ETH
FIN
FRA
GEO
GER
GHA
GBR
GTM
IND
IDN
IRN
IRQ
ITA
JPN
JOR
KGZ
LVA
LTU
MKD
MYS
MLI
MEX
MDA
MAR
NZL

Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bosnia Herzogovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Canada
Chile
China
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Egypt
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Great Britain
Guatemala
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Malaysia
Mali
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
New Zealand

Ethnolinguistic
fractionalization
(ELF)
0.0269
0.2639
0.6166
0.1313
0.0643
0.2441
0.2495
0.1507
0.3833
0.6261
0.5820
0.2955
0.6674
0.6256
0.1621
0.1356
0.5038
0.0071
0.6350
0.4862
0.6940
0.0531
0.1352
0.2502
0.0729
0.5820
0.1274
0.4093
0.8517
0.5956
0.6136
0.2960
0.0000
0.0043
0.4976
0.5860
0.5869
0.1697
0.4398
0.6528
0.4331
0.6426
0.3695
0.2235
0.0408

Cultural
fractionalization
(CF)
0.5239
0.4856
0.5409
0.5381
0.5244
0.5524
0.4930
0.4356
0.5257
0.5542
0.5632
0.5377
0.5427
0.5583
0.5650
0.4939
0.5830
0.5374
0.4299
0.5174
0.5453
0.5519
0.5825
0.4947
0.5760
0.5293
0.5728
0.5129
0.5655
0.4616
0.4998
0.4892
0.5574
0.5273
0.4273
0.5489
0.5302
0.5031
0.5428
0.5632
0.5657
0.5476
0.5450
0.4452
0.5379
53

FST

0.0017
0.0055
0.0103
0.0032
0.0038
0.0058
0.0152
0.0038
0.0064
0.0151
0.0052
0.0104
0.0208
0.0119
0.0042
0.0126
0.0306
0.0025
0.0070
0.0228
0.0195
0.0040
0.0086
0.0078
0.0028
0.0162
0.0090
0.0023
0.0588
0.0167
0.0080
0.0227
0.0000
0.0009
0.0066
0.0193
0.0173
0.0042
0.0344
0.0336
0.0128
0.0057
0.0108
0.0031
0.0065

Chi-Square

0.0055
0.0175
0.0267
0.0090
0.0112
0.0150
0.0363
0.0100
0.0155
0.0307
0.0132
0.0230
0.0588
0.0254
0.0118
0.0357
0.0688
0.0071
0.0156
0.0462
0.0576
0.0122
0.0294
0.0191
0.0093
0.0446
0.0278
0.0064
0.1281
0.0379
0.0211
0.0415
0.0000
0.0028
0.0165
0.0420
0.0469
0.0098
0.0674
0.0919
0.0360
0.0148
0.0282
0.0084
0.0227

Iso
Code

Country

NGA
NOR
PAK
PER
PHL
POL
PRI
ROM
RUS
SAU
SER
SGP
SVK
SVN
ZAF
KOR
ESP
SWE
CHE
TWN
TZA
THA
TTO
TUR
UGA
UKR
URY
USA
VEN
VNM
ZMB

Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Puerto Rico
Romania
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
Uruguay
USA
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zambia

Cultural
fractionalization
(CF)
0.4987
0.5394
0.4451
0.5234
0.5168
0.5443
0.5059
0.5229
0.5388
0.5082
0.5869
0.5099
0.5418
0.5469
0.5552
0.5518
0.5522
0.5438
0.5566
0.516
0.4651
0.5611
0.5325
0.5186
0.5166
0.5429
0.5437
0.5512
0.5454
0.5039
0.6024

Ethnolinguistic
fractionalization
(ELF)
0.7675
0.0661
0.7562
0.5767
0.7655
0.0199
0.6382
0.1387
0.4837
0.5148
0.1896
0.6778
0.1339
0.0559
0.8389
0.0000
0.2944
0.2277
0.6380
0.5394
0.2744
0.6979
0.6209
0.2041
0.8114
0.5018
0.1126
0.3359
0.6602
0.0814
0.8045

54

FST

0.0103
0.0028
0.0198
0.0081
0.0295
0.0021
0.0054
0.0049
0.0035
0.0137
0.0102
0.0321
0.0100
0.0020
0.0191
0.0000
0.0052
0.0086
0.0139
0.0089
0.0044
0.0495
0.0094
0.0092
0.0185
0.0062
0.0041
0.0067
0.0050
0.0016
0.0293

Chi-Square

0.0231
0.0092
0.0482
0.0219
0.0765
0.0060
0.0169
0.0145
0.0098
0.0345
0.0299
0.0629
0.0305
0.0062
0.0445
0.0000
0.0125
0.0277
0.0312
0.0203
0.0149
0.1218
0.0270
0.0253
0.0469
0.0135
0.0111
0.0169
0.0156
0.0043
0.0834

Appendix Table A6 – List of Questions Asked in at Least 50 Countries, by Category and Type
A: Perceptions of Life
Binary questions
a025
love and respect parents always/earned
a029
learn children at home: independence
a030
learn children at home: hard work
a032
learn children at home: feeling of responsibility
a034
learn children at home: imagination
a035
learn children at home: tolerance+respect
a038
learn children at home: thrift
a039
learn children at home: determination/perseverance
a040
learn children at home: religious faith
a041
learn children at home: unselfishness
a042
learn children at home: obedience
a124_01
don't like as neighbours: people with criminal record
a124_02
don't like as neighbours: people of different race
a124_03
don't like as neighbours: heavy drinkers
a124_04
don't like as neighbours: emotionally unstable people
a124_06
don't like as neighbours: immigrants/foreign workers
a124_07
don't like as neighbours: people with AIDS
a124_08
don't like as neighbours: drug addicts
a124_09
don't like as neighbours: homosexuals
a124_12
neighbours: people of a different religion
a165
people can be trusted/can't be too careful
Scale questions
a001
how important in your life: family
a002
how important in your life: friends and acquaintances
a003
how important in your life: leisure time
a004
how important in your life: politics
a005
how important in your life: work
a006
how important in your life: religion
a008
taking all things together how happy are you
a009
describe your state of health these days
a062
how often discuss politics with friends
a098
active/inactive membership of church or religious organization
a099
active/inactive membership of sport or recreation
a100
active/inactive membership of art, music or educational organization
a101
active/inactive membership of labour unions
a102
active/inactive membership of political party
a103
active/inactive membership of environmental organization
a104
active/inactive membership of professional organization
a105
active/inactive membership of charitable/humanitarian organization
a106
active/inactive membership of any other organization
a170
how satisfied are you with your life
a173
how much control over your life
Unordered response questions
a026
parents responsibilities to their children at expense of/not sacrifice own well-being

55

B: Environment
Scale questions
b001
environment: giving part of income
b002
environment: increase taxes to prevent environmental pollution
b003
environment: government should reduce environmental pollution
Unordered response questions
b008
protecting environment vs. economic growth
C: Work
Binary questions
c011
important in a job: good pay
c012
important in a job: not too much pressure
c013
important in a job: job security
c014
important in a job: respected job
c015
important in a job: good hours
c016
important in a job: use initiative
c017
important in a job: generous holidays
c018
important in a job: achieving something
c019
important in a job: responsible job
c020
important in a job: interesting job
c021
important in a job: meeting abilities
c059
fair/unfair: quicker secretary is paid more
Scale questions
c006
how satisfied with financial situation
c008
work compared with leisure
c036
job needed to develop talents
c037
humiliating receiving money without working
c038
people turn lazy not working
c039
work is a duty towards society
c041
work always comes first
Unordered response questions
c001
jobs are scarce: giving men priority
c002
jobs are scarce: giving...(nation) priority
c009
first choice if looking for a job
c010
second choice if looking for a job
c060
how should business and industry be managed
c061
follow instructions at work/must be convinced first
D: Family
Binary questions
d018
children need both parents to grow up happily
d019
women need children in order to be fulfilled
d022
marriage is outdated
Scale questions
d017
ideal size of a family
d054
one of main goals in life has been to make my parents proud
d055
make effort to live up to what my friends expect
d056
working mother warm relationship with children
56

d057
being housewife as fulfilling as paid job
d058
husband+wife contribute to household income
d059
men make better political leaders than women do
d060
university is more important for a boy than for a girl
Unordered response questions
d023
woman wants to have child as single parent without stable relationship with a man
E: Politics and Society
Binary questions
e128
country is run by big interest vs. for all people's benefit
Scale questions
e014
good/bad: less emphasis on money
e015
good/bad: decrease work importance
e016
good/bad: more emphasis on technology
e018
good/bad: more respect for authority
e019
good/bad: more emphasis on family life
e023
how interestedin politics
e025
political action: signing a petition
e026
political action: joining in boycotts
e027
political action: attending lawful demonstrations
e028
political action: joining unofficial strikes
e029
political action: occupying buildings/factories
e033
political view: left-right
e034
opinion on society
e035
equalize incomes vs. incentives for individual effort
e036
private vs. government ownership business
e037
individual vs. state responsibility for providing
e039
competition good vs. harmful for people
e040
hard work brings better life vs. doesn't bring success
e041
accumulate wealth at expense of others vs. enough for everyone
e069_01
how much confidence in: church
e069_02
how much confidence in: armed forces
e069_04
how much confidence in: the press
e069_05
how much confidence in: trade unions
e069_06
how much confidence in: the police
e069_07
how much confidence in: parliament
e069_08
how much confidence in: civil service
e069_10
confidence: television
e069_11
how much confidence in: government
e069_12
how much confidence in: political parties
e069_13
how much confidence in: major companies
e069_14
how much confidence in: environmental organizations
e069_15
confidence: the women´s movement
e069_17
how much confidence in: justice system
e069_20
how much confidence in: United Nations Organisation
e114
political system: strong leader
e115
political system: experts making decisions
e116
political system: the army ruling
e117
political system: democratic
57

e120
democracy: causes bad economy
e121
democracy: is indecisive
e122
democracy: cannot maintain order
e123
democracy: best political system
e124
how much respect for human rights nowadays
e125
satisfaction with the people in national office
Unordered response questions
e001
aims of this country: most important
e002
aims of this country: 2nd most important
e003
aims of respondent: first choice
e004
aims of respondent: second choice
e005
aims of respondent II: first choice
e006
aims of respondent II: second choice
e012
are you willing to fight for country
e022
scientific advances help/harm mankind
e135
who should decide: international peacekeeping
e136
who should decide: protection of the environment
e137
who should decide: aid to developing countries
e138
who should decide: refugees
e139
who should decide: human rights
e143
work: people from less developed countries
F: Religion and Morale
Binary questions
f024
do you belong to a religious denomination
f035
church answers to: moral problems
f036
church answers to: family life problems
f037
church answers to: spiritual needs
f038
church answers to: social problems
f050
do you believe in: god
f051
do you believe in: life after death
f052
do you believe in: a soul
f053
do you believe in: hell
f054
do you believe in: heaven
f064
do you get comfort and strength from religion
f065
do you take moments of prayer/meditation
Scale questions
f001
how often: think about meaning of life
f028
how often attend religious services
f063
how important is god in your life
f102
politicians and god
f103
religious leaders and influence voting
f104
religion and public office
f105
religious leaders and influence government decisions
f114
do you justify: claiming state benefits
f115
do you justify: avoiding fare on public transport
f116
do you justify: cheating on tax
f117
do you justify: accepting a bribe
f118
do you justify: homosexuality
58

f119
do you justify: prostitution
f120
do you justify: abortion
f121
do you justify: divorce
f122
do you justify: euthanasia
f123
do you justify: suicide
Unordered response questions
f034
are you a religious person
G: Nationality and Identity
Scale questions
g006
how proud are you to be a ... (country) citizen
Unordered response questions
g001
belong to geographic group - most
g002
belong to geographic group: next

59

