                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        REAL ESTATE AND THE
                       TAX REFORM ACT OF 1986




                       Patrjc H. Hendershott

                         James R. Foflian

                           David C. Ling




                      Working Paper No. 2098




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            December 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
                                                          program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors  3nd
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2098
                                               December 1986


                 Real Estate and the Tax Reform Act of 1986


                                  ABSTRACT


       In contrast to the convdntjonal wisdom, real
                                                    estate activity in the
 aggregate is not disfavored by the 1986 Tax Act. Within the broad aggregate,
 however, widely different impacts are to be expected. Regular rental and
 commercial activity will be slightly disfavored, while historic and old
 rehabilitation activity will be greatly disfavored. In contrast, owner—
 occupied housing, far and away the largest component of real estate, is
 favored, both directly by an interest rate decline and indirectly owing to the
 increase in rents. Low—income rental housing may be the most favored of all
 real estate activities.

      The rent increase for residential properties will be 10 to 15 percent
with our assumption of a percentage point decline in interest rates. For
commercial properties, the expected rent increase is 5 to 10 percent. The
market value decline, which will be greater the longer and further investors
think rents will be below the new equilibrium, is unlikely to exceed 4 percent
in fast growth markets, even if substantial
                                            excess capacity currently exists.
In no—growth markets with substantial excess capacity, market values could
decline by as much as 8 percent from already depressed levels.

      Average housing costs will decrease slightly for households with incomes
below about $60,000, but increase by 5 percent for those with incomes above
twice this level. With the projected increase in
                                                  rents, homeownership should
rise for all income classes, but especially for those with income under
$60,000. The aggregate home ownership rate is projected to increase by three
percentage points in the long run in response to the Tax Act.

       The new passive loss limitations are likely to lower significantly the
values of recent loss—motivated partnership deals and of properties in areas
where the economics have turned sour (vacancy rates have risen sharply) .
                                                                           The
limitations should have little impact on new construction and market rents,
however. Reduced depreciaijon write—offs, lower interest rates, and higher
rents all act to lower expected passive losses.
                                                 Moreover, financing can be
restructured to include equity—kickers or less debt generally at little loss of
value.


Patrjc H. Hendershott   James R. Follairi                David C. Ling
Galbreath Professor     The Office of Real Estate Res.   Cox School of Business
The Ohio State Univ.    430 Commerce West                Southern Methodist Univ.
1775 College Road       1206 South 6th Street            Dallas, Texas 75275
Columbus, Ohio 43210    University of Illinois           (214) 692—2785
(614) 292—0552          Champaign—urbana, Il 61820
                        (217) 244—0952
                    Real Estate and The Tax Reform Act of 1986


                                Patric 1-i. Hendershott
                                  James R. Follajn
                                    David C. Ling


        The U.S. Congress passed the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (the Act) on

  September 27 and President Reagan signed it into law on October 22. This bill,

  which is the Outcome of a process that
                                           began several years ago and included

 numerous tax reform proposals, radically alters the federal income tax system

 and generally taxes investment activities
                                              more heavily. In fact, partial
 equilibrium analysis leads to the implausible conclusion that tax reform will

 reduce investment in all capital goods.     Reduced investment in relatively

 disadvantaged capital goods and increased investment
                                                          in relatively advantaged
 goods would be a more plausible Outcome.

       The mechanism by which a general decline in investment is converted into

 a mixed investment response is a fall in interest rates. This fall would

 follow directly from a general reduction in the demand for investable funds.

 Allowing for an interest rate decline
                                         significantly alters the expected impact
 of the Act upon real estate.   In particular, one finds that depreciable real

 estate will be negatively affected by the Act, but the effect is much less

negative when one factors in the interest rate decline.
                                                              Moreover, owner—
occupied housing shifts from being unfavorably affected to being favorably

affected when a decline in interest rates is
                                                incorporated into the analysis.1
      The analysis begins with a discussion of
                                                  the main provisions of the Act
and their implications for interest rates. In Section ii, we turn to the

anti—tax shelter provisions of the bill:     passive loss and interest expense

limitations and changes in at—risk rules and the minimum tax. Sections iii and

IV report the likely effects of the Act
                                           UOfl income—producing properties
(market rent levels and real estate values)
                                              and owner—occupied housing (the
cost of ownership and the aggregate
                                      ownership rate). The provisions for low—
income housing are discussed in Section V, and a summary concludes the paper.
                                        —2—



   I. Maj.r Provisions of the Act and Their Implications for Interest Rates

       Three classes of provisions are considered in turn: individual income

tax rates, tax depreciation schedules, and investment tax credits. The likely

interest—rate impact of these provisions is then discussed.


                         A. Individual Tax Rate Schedule

       The new law replaces the previous 14—bracket tax rate schedule with what

is best viewed as a 4—bracket rate schedule. These four rates are 15, 28, 33,

and 28 percent. The rate schedule for nonitemizing households is drawn in

Figure 1. The 33 percent marginal rate reverts to 28 percent when a

household's average tax rate on all income above the standard deduction equals

28 percent (when area B in the figure equals area A) .     That is, the benefits of

the zero tax rate on personal exemptions and of the initial 15 percent tax rate

will be phased out for taxpayers with sufficiently high incomes, the phase—out

mechanism being a five percent surcharge ——   giving   the 33 percent marginal rate
—— on income above the indicated level in Figure 1. The new rate schedule

takes effect in 1988 and will be adjusted for inflation beginning in 1989. A

transitional tax rate schedule that consists of five tax rates ranging from

11.5 percent to 38.5 percent will be in effect in 1987.

      Breakpoints for the tax bracket changes are shown at the bottom of the

figure (in thousands of dollars) for four household types: married couples

with two dependents, married couples with no dependents, "other" household

heads with one dependent, and single households. The first breakpoint for

nonitemizers is governed by the standard deduction and the personal exemptions

(for itemizers, more of AOl goes untaxed, so all breakpoints would be further

to the right) .   The Tax Reform Act increases the standard deduction (zero

bracket amount) by about a quarter (to $5,000 in 1988) for marrieds filing

jointly, by a full two—thirds (to $4,400) for heads of household, and by an
                                                              Figure 1
                                              Tax Kate Schedule   for Nonitem.tzers,   1988



                  .33

                                                                                       B
                            — —    —
                  .28
                        I
                                                                                              a

                               A



                  .15




Married, 2 dep.         12.8   (8.4)   42.6            84.7
Married, 0 dep.          8.9   (6.1)   38.7            80.8                                   205.7     Adjusted
Other, 1 dep.            8.3   (3.8)   32.2            70.0                                   180.0     Gross
Single                   4.9   (2.6)   22.8           48.1                                    153.9     Zncome
                                                                                              105 • 5
                                      —3—



eighth (to $3,000) for singles. The personal exemption will be increased

gradually until 1989 at which time the exemption will equal $2,000 for the

taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse and dependents. The standard deduction and the

personal exemption amounts will be adjusted annually for inflation beginning in

1989 and 1990, respectively. The numbers in parentheses following the first

breakpoint represent the extrapolated 1988 income levels at which nonitemizers

would have begun paying taxes under the old law (standard deduction plus 4,2,2

and 1 personal exemptions, respectively, for the four households). The

substantial increases under the new law are expected to remove 6 million

households from the federal income tax rolls.

      The reductions in statutory tax rates, including the near doubling of the

personal exemption, significantly lower both the average and marginal tax rates

at which households will deduct housing expenses. Table 1 contains some sample

calculations for households with different adjusted gross incomes. While the

calculations are based on numerous specific assumptions (married couples with

two dependents, etc.), the general result —— a cut in these tax rates ——   holds
                                2
for virtually all households.

      The Tax Act also alters the tax rate on capital gains income. In 1988

and beyond, the general capital gains exclusion will not exist (in 1987,

capital gains will be taxed at no more than a 28 percent tax rate). For most

households with significant assets other than consumer durables and their

residence, the capital gains rate will be increased from 20 percent or less to

28 or 33 percent. The effective exemption of capital gains taxation on owner—

occupied housing continues unaltered, however. That is, capital gains taxation

on owner—occupied housing can be totally postponed upon sale by purchasing

another home of at least equal value; in addition, a one—time capital gain of

up to $125,000 is excluded from taxation for taxpayers above the age of 55.
                                          —4—




                               B. Depreciation Schedules

       Economists have argued that tax depreciation should equal economic

 depreciation at replacement cost. This generally means relatively low tax

 depreciation in the early years of a property but much higher depreciation in

 later years if significant inflation exists.     Because depreciation allowances
 would be inflation—indexed, more than 100 percent (possibly far more) of an

 asset's value would be deductible over its life.     Legislators have not bought
 this argument in practice, although they seem to have accepted it in principle.

 More specifically, when inflation became rampant in 1979 and 1980, tax

 depreciation lives were sharply shortened (by ERTA) to offset the inflation.

 Since then, inflation has fallen and depreciation lives for industrial and

 commercial structures have been lengthened (from 15 to 19 years) .   The 1986 Act
 continues this lengthening.

      Under previous law, residential rental property could be depreciated over

 19 years using a 175 percent declining balance method with a switch to straight

line in about the ninth year. Nonresidential
                                                 property could use either
straight line or the 175 percent declining balance
                                                      method, but given the

severity of the recapture provisions for those who used the accelerated

procedure, most nonresidential property was depreciated using straight line.

Equipment was depreciated over 5 years, on average, and public utility

structures over 10 or 15 years; 150 percent
                                                declining balance with a switch to
straight line was applicable to both asset types.

      Under the new law, residential rental property is depreciable over 27.5

years and nonresidential property over 31.5 years. The depreciation method is

straight line, and the recapture provisions are eliminated.     Tax lives for

public utility structures are lengthened to 15 or 20 years (still 150% DB)

While tax lives of equipment are lengthened,
                                                a more accelerated method (200% DB

versus the old 150% 05) is available. The net result is
                                                           roughly no change in
                                       —5-.




the preseT.; value of tax depreciation allowances. Finally, construction period

interest and property tax expenses are added to the basis of the property;

consequently, they will be amortized over either 27.5 or 31.5 years versus the

10 years under previous law.



                                 C. Tax Credits

      Under the old law, tax credits existed for equipment, public utility

structures, and rehabilitation expenditures on qualified properties. The

latter included historic structures and nonresidential old (over 40 years) and

quasi—old (over 30 years) structures. The credits were 10 percent for

equipment and public utility structures, 15 percent for quasi—old

rehabilitation outlays, 20 percent for old rehabs and 25 percent for historic

structures. The depreciation basis was reduced by the full credit for the

nonresidential rehabs and by half the credit for equipment and public utility

and historic structures.

      The new bill removes the credits for equipment, public utility

structures, and rehabs of buildings built after 1936. For historic structures,

the credit is cut from 25 to 20 percent, and the depreciable basis must now be

reduced by the full credit.    For old qualifying properties, the credit is

lowered from 20 to 10 percent Our calculations suggest that assets which

lose, partially or totally, their tax credits are the investment activities

most disadvantaged by the Tax Reform Act.



                       D. Tax Reform and Interest Rates

      The Tax Reform Act of 1986 has negative direct implications for every

type of capital good. Longer depreciation lives raise the investment hurdle

rates (annual rental costs) for all structures except owner—occupied housing,

and the reduction or elimination of investment tax credits increases hurdle
                                       —6—



 rates for equipment, public utility structures, and rehabilitation projects.

 Finally, the cut in personal tax rates lowers the demands for depreciable real

 estate and owner—occupied housing. With the demand for all investment goods

 falling, interest rates will certainly decline. The magnitude of the decline

 depends on the interest sensitivities of both the supply of domestic and

 foreign saving and of investment demand itself. Hendershott (1986) has

 constructed a model in which total saving is independent of interest rates and

 the demands for capital are approximately
                                             unitary elastic with respect to the
 rental prices of capital goods. In this model, interest rates have to decline

 by 1.4 percentage points to offset the negative capital provisions of the Act.

 That is, rates have to decline by this much
                                               to maintain aggregate investment at
 its pre—reform level. A similar calculation with the more detailed Galper—

Lucke—Toder model (1986) yields a 1.74 percentage point decline.

      Of course, interest rates will decline less if the supply of saving is

reduced, and a reduction might be expected. On the domestic side, the

deductibility of contributions to retirement accounts has been limited. IRA

contributions for those with established pensions will no longer be deductible

for households with incomes above $35,000 (singles) or $50,000 (married

couples). Also, the maximum deductible annual contributions
                                                               to supplemental
retirement accounts (401k's) has been lowered from $30,000 to $7,000 (a similar

reduction occurs for 403b's). On the foreign side, any reduction in U.S.

interest rates reduces returns to foreigners because they pay taxes based on

foreign tax schedules, not U.S. schedules, and thus do not benefit from lower

U.S. tax rates. However, international capital flows are not infinitely

elastic, and even if they were, the U.S. is sufficiently large that its reduced

investment demand would lower the world level of interest rates.
                                      —7—



      In the calculations reported in Sections III and IV, a one (not 1.4 or

1.76) percentage point decline in U.S. interest rates is presumed. This does

not mean that interest rates should be expected to decline (abstracting from

other factors affecting interest rates) by 100 basis points from levels on the

Act's enactment date; some of the rate decline likely occurred earlier in

1986. All tax reform plans considered in 1986 proposed elimination of the

investment tax credit for equipment and public utility structures retroactive

to the beginning of 1986, and the likelihood of some version of tax reform

passing was high virtually all year. Thus the decline in interest rates and

the weakness in equipment expenditures experienced in 1986 was partially

attributable to the anticipated removal of this provision. Indeed, 75 basis

points of 140 basis point model—calculated decline in interest rates is due

solely to the elimination of this credit. Real estate likely benefited from

tax—reform induced lower interest rates during much of 1986.



                        II. Anti—Tax Shelter Provisions

      The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains multiple attacks on tax shelter

activities:   (1) the establishment of a new income category (passive income)

the losses from which are generally not deductible against other income, (2) a

tightening of the limitations on interest expenses, (3) application of the at—

risk rules to real estate, but with major exceptions, and (4) an expansion of

the individual minimum tax. Each of these is discussed in turn. The section

concludes with an analysis of the market impacts of these changes.



                          A. Passive Loss Limitations

     For many years, different sources of income have been taxed differently

under the federal tax code. For example, until 1981, "unearned" (nonlabor)

income was subject to a far higher maximum tax rate than was "earned" or labor
                                       —8—



 income. Also, capital gains have generally been taxed less heavily than other

 income, owning both to the gains exclusion and deferral until realization.

 Moreover, portfolio capital losses, while fully deductible against portfolio

 capital gains, have been deductible against only $3,000 of other income.

       The 1986 Act introduces a new income class, passive income, and puts

 restrictions somewhat analogous to those on portfolio capital losses on passive

 losses. Passive income is defined to include income generated from business

 and trade activities in which the taxpayer does not materially participate and

 from rental activities such as real estate.   For individuals, partnerships,
 trusts, and personal service corporations, losses from passive activities can

 be used to offset income from other passive activities, but not other income

 (e.g., wages, interest, etc.). Losses that cannot be claimed in a particular

year can be "banked" and used to offset passive income in future
                                                                   years. Also,
cumulative losses are allowed in full at the time of sale of the property if a

gain or loss is recognized. The effective date for this provision is January

1, 1987, but a transition period was established for
                                                       properties purchased
before the law was signed by the President. The transition rule allows 65

percent of passive losses to be used to offset nonpassjve income in 1987, 40

percent in 1988, 20 percent in 1989, and 10 percent in 1990.

      An important exception applies to "small landlords."    Taxpayers who
actively manage residential rental investments may deduct up to $25,000 in

losses against nonpassive income if their adjusted gross income computed

without regard to the losses is less than $100,000.    This amount is phased out
one dollar for two dollars of income for taxpayers with incomes
                                                                  above $100,000
so that no losses are allowed for anyone who earns above $150,000. An

identical exemption applies to tax credits in a deduction—equivalent sense;

that is, $7,000 in credits is allowed because a $7,000 credit is equivalent to

a $25,000 deduction for a taxpayer with a 28 percent tax rate ($25,000x.28 =
                                         —9—



$7,000) .   Active   management requires that a taxpayer have at least a 10 percent

interest in the property (and not be a limited partner) and be involved in the

management of the property on a "substantial and continual" basis.

      Two related rationales for the small landlord provision can be provided.

The first is based upon uncertainty regarding the true nature of the income

from actively—managed properties. With active management, some of the income

is earned income and thus should be aggregatable with other earned income. The

second rationale reflects the difficulties of real estate diversification for

small investors attempting to use their management/maintenance skills.

Diversification (by geographic area and real estate type) becomes particularly

important when passive losses are deductible against only passive gains.

Without diversification, large losses can more easily occur. While equity

mutual funds allow small equity investors to easily diversify, real estate

diversification for small managers/maintainers is impossible.

      Other potentially important exceptions apply to certain types of

corporations. Regular C Corporations are not subject to the rule so they will

be able to use passive losses to offset both regular and portfolio income of

the corporation. Closely held C corporations other than personal service

corporations that are subject to the at—risk rules (generally where 5 or fewer

individuals own more than 50 percent of the stock) can use passive losses to

offset earned income, but not portfolio income (unearned income other than

passive income)
                                          —10—




                            B. Interest Expense Limitations

          Previous law employed the concept of net investment income (investment

 income less investment expense) and investment interest expense (interest

 expense associated with investment income) to limit the amount of investment

 interest expense a taxpayer could deduct. The limit equalled $10,000 plus the

 amount of the taxpayer's net investment income. The new law will tighten the

 limitation by restricting the amount of investment interest expense that can be

 deducted to net investment income. Excess interest expense can be banked for

 possible deduction in future years, and the four—year transition period for

 passive losses applies.

          In general, interest expense and income (losses) for passive activities

 will not be included in the calculation of investment income or investment

 interest expense, i.e., real estate is not subject to the interest expense

 limitation. However, during the transition period passive losses allowed

 (e.g., 65 percent in 1987) will be subtracted from investment income. Thus, a

taxpayer for whom the investment interest expense limitation is
                                                                   binding will
not obtain any relief from the transition rule for the passive losses.

      The new law prohibits the deduction of nonbusiness household interest

except that on debt secured by first and second residences.     Moreover, this
interest is limited to that on mortgage debt which does not exceed the sum of

the original purchase price of the properties, the cost of improvements, and

(up to the current market value of the properties) educational and medical

expenses incurred. The mortgage debt ceiling applies only to debt incurred

after August 15, 1986. The prohibitions on nonmortgage, nonbusiness household

interest deductions are subject to the four—year transition period for passive

losses.
                                          —11—



                                   C. At Risk Rules

      At risk rules limit the cummulated deductible losses on an investment to

the amount at risk (initial equity contribution plus cummulated taxable income

less cummulated cash distributions plus recourse debt). To the extent that

cummulative losses exceed investment at risk, the losses can be banked for

future possible deductibility. Under old law, real estate was exempt from the

at—risk rule.

      The Tax Act extends the at—risk rules to real estate but simultaneously

expands the definition of the amount at risk for real property to include

nonrecourse debt secured by the property, including debt supplied on

commercially reasonable terms by a lender with an equity interest in the

property. Seller or installment sale financing, however, is not treated as

nonrecourse debt. While this extension will obviously discourage seller

financing, no general impact on the real estate market seems likely.



                         D. The Individual Minimum Tax4

      Individuals must pay   the   higher of their regular tax liability or their

minimum tax liability. The latter is 21 percent of their income base ——

regular   taxable income plus specified tax preferences less a $40,000 exemption

for married taxpayers ($30,000 for singles or individual filers) .    The

exemption is reduced 25 cents for each dollar by which the income base exceeds

$150,000; during this phase out, the effective tax rate is 26.5 percent.

      The 1986 Act expands the list of tax preferences to include "accelerated

depreciation" on equipment (the difference between 200% DE and 150% DE), tax—

exempt interest on new private activity bonds (those issued after August 7,

1986), and the appreciation component of charitable contributions. These

expansions will increase the likelihood of taxpayers paying the minimum tax.

However, the real estate tax preferences are reduced because accelerated
                                           —12—



 depreciation and excluded capital gains on real estate no longer exist. Still

 remaining is the excess of tax depreciation over
                                                        40—year straight line. This
 could reduce the value of tax depreciation allowances
                                                                by a sixth.5 Also, the
 reduction in taxable income resulting from an installment sale is a tax

 preference item. Moreover, during the transition period passive losses allowed

  (e.g., 65 percent in 1987) will be included in the minimum tax.



                         E. Impacts of Anti—Shelter Provisions

           Of all the anti—shelter provisions,
                                                 only the new passive loss rules could
 plausibly affect real estate markets significantly. Four areas of possible

 impact include: market rents, the volume of transactions, the form of

 financing and the form of ownership. Such impacts are considered in turn.

       Using the simulation methodology described in the next section, we

 computed the worse—case certainty impact of passive loss rules on rents. That

 is, the investment earns the expected return with
                                                        certainty, and no passive
gains on other investments are available to offset passive losses. The

analysis implies little impact. The combination of lengthened tax depreciation

and construction period interest and property tax (CPIT) deductions (to 27.5

years) ,    lower interest rates (one percentage point)   •   and higher rents (10
percent) virtually eliminates initial tax losses.         Moreover, if passive losses
were expected to be greater, as they would be in a higher inflation (and thus

interest rate) environment, the financing could/would be restructured. The

simplest method would be greater use of equity.        Alternatively, debt with
equity—kickers (share of asset appreciation or increase in rents) could be used

to lower direct interest costs and thus passive losses.

      The passive loss rules could still affect market rents, however. While

no losses occur when the project "works," significant
                                                              uncertainty surrounds the
net operating income from properties, and losses would occur if this income
                                      —13—



falls signficantly below expectations. If incomes from other projects are not

sufficient to offset the passive losses, net losses would not be currently

deductible. This possibility would cause investors to raise the required

expected return on real estate investments. Also acting to raise the required

return is the reduction in importance of the relatively certain tax

depreciation component of real estate investment vis—a--vis the relatively

uncertain operating income and cash reversion component.

      The passive loss rules will likely increase the number of real estate

transactions. At any point in time, some projects are likely to be souring ——

earning significant passive losses and promising to do so for some future
periods —— and others to be sweetening ——    earning above expected returns and
thus promising significant passive gains in the future. A sale of the sour

project to the owner of the sweet one would allow the banked passive losses to

be immediately deducted and would transfer the expected future losses to an

owner who could use them as they accrue. While the sale price will be a

distressed one, the buyer and seller will gain vis—a—vis the Treasury in that

the losses will be deducted sooner.

     A final issue is the impact on ownership form. Will large C corporations

increase their Ownership of real estate because they are able to deduct passive

losses against nonpassive income but individuals and partnerships are not?
                                       —14—



 This seems likely in the short run when substantial passive losses on numerous

 projects exist, owing to both the large losses built into deals in the last few

 years and the high vacancy rates for many types of real estate in many areas of

 the country. In the longer run, however, expanded corporate ownership seems

 unlikely. For the first time in decades, the corporate income tax rate will be

 higher than the maximum personal tax rate. Moreover, the taxation of corporate

 income at the personal level may even be rising with the increase in the

 capital gains tax rate. The 1986 Tax Reform Act is unlikely to be a boon to

 the corporate ownership form.



                  III. Impacts on Income—Producing Properties

       This section reports the likely effects of the Tax Act upon the rents and

 values for rental and commercial real estate. The discussion makes the

 stylized distinction between the long— and short—run effects of the Act. The

 short—run effect is to alter the values of existing properties, while the

long—run effect is to alter the level of rents. The likely impacts on rents

and values are reported in turn, but first we discuss the precise tax law

changes analyzed and the key underlying assumptions made.

      The real estate provisions analyzed are: the lengthening of tax

depreciation from 19 years, 175% DB to 27.5 (or 31.5) years straight line, an

extension of the deduction period for Construction period interest and taxes

from 10 to 27.5 (or 31.5) years, the removal of the capital gains exclusion and

a Cut in personal tax rates. All of these changes tend to raise rents and

lower real estate values.

      The precise tax rate change depends on the assumed marginal investor.

For the new law, a marginal federal rate of 0.33, which would be paid on

taxable income of $72,000 to $193,000 (itemizing married couple with two

dependents), seems reasonable enough. But the corresponding tax rates under
                                           —15—



the old law (indexed to 1988) range from 0.42 ($68,000 to $97,000) to 0.49

 ($124,000 to $184,000) ,   with   0.45 lying in between. Because of our uncertainty

regarding the marginal investor, two sets of results will be reported, one

starting with a 0.52 tax rate [0.49 + (1 —        .49).06,   where .06 is the presumed

state and local income tax rate] and the other with a 0.45 rate [0.42 + (1 —

 .42).052).   In both cases, the marginal investor under new law is assumed to be

in the 0.36 bracket (0.33 + (1 —      .33).045,   the lower state and local rate

reflecting a presumed cut to offset the broadening of the taxbase]. That is,

the marginal rate will be cut by 0.09 or 0.16.

      The major assumptions underlying the analysis are an expected inflation

rate of 0.045, a risk—free interest rate of 0.09 applied to debt maintained at

two—thirds of the market value of the project (see Hendershott and Ling, 1986),

depreciation rates of 2½ percent in rents and 3 percent in structure price,6

and a required after—tax return on equity of about 0.105 for the 52 percent tax

bracket investor and 0.115 for the 45 percent investor.7



                      A. Impact on Equilibrium Rent Levels

      The computational procedures employed to determine the change in

equilibrium rent use a discounted cash flow model of an investment in real

estate. The model takes into account the downpayment, the expected after—tax

cash flows, and the expected net reversion at sale. The long—run equilibrium

level of rent is the initial rent that would equate the net present value of

the investment to zero for a given set of assumptions (inflation, interest

rate, required return on equity, etc.) and a particular tax regime. This rent

per dollar of investment serves as a hurdle rate for prospective investors in

income—producing properties. If a property can earn a rent greater than the

equilibrium rent, then new units will be built to expand the supply of real

estate. This process continues until the market rent declines to the
                                          —16—



 equilibrium rent. On the other hand, if the equilibrium rent were to jump

 above the market rent, then new construction would be cut back until market

 rent rose to the new equilibrium value. The
                                                  impact of the Tax Act upon rents
 is obtained by comparing the equilibrium level of rent under previous law to

 that required under the new law. In this computation, real estate value is

 assumed to equal its presumably unchanged replacement cost.

       The equilibrium level of rent must increase under the Act to replace the

 reduced tax benefits. Only then will investors in real estate earn a rate of

 return comparable to what can be earned on other investments of similar risk.

 Estimates of the likely rent increase are presented in Table 2 for alternative

 of assumptions regarding the tax rate of the marginal investor in real estate

 and the size of the interest rate decline.
                                                 The first numbers, which are
discussed first, are for residential properties; the second numbers (in

parentheses) are for commercial properties.

      The top row indicates the equilibrium increase in rent assuming no change

in interest rates for two different
                                      assumptions regarding the tax rate of the
marginal investor under prel9s6 law. With a 45 percent marginal tax rate,

rents will increase by 19 percent; with
                                           a 52 percent marginal rate, the rent
increase is 33 percent. These increases
                                           are partially a result of increases in
the required rate of return (81 and 182
                                          basis points, respectively, for the 45
and 52 percent tax—bracket investors)
                                        owing to the generally lighter taxation
of pretax returns on alternative investments.
                                                   Because ample evidence exists
that taxpayers with tax rates far below the maximum are active in the rental

market, the 19 percent increase seems more plausible than the 33 percent

increase.
                                         —17—



      In the second row a 100 basis point decline in interest rates (and a 68

basis point decline ——   relative   to that incorporated in the first row ——   in   the

required after—tax equity rate) is factored into the analysis. The result is a

substantial reduction in the required rent increase: from 19 percent to 11

percent for the 45 percent tax—rate investor and from 33 percent to 24 percent

for the 52 percent investor. The rational for believing that the Tax Act would

lower interest rates was developed earlier.

      The required return on equity in real estate could rise relative to that

on other investments because the importance of the relatively certain tax

depreciation component of the return to real estate will decline vis—a—vis the

less certain net—operating—income component. Moreover, real—estate losses will

no longer be deductible against nonpassive income. If one's passive activities

should fall on hard times, the lack of deductibility against other income would

result in the investor shouldering the entire loss, as opposed to sharing it

with the U.S. Treasury. A one percent increase in the required return would

raise all equilibrium rent increases in Table 2 by about four percentage

points.

      Our own view is that a 10 to 15 percent rent increase for residential

properties is most likely. That is, we believe (1) the marginal investor under

the old law to have been in the 45 percent tax bracket, (2) the likely decline

in interest rates to be 100 basis points, and (3) some increase in the required

return to be necessary to offset the increased riskiness of real estate

investments.

      The rent increases for commercial properties ——    the   numbers in

parenthesis in Table 2 —— are lower. For the 45 percent tax rate, the

percentage increases are about 5 points less; for the 52 percent tax rate, the

increases are 7 points less. While tax depreciation for commercial properties

is less generous than for residential under the new law, depreciation for the
                                         —18—



  former was even less generous than for the latter under the old law. For

  commercial properties, then, the expected range of "rent" increases is S to 10

 percent.

       It is important to reiterate the process by which rents increase in

 competitive markets. Builders will find it less profitable to invest at the

 current level of rents with the new tax incentives than with the old. The

 combination of reduced new construction with normal growth in demand and steady

 obsolescence of the existing stock will
                                           eventually generate higher rents for
 the existing stock.

       How quickly will rents rise from the old equilibrium level to the new?

 The rise will occur at the most
                                   rapid rate in fast—growing markets and will get
 to the new equilibrium sooner the smaller the change in the equilibrium level.

 Of course, in markets with high vacancy rates this rent rise will occur only

 after current rents and occupancy rates get back to their equilibrium level

 under old law. Our best guess is that it will
                                                  take four (Columbus, Ohio) to
 ten (Houston, Texas) years for rents to rise to their new equilibrium level.

      Which provisions of the Act are most responsible for the rent increases?

Estimates of the effects of the individual
                                             provisions, including a change in
the marginal tax rate from 0.45 to 0.36,
                                            were computed two ways: the change
in the equilibrium rent if a specific
                                        provision were the only change being made
and the change when this provision is added after all other provisions ——

including   a 100 basis point decline in the rate of interest —— had been taken

into account. Either way, the depreciation change increases rents about twice

as much as the cut in the regular income tax
                                                rate does, and the impacts of the
CPIT and capital gains exclusion are negligible. Removal of the capital gains

exclusion is of little importance because
                                            (1) few gains are expected in a low
inflation enviromnent, (2) gains are expected to be realized in the far distant
                                          —19—



 future (see the next paragraph), and (3) the gains exclusion is also removed on

 alternative investments, a fact that will lower the required return on real

 estate and thus tend to offset the direct impact of the exclusion removal.

      Trading should decrease under the new law. Under old law, trading before

 tax depreciation disappeared in the 19th year was advantageous. Trading should

 not be optimal prior to the new 27½ (or 31½) year tax depreciation life because

 a penalty to trading ——   the   capital gains tax rate —— has been increased and an

advantage to trading ——    getting   on the new depreciation schedule —— has been

decreased (see Hendershott and Ling, 1984, on optimal trading). Moreover, the

value of installment sale transactions, a method of dampening the capital—gains

tax penalty, is greatly reduced in the Tax Act for sales of assets worth over

$150,000 for sellers with substantial debt. In effect, the fraction of taxes

that could formerly be deferred is reduced by the ratio of the seller's debt to

book value of assets.

                 B. Impact on the Value of Existing Properties

      We now turn to the short—run impact of the Act upon the value of existing

real estate. The initial perspective taken is that of an investor in early

1987 contemplating purchase of property put in place in 1986. This new

investor will face a less generous tax depreciation schedule, a higher capital

gains tax rate, a lower marginal tax rate and, possibly, passive loss

limitations. The question, then, is how much will this new investor alter his

bid for the property relative to his bid under previous law? The standard of

comparison is the price of the property that would have made it a zero net

present value investment under the old law, assuming that rents were at their

equilibrium level.

      If rent instantaneously jumped to its new equilibrium level, then value

would not decline; the higher rent would compensate exactly for the less

generous tax depreciation, lower marginal tax rates, etc. Because rent will
                                           —20—



 not rise instantaneously, value will decline, the magnitude depending on how

  Slowly investors think rent will rise to the new equilibrium level (Hendershott

 and Ling, 1985) .     The longer is the expected adjustment ——   the   greater is the
 present value of expected below equilibrium rents ——     the greater will be the
 fall in value. A useful analogy can be drawn to the pricing of discount bonds.

 Bonds sell at a discount when they are earning a below—market coupon (rent)

 The more the coupon is below market and the longer the bonds are expected to

 earn the below—market coupon (the longer is the bond's maturity), the lower is

 the market value relative to par.

         Investor expectations of the rental adjustment process should vary with

 both the growth rate of the area and the extent of initial disequilibrium. We

 consider two growth rates (zero and positive) and three prereform states of the

 market (equilibrium, 10 percent "excess capacity" and 20 percent excess

 capacity) .   In   all cases, depreciation or obsolescence is assumed to occur at

 the rate of 2 percent per year. Thus 10 percent excess capacity or below

market rent would be eliminated in 5 years even with zero growth. The positive

growth market is assumed to eliminate 5 percent
                                                    excess capacity per year, 2 for
obsolescence and 3 for growth. Thus 30
                                            percent initially below—market rents,
20 percent due to excess capacity and 10 percent due to tax reform, would be

eliminated in 6 years in the high growth area versus 15 years in the no—growth

area.

        The upper half of Table 3 contains estimates of the percentage value

declines in a property purchased in early 1987 owing to an 11 percent increase

in equilibrium rents and the failure of actual rents to increase immediately to

that level. The first row is for a property that would have had a zero net

present value under the old law, i.e., is in a market in equilibrium prior, to

the enactment of the Tax Act. As can be seen, the value decline is a modest

one percent in a growth market and two percent in a no—growth market.
                                          —21—



       Rowe 2 and 3 pertain to cases of 10 and 20 percent excess capacity. In

 these calculations, we first compute the total percentage price discount from

 reproduction cost and then attribute some of it to the initial disequilibrium

and the remainder to tax reform. The calculations are illustrated in Figure 2

which plots real rent over time. The solid horizontal line is equilibrium real

rent in the absence of tax reform; the dashed horizontal line is equilibrium

rent with tax reform. Now consider a market initially in equilibrium. As a

result of tax reform at time 0 in the figure, rent rises along the BC segment,

the slope of which is steeper in growth areas than in no—growth areas. The

decline in value is measured as the ratio of the present value of triangle ABC

to the initial value (reproduction cost) .       Next, consider a market with
substantial excess capacity prior to enactment of the Tax Act, i.e., initial

rent equal to p rather than B With passage of the Act, rent rises along the OF

segment. The percentage price discount from reproduction cost is the ratio of

the present value of triangle ADF to reproduction tost. The percentage decline

in value due to the Tax Act is then the ratio of the difference in the present

values of ADF and HOE ——   the   present value of ABEF ——   to   the initial below

market price (reproduction cost less the present value of triangle HOE)

      As can be seen in Table 3, the value declines are far larger when

substantial excess capacity exists. The Tax Act is seen to reduce value, from

an already depressed level, by 7 or 8 percent in no—growth areas versus only 4

percent in a growth area. The 8 percent is probably the upper bound on value

decline. The 11 percent rent increase and 20 percent excess capacity is a

worse case commercial scenario and is probably equivalent to a worst case

rental scenario. While greater rent increases are possible for rental, excess

capacity is far less.
                    —21a—



                  Figure 2
  Rent Paths with and without the Tax Act




       C       F                   New Equilibrium

___________________________________Old Equilibrium




                                   Time
                                      —22—



      The perspective taken above was that of new buyer of the property in

 early 1987; an alternative perspective is that of the current owner of a new

 property placed in service in 1986. The value of the investment to this person

will exceed that to the 1987 purchaser because this person will be able to use

 the more generous tax depreciation schedule from previous law and, if he

purchased before 10/22/86, the passive loss transition rules. The computations

are contained in the lower half of Table 3. Note that the value to this

investor rises even if rents are expected to take 5 years to adjust (the no

growth assumption), as long as the passive loss limits are not binding. That

is, the present value of the tax saving from the more favorable tax

depreciation exceeds the present value of the below—market rents. However, if

the investor has no passive income to offset passive losses and is not eligible

for the transition rules (row 5), the more generous depreciation is of no

value. Because this investor is worse off than the marginal investor, who is

not affected by the passive loss limits by assumption, value declines are

greater than those in row 1. Finally, if this investor purchased the property

before 10/22/86 (row 6), the value declines would be less than those of the

marginal investor purchasing in 1987. That is, the transition rules would

nearly allow the investor to maintain value.

      A comparison of row 1 with rows 4—6 yields interesting implications

regarding trading in 1987. Row 1 can be viewed as the maximum bid price,

relative to reproduction cost, of an investor for a property in 1987 whereas

rows 4—6 give the relative value to owners of the property in different tax

situations. An owner will sell only if the bid price of a new investor exceeds

the value of holding the property. These numbers suggest (1) a strong

disincentive by owners not subject to the passive loss limits to trade

properties purchased in 1986, (2) a mild disincentive for owners subject to the

limits but eligible for the transition rules, and (3) a strong incentive to
                                       —23—



 trade by those subject to the limits and not eligible for the transition rules.

 In fact, the latter investor trades in the first or second period in our model

 to maximize his return (minimize his loss)   .   A disincentive to trade also holds

 for investors not subject to the loss limits who purchased properties in

 earlier years, but the disincentive is less the earlier the property was

 purchased because the present value of the tax saving from the more generous

 depreciation under old law is less.



                       IV. Impact on Owner—Occupied Housing

      Current law grants important benefits to homeowners:      imputed rental
 income is not taxed, and capital gains are rarely taxed and then only on a much

deferred basis. Moreover, the deductibility of home mortgage interest ensures

that itemizing households who debt finance will benefit fully from the

nontaxation of owner—occupied housing. A consequence of these favorable

provisions is that homeowners receive substantial tax subsidies.      The higher
the marginal tax rate of an individual, the larger the subsidy and the lower is

the after—tax cost of owner—occupied housing.

      The Tax Act of 1986 does not directly alter any of these favorable

provisions, but it does affect the after—tax cost of
                                                         owner—occupied housing.
First, the tax rates at which households deduct housing costs are reduced.

Second, the pretax level of interest rates will be lower.      Furthermore, the
combination of changes in owner costs and in market rents will likely change

the aggregate homeownership rate.

      The annual after—tax cost of obtaining one unit of housing capital

depends upon the cost of debt, the cost of contributed
                                                          equity, property taxes,
real economic depreciation, expected appreciation, and the tax savings

associated with owner—occupied housing. Two costs or "prices" of owner housing

are relevant: the average cost, which influences the tenure choice decision;
                                      —24—



and the marginal cost, which affects the quantity demanded by households that

choose to own. The average and marginal costs, respectively, are higher the

lower are the average and marginal tax rates at which housing costs are

deductible.

      Estimates of owner housing costs for households in different income

classes under both old law and the Tax Act are contained in Table 4, based on

the tax rates listed in Table i.8 If interest rates were not affected by the

Tax Act, then the marginal cost would be unchanged for households with incomes

under $30,000 but would rise by roughly 10 percent for those with higher

incomes because of the general decrease in the tax rates at which marginal

housing costs are deducted. If, however, interest rates decline by 100 basis

points, as we expect, then households with incomes below about $30,000 will

experience about a ten percent decrease in marginal housing costs, households

with incomes above about $130,000 will face a 5 percent increase, and the

change for other households will be negligible. Thus any tendency toward

softer house prices will be confined to only the very high end of the market

(over $250,000) and will be modest in magnitude.

      In the absence of a decline in interest rates, average housing costs

increase 5 to 10 percent across the board. Costs increase for households with

incomes below $30,000, in spite of roughly no change in marginal tax rates,

because the Tax Act both raises the standard deduction and reduces nonhousing—

related itemized deductions (sales taxes, consumer interest, etc.), causing

more housing deductions of these households to be wasted than was the case

under the old law. With the 100 basis point decline in interest rates,

however, average housing costs will decrease slightly for households with

incomes below approximately $60,000; households with incomes above about

$120,000 will experience a 5 percent increase in   costs.
                                       —25—




       Homeownership depends on, among other things, the ratio of the average

 cost of owning to the cost of renting. The percentage changes in these ratios

 for households in the various income classes are reported in Table 5. The

 calculations in column 1 assume no decline in interest rates and no change in

 rents. Columns 2 and 3 factor in the 100 basis point decline in interest

 rates, first without, then with, a 10 percent increase in rental costs.

 Because rents are held constant in columns 1 and 2, the percentage changes

 equal the percentage changes in average owner costs for each income level.

 With the interest rate decline and no rent increase, the ownership rate will

 likely increase modestly for households with incomes below about $60,000 and

 decrease ever so slightly for higher income households.    With the rise in

 rents, all currently renting households will find homeownership relatively more

 attractive than under old law. Overall, the
                                               aggregate homeownership rate would
 eventually rise by about 3 percentage points.




                          V. Low—Income Rental Housing

      Tax incentives to stimulate the construction of low—income rental housing

have been part of the law for many years. Previous law allowed investors in

low—income properties to depreciate the properties over 15 years and to use a

200 percent declining balance method; in addition, CPIT would be expensed

during the construction period. Furthermore, investors often had access to

tax—exempt financing at rates substantially below market.

      The Tax Act changes this law in two important respects. First, the

preferential depreciation and construction period write—off schedules are

replaced with a system of tax credits that depends upon the type of housing

purchased or built and whether the project has access to tax—exempt financing

or other types of subsidy. Specifically, the investor receives:
                                         —26—



       1) An annual credit for 10 years which has a present value equal to 70

           percent of the cost of construction (both new and substantially

           rehabilitated projects) placed in service between 1/1/87 and

           12/31/89. For 1987, the applicable Treasury discount rate converts

           into a 9 percent annual credit, but this credit will rise if interest

           rates rise and fall if rates decline.

       2) For existing low—income housing or new construction with tax—exempt

           financing or other rental housing subsidies (e.g., FmHA section 515

           loans), the present value of the credit is 30 percent (the annual

           credit for 1987 is 4 percent)

The depreciable basis is not reduced by the credit. Second, the availability

of tax—exempt financing is reduced.

      An analogy to the passive loss limits applies to these credits, as does a

"small landlord provision." The latter says that up to $7,000 in credits (0.28

times $25,000) can be used to offset taxes on regular or portfolio income by

households with taxable income below $200,000 (no active management criterion

need be met) .    The offset is phased out between $200,000 and $250,000. With a

nine percent annual credit, an investment of up to $77,778 ($7,000/.09) is

eligible for the full offset.

      Potentially severe restrictions are placed upon investments to qualify

investors for the credits. First, at least 20 (40) percent of the units must

be occupied by tenants whose income cannot exceed 50 (60) percent of the area's

median income adjusted for family size, and only the units so occupied receive

the credit.      (Previous law defined qualifying income as 80 percent of the

area's median income.) Second, tenants cannot pay more than 30 percent of

their income in rent. Third, the project must satisfy these
                                       —27—



 15 years after it is placed in service or purchased, otherwise a substantial

 penalty will be levied. Fourth, the total value of the credits issued in a

 state is limited to $1.25 times of the population of the state.

       A number of difficult conceptual problems exist in modeling low—income

 housing. These include specifying the expected sales prices at year 15 and

 beyond and the depreciation rates and required equity returns, both which are

 presumably higher than their counterparts for regular rental housing. These

 and other problems must be addressed before a definitive statement can be made

on the treatment of low—income housing in the Tax Act vis—a—vis old law.

Nonetheless, we have made a few "minimum" rent calculations that are probably

instructive.

      The minimum rent required by investors to earn their required rate of

return is half as large with the new 9 percent credit as it was under old law,

even when tax—exempt financing was employed (the debt rate was 200 basis points

below market). With the 4 percent credit and
                                               tax—exempt financing, the minimum
rent is roughly the same as under old law with tax exempt financing. This

suggests two things. First, the 9 percent credit dominates the 4 percent

credit with tax—exempt financing. Thus, limits on tax—exempt financing for

low—income housing may not be of importance.   Second, the 9 percent credit is
far more generous than old law. Whether the credit is sufficient to generate a

substantial increase in the construction of low—income
                                                         housing is unknown,
however.
                                         —28—




                                  VI. Summary

      In contrast to the conventional wisdom, real estate activity in the

aggregate is not disfavored by the 1986 Tax Act. Within the broad real estate

aggregate, however, widely different impacts are to be expected. Regular

rental and commercial activity will be slightly disfavored (modest increases in

rents and declines in values will occur) , and historic and old rehabilitation

activity will be greatly disfavored. In contrast, owner—occupied housing, far

and away the largest component of real estate, is favored, both directly by an

interest rate decline and indirectly owing to the increase in rents.

Homeownership should rise significantly, and the quantity and value of houses

should increase slightly, except at the very high end of the market. Low—

income rental housing may be the most favored of all activities.

      The rent increase for residential properties will be 10 to 15 percent

with our assumption of a percentage point decline in interest rates. For

commercial properties, the expected rent increase is 5 to 10 percent. The

market value decline, which will be greater the longer and further investors

think rents will be below the new equilibrium, is unlikely to exceed 4 percent

in fast growth markets, even if substantial excess capacity currently exists.

Moreover, the value of recently—purchased properties to their current holders

not subject to the passive loss limits will generally rise because the more

generous tax depreciation allowances under old law vis—a—vis new law adds more

value than the expected below—market rent subtracts. In no—growth markets with

substantial excess capacity, market values could decline by as much as 8

percent from already depressed levels.

      Two offsetting factors operate on the after—tax cost of owner—occupied

housing. Lower tax rates increase the cost, but lower interest rates decrease

it. With a percentage—point interest—rate decline, the after—tax marginal cost

will fall by about 10 percent for most households with incomes below $30,000
                                      —29—



 and rise by about 5 percent for those with incomes above $130,000. Thus, Only

 the highest price houses would experience weakness in value. Average housing

costs will decrease slightly in this scenario for households with incomes below

about $60,000, but increase by 5 percent for those with incomes above twice

this level. With the projected increase in
                                             rents, homeownership should rise
for all income classes, but especially for those with income under $60,000.

The aggregate home ownership rate is projected to increase by three percentage

points in the long run in response to the Tax Act.

      The new passive loss limitations are likely to lower significantly the

values of loss—motivated partnership deals and of properties in areas where the

economics have turned sour (vacancy rates have risen sharply). The limitations

should have little impact on new construction and market rents, however.

Reduced depreciation write—offs, lower interest rates, and higher rents all act

to lower expected passive losses. Moreover, financing can be restructured to

include equity—kickers or less debt generally at little loss of value.
                                                      —30-.




                                                Footnotes

     This is not the first tax act whose impact on real estate would be

 misunderstood without allowing for interest rate changes. Many (Brueggeman,

 et. al., 1981, for example) predicted substantial rent decreases in response to

 the more generous tax depreciation allowances contained in the Economic

 Recovery Tax Act of 1981. Hendershott and shilling (1982)                      •   however, foresaw a
 sharp increase in interest rates as a result of the Act and forecast rising

 real rents. Real rents have, in fact, risen by 10 percent since 1980.


2
    The households for which calculations are reported are also assumed to have

one wage earner and the average fringe benefits and nonhousing itemized

deductions of their income classes (based on 1983 SOl data), to own houses of

dollar value equal to twice their AGIs and to pay property taxes equal to 1.2

percent of their house values. The general methodology for computing these tax

rates is discussed in Hendershott and Slemrod (1983).



    These credits are subject to the same passive loss treatment as is the credit

for low—income rental housing (see Section IV below).



    See Graetz and Sunley (1986) for a detailed discussion of both the individual

and corporate minimum taxes.



    The ratio of tax depreciation on a dollar of depreciable investment when the

minimum tax is fully applied to tax depreciation with no minimum tax is

         N /27STmin(1275            —   1/40)   ]/t   (1/27.5),
where T      is   the regular tax rate and t            is    the minimum rate. With t       = 0.52
                                                mi n

and T        = 0.257    (0.21 plus the state and local tax)              this   ratio is 0.846.
        mm                                                           ,
                                                   —31—




 6
      A potential problem with discounted cash flow models of this type is

 consistency between the assumed patterns of future rents and prices (Ling and

 Whinihan, 1985)       Assuming that rents are initially at the equilibrium level,

 the 2½ and 3 percent assumed depreciation
                                                          rates provide consistency, e.g., the
 resale price at year 20 is within one percent of the present value of cash

 flows beyond year 20. This consistency holds for both old law and the Tax Act.



     We compute the required equity rate Ce) as:

         e = (1 —   t*)[i   +   beta(   —   i)],
where t is a weighted average of the taxpayer's income and effective capital

gains tax rates, i is the interest rate, beta is the measure of the covariance

of an unlevered real estate investment with
                                                           the market return (assumed to be
0.5), v is the loan—to—value ratio, and rm —                i   is the excess of the return on
the market portfolio over the (risk free) interest rate (assumed to be 0.06)

The weights attached to the regular and effective
                                                                  capital gains tax rates,
respectively, are 3/4 and 1/4. The capital gains tax rate is (l—excl.)1/2,

where excl. is the long—term capital gains                               is
                                                          exclusion, t        the regular income
tax rate and the division by 2 reflects deferral.
                                                                   For prel987 law, t* =
for   the new law, *    = .87S.


  For details on the precise methodology
                                                    underlying these calculations, see
Hendershott and Ling (1986).
                                       —32—



                                   Ref erences




Brueggeman, William B., Jeffrey D. Fisher and Jerrold J. Stern, "Rental Housing

and the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance Quarterly, 10, April

1982, pp. 222—241.



Galper, Harvey, Robert Lucke and Eric Toder, "The Economic Effects of the Tax

Reform Act of 1986: Simulations with a General Equilibrium Model," Brookings

Tax Conference, October 30—31, 1986.



Graetz, Michael J. and Emil Sunley, "Minimum Taxes and Comprehensive Tax

Reform," Brookings Tax Conference, October 30—31, 1986.



Hendershott, Patric H., "Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the 1980s," in

Feldstein (ed.), The Effects of Taxation on Capital Formation, University of

Chicago Press, 1987.



Hendershott, Patric H. and David C. Ling, 1984, "Trading and the Tax Shelter

Value of Depreciable Real Estate," National Tax Journal, June 1984, pp. 213—

223.




Hendershott, Patric H. and David C. Ling, 1985, "Prospective Changes in Tax Law

and the Value of Depreciable Real Estate," Journal of the American Real Estate

and Urban Economics Association, Fall 1984, pp. 297—317.



Hendershott, Patric H. and David C. Ling, 1986, "Likely Impacts of the

Administration Proposal and the House Bill," in Follain (ed.), Tax Reform and

Real Estate, The Urban Institute, 1986, pp. 87—112.
                                         —33—.




Hendershott, Patric H. and James Shilling, "The Impacts on Capital Allocation

of Some Aspects of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance

Quarterly, April 1982, pp. 242—273.



Hendershott, Patric H. and Joel Slemrod," "Taxes and the User Cost of Capital

for Owner—Occupied Housing," Journal of the An1erican Real Estate and Urban

Economics Association, Winter 1983, pp. 375—393.



Ling, David C. and Michael Whinihan, "Valuing Depreciable Real Estate: A New

Methodology," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics

Association, Summer 1985, pp. 181—194.
                                    —34—



                                  Table 1

               Tax Rate at Which Housing Costs Are Deductible

                   Tenure Choice (Average)    Quantity Demanded (Marginal)
Income (000)        Old Law   Tax Reform       Old Law          Tax Reform

   13—25               .146       .074           .166               .176

   25—30               .211       .128           .189               .180

   30—50               .279       .242           .251               .184

   50—100              .402       .316           .364               .316

  100—200              .471       .370           .455               .370



Authors calculations (see footnote 2).
                                    —35—



                                   Table 2

            Percentage Change in the Equilibrium Rent Level
                   (commercial number in parentheses)

                                   Change in Tax Rate of Marginal Investor

                                   .45 to .36                     .52 to .36
Basic Provisions                    19 (14)                       33 (18)
and No Decline in
the Interest Rate.

Basic Provisions and a              11 (6)                        24 (10)
100 Basis Point Decline
in the Interest Rate.



Authors calculations (see text).
                                      —36—



                                    Table 3

             Estimates of Likely Percentage Property Value Changes
                     (11 Percent Rise in Equilibrium Rents)



                                  Fast Growth                   No Growth
                        Total Price    Discount Due   Total Price Discount Due
                         Discount       to Reform      Discount      to Reform

Purchased 1/1/87

  1. In Equilibrium          —l              —l           —2           —2

  2. 10% Excess Capacity     —5              —4           —9           —7

  3. 20% Excess Capacity     —9              —4          —16           —8

Held by Investor
After Purchase on

  4. 12/1/86, no passive                      5.3                       5.2
     loss limits

  5. 12/1/86, passive loss                —2.2                         —2.6
     limits fully binding

 6. 10/1/86, passive loss                 —0.5                        —1.4
    limits fully binding
    but transition rules
    are applicable


 Authors calculations (see text)
                                         —37—



                                    Table 4

                    Marginal and Average After—Tax Cost of
                     Owner—Occupied Housing by Income Class

                                                  Tax Act of 1986
              Old Law               9% Interest Rate        8% Interest Rate
Income(000) Marg.     Ave.          Marg.       Ave.        Marg.       Ave.
  13—25     .0818    .0851          .0808       .0909         .0729    .0820
  25—30     .0795    .0777          .0804       .0865         .0726    .0772
  30—50     .0734    .0700          .0800       .0743         .0722   .0673
  50—100    .0633    .0610          .0670       .0670         .0624   .0624
 100—200    .0567    .0550          .0629       .0629         .0588   .0588



Authors calculations (see footnote 2).
                                      —38.-.




                                    Table 5

                       Impact of the Tax Act on the Ratio
                     of Average Owner Costs to Rental Costs


                                             Percentage Change in Ratio
            9% Rate, No             8% Rate No              8% Rate, 10%
Income(000) Change in Rents         Change in Rents         Increase in Rents

  13—25          7                       —4                        —12

  25—30         10                       —1                        —10

  30—50          6                       —4                        —13

  50—100        10                         2                        —7

 100—200        14                         7                        —2




Authors calculations (see text)
