NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REGULATING INNOVATION WITH UNCERTAIN QUALITY:
INFORMATION, RISK, AND ACCESS IN MEDICAL DEVICES
Matthew Grennan
Robert Town
Working Paper 20981
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20981

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015, Revised June 2019

Data for this research was provided by Millennium Research Group (www.mrg.net). We owe
thanks to Jason Abaluck, Andres Aradillas-Lopez, Steve Berry, Dave Chan, Allan CollardWexler, Joe Harrington, Ali Hortaçsu, Robin Lee, Sam Peltzman, Scott Stern, Ashley Swanson,
Mauricio Varela, and numerous seminar audiences for helpful comments. The University of
Toronto, Wharton Dean's Research Fund and Mack Institute, and the Indian School of Business
provided financial assistance. Alexandra Charbi, Gi Heung Kim, Ellie Prager, Mike Punzalan,
and Emi Terasawa provided excellent research assistance. Any errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Matthew Grennan and Robert Town. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Regulating Innovation with Uncertain Quality: Information, Risk, and Access in Medical
Devices
Matthew Grennan and Robert Town
NBER Working Paper No. 20981
February 2015, Revised June 2019
JEL No. I11,L11,L51
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of regulating product entry and quality information requirements on an
oligopoly equilibrium and consumer welfare. Product testing can reduce consumer uncertainty,
but also increase entry costs and delay entry. Using variation between EU and US medical device
regulations, we document patterns consistent with valuable learning from more stringent US
requirements. To derive welfare implications, we pair the data with a model of supply, demand,
and testing regulation. US policy is indistinguishable from the policy that maximizes total surplus
in our estimated model, while the EU could benefit from more testing. “Post-market surveillance”
could further increase surplus.

Matthew Grennan
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
grennan@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert Town
Department of Economics
The University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
robert.town@austin.utexas.edu

1

Introduction

Most innovative new products are brought to the market because their makers believe they
create new value. However, with innovation often comes uncertainty, and once in the hands
of consumers, there is some chance that the product will not operate as hoped. The consequences of this failure range from consumer regret to death. When this uncertainty matters
for welfare, products often must go through pre-market testing and become approved and
certified by a formal body before entering the marketplace. Especially in oligopolistic markets, where private and public incentives may diverge (Spence 1975), the standard that a
regulatory body imposes has the potential to fundamentally alter market outcomes by requiring testing that firms would not undertake themselves. As first highlighted by Peltzman
(1973) in the context of pharmaceuticals, higher testing standards can create value through
generating information that decreases uncertainty, but this benefit comes with the potential cost of fewer available products due to delayed entry and higher entry costs from more
testing. Today such certification processes are commonplace and a source of controversy in
areas as diverse as airplanes, automobiles, electronics, finance, health care, and toys.1
In this paper, we use new, detailed data and exploit exogenous regulatory differences between the United States (US) and European Union (EU) to identify the impact of product
testing requirements (and the information and costs they generate) on market outcomes for
medical devices.2 Among its many duties, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
oversees medical device regulation in the US, while in the EU medical device approval is
performed by private organizations called “notified bodies.” The FDA applies a “safe and
effective” standard while EU notified bodies only certify the safety performance of the product. For the Class III medical devices we study, this difference is material. Meeting the
“effectiveness” standard often requires manufacturers to generate product performance information through large, randomized clinical trials. These trials are costly in both time and
expense. As a result, medical device manufactures (many of which are US based) typically
introduce products in the EU well before they are granted FDA approval, if they enter the
1

See, for example in airplanes “Boeing Acknowledges Tests Underestimated 787 Battery Risks”, The
New York Times, April 23, 2013; in automobiles “U.S. Sues Chrysler After Auto Maker Refuses to Recall
Cars”, The New York Times, June 5, 1996; in electronics “European Environmental Rules Propel Change
in U.S.”, The New York Times, July 06, 2004; in finance “An FDA for Securities Could Help Avert Crises”,
Bloomberg, April 2, 2012; in toys “Toy Makers Fight for Exemption From Rules”, The New York Times,
September 28, 2010.
2
In particular, our analysis focuses on coronary stents 2004-13. We chose this segment as the coronary
stent market is large and important with excellent market data and with constant innovations introduced
over time. Coronary stents treat ischemic heart disease—the narrowing of the coronary artery caused by
fatty deposits. Ischemic heart disease is the leading cause of global death accounting for 7 million fatalities
in 2010 (Lozano 2012). In 2013, total worldwide sales of coronary stents exceeded $7.9 billion with the vast
majority of those sales occurring in the US and the EU.

2

US at all.
The shared “safety” standard between the US and EU represents one of several limitations
of our study for understanding the varied issues involved in product testing regulation in
general. It means that we do not have variation to credibly examine differential safety
standards or the impact of no safety regulation at all. In keeping with the variation available
in our context, we focus on measuring the costs and benefits of additional effectiveness
information, which is also where the current policy debate for Class III medical devices is
centered.3
The differences between the US and the EU in the medical device approval process
have led to calls for reform in both regions. In the US, the FDA has faced criticism from
some commenters claiming that a slower, tougher approval process is crippling innovation.
However, others have taken the opposite view claiming that the approval process is too lax.4
Congress has responded to this debate by including measures in the 21st Century Cures Bill
that would change the amount of information the FDA is allowed to require before market
approval.5 In April 2017, the EU amended the Medical Device Directive, increasing data
collection on high risk devices both before and after they are allowed into the market.6
Despite its broad importance, empirical research on testing and information provision
for innovative new products is scarce. One major challenge is finding exogenous variation
in information provision regimes. To address this challenge, we exploit the fact that the
EU approval process requires less intensive pre-market testing from manufacturers, and as
a consequence it is both faster and less costly than the US approval process for any given
Class III device. We describe this difference in detail and argue that it is due to historical
political processes that are not correlated with market demand for Class III devices. From
a research design perspective, this setting provides us with two key features: First, we are
able to observe market outcomes for a number of new devices that are invented and enter
the EU where regulatory requirements are less stringent. This provides us with a candidate
population of products that might potentially be developed and enter (or not) under more
3

For the reader more familiar with pharmaceutical clinical trials, EU Class III device requirements could
be thought of as similar to Phase 1 and 2 pharmaceutical requirements, and the additional US Class III device
requirements as similar to Phase 3 pharmaceutical requirements. Thus, in the context of pharmaceuticals,
our analysis could be thought of as asking “How much Phase 3 testing should be required?” There are other
features of our context, however, that may differ from some pharmaceutical markets. In the Conclusion,
we provide more discussion on the extent to which our study of coronary stents might extrapolate to other
product markets.
4
For an example arguing the FDA is too lax “Report Criticized F.D.A. on Device Testing”, The New
York Times, January 15, 2009; and too tight “FDA Seeks to Toughen Defibrillator Regulations”, The New
York Times, March 22, 2013.
5
See “How Not to Fix the FDA”, The New York Times, July 20, 2015.
6
See http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/medical-devices/regulatory-framework/revision˙en.

3

stringent requirements. Second, we observe market outcomes for some devices under two
regulatory regimes with different pre-market testing requirements. Most importantly, we
observe EU market outcomes for devices that are concurrently undergoing US trials as well
as for those devices that are not undergoing US trials. This allows us to examine the EU
market response to the information generated by additional US trials. The key additional
identifying assumption for this comparison (which we verify in the data) is that selection
into US trials is based on the level of expected US profits, not uncertainty about product
quality at the time of EU entry.
A further challenge is assembling a dataset of sufficient detail and scope to credibly
identify the impact of different regulatory information regimes. We assemble monthly data
on prices and quantities for all coronary stents implanted at a large number of hospitals
in the US and the EU from 2004-13. Paired with product-month variation in participation
in US clinical trials, revealed preference arguments imply that such data capture the state
of market knowledge over the expected performance of a device, the uncertainty over that
expected performance for these devices, and, in turn, consumer choice patterns and welfare.7
We augment the market data with hand-collected data on clinical trials, which help to more
precisely demonstrate the differences in US and EU requirements, and also allow a validation
of our revealed preference estimates of product quality.
We begin by documenting multiple patterns in the data. The EU enjoys greater access
to the newest medical technologies. On average, US physicians have 11 stents available to
implant while their EU counterparts have 39 from which to choose – 81 percent of products
(accounting for 23 percent of stents used) in the EU never enter the US. Conditional on the
product entering the US, EU physicians have access to the product 10 months earlier.
However, EU consumers also face greater performance uncertainty by allowing entry with
less evidence on product efficacy. A clinical trial has been published for only 20 percent of
EU-only available devices. In contrast, 85 percent of FDA approved devices have undergone
a published clinical trail. Also, conditional on publishing a clinical trial, average sample sizes
for the FDA approved devices are 1313 patients vs. 280 for the EU-only devices. This extra
evidence comes at a cost as the additional subjects are associated with an extra 9 months in
trials (due to recruitment time). This time is costly in terms of delayed access for patients
7

In this sense, our approach contrasts with studies of the FDA using product introductions and withdrawals (e.g., Grabowski and Wang 2008; Olson 2008; Philipson et al. 2008). The EU does not record
introductions or recalls of devices in a publicly available database. More importantly, our interest is in
understanding whether further efficacy testing required by the US provides more precise information on
product performance, on which negative tail events such as recalls provide little information. See Stern et al.
(2017) and Nistor and Tucker (2015) for analyses of the correlations between FDA review time and adverse
event reporting for cardiac devices and the benefits and limitations of using adverse event data to infer device
safety.

4

as well as raising fixed costs of entry.8
To explore whether the information generated by additional testing for US approval is
valuable to consumers, we look to the market usage data in the EU and compare products
that undergo FDA trials to those that do not. As expected, in both the clinical trial and
market usage data, the products that begin US trials appear better on average at the time
of EU introduction. They are more clinically efficacious and are more likely to be implanted.
However, both sets of products have similar levels of uncertainty in terms of the standard
deviation of efficacy and usage upon introduction. Thus, selection into US trials appears to
be on differences in expected outcomes, not uncertainty about those outcomes.9
After EU entry, the two sets of products display different usage dynamics. For those
products in US trials, volatility in usage decreases over time, consistent with learning from
the trials. Average usage also increases as volatility decreases, consistent with consumers
valuing this additional information and facing decreasing risk. Products not in trials exhibit
neither of these patterns. We consider alternative mechanisms such as non-learning models
of product diffusion, learning from observational use versus learning from clinical trials, and
signaling with asymmetric information. We conclude the evidence is strongest for EU market
learning from information spillovers from US clinical trials, with firms and physicians facing
symmetric uncertainty about these additional trials.10
In order to derive welfare measures and address policy questions regarding optimal regulation, we construct and estimate a structural model of an agent charged with regulating
medical devices and medical device manufacturers and consumers optimally responding to
8

See Makower et al. (2010) for industry estimates of $1.6M per month for a Class III medical device

trial.
9
Note that this assumption is key in the reduced form analysis (to rule out that the evidence of no learning
in the sample of products not in US trials is not due to there simply being nothing to learn about them),
but a weaker version is needed in the structural analysis, where we model and estimate the distribution of
product qualities for each subsample. There the key to the credibility of our counterfactual analysis is that
the same learning rate we estimate from the set of products in US trials would apply to the set of products
not in trials, if they were to undertake them (a slightly milder “parallel trends” assumption).
10
Manufacturers may indeed have private information about their device prior to undertaking in-human
trials, but our analysis of the data is most consistent with a model where firms and physicians are symmetrically (un)informed after the results of trials required for EU market entry are released. This is a departure
from the asymmetric information that is frequently the focus of discussion in regulation of pharmaceutical
markets (Scott Morton and Kyle 2012) and in the broader literature on certification (Dranove and Jin 2010).
Our institutional setting of coronary stents – where trials generate important information that could not
be otherwise obtained by manufacturers and interventional cardiologists pay close attention to new technologies being developed – is a case where symmetric information seems like a reasonable approximation to
the first-order forces at work. We believe that many markets with published testing results and informed
consumers may also fit this model, and indeed symmetric information games of persuasion and information
disclosure have recently received increased attention in the literature (e.g., Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011).
In the conclusion, we discuss in more detail what we perceive as the boundaries to our analysis, in particular
the ways in which other product markets may be similar or different to coronary stents 2004-13.

5

the agent’s regulatory policy. In the model, products are invented with uncertain performance characteristics. EU and US regulators establish product performance statistical
thresholds that the product must meet before it can be marketed to consumers in those
regions. These performance thresholds are designed to limit the likelihood that harmful
devices (or devices that provide limited health benefits) are marketed to consumers. The
statistical thresholds determine the clinical trial sample size which, in turn, maps into the
manufacturer’s entry cost and time required to run the trial. Consumers learn about product
performance through these trials and/or potentially through observational learning once a
product is available in the marketplace.
We estimate the structural parameters of the demand model using detailed producthospital-month price and quantity data and our hand collected data on the timing and results of clinical trials. Our demand system combines a model of utility over health outcomes
(Cardon and Hendel 2001; Handel 2013) with a model of consumer learning (Roberts and
Urban 1988; Erdem and Keane 1996; Ackerberg 2003; Crawford and Shum 2005; Ching 2010)
and recent work by Quan and Williams (2017) that accounts for regional variation in tastes
(and in our adaptation, hospital variation in learning processes). The model provides an internally consistent approach to estimate the perceived stent quality distribution, market and
hospital level learning about product quality, consumer risk aversion over health outcomes,
and heterogeneity in preferences over stent attributes across hospitals and patients/doctors.
The demand model generates sensible parameter estimates which we also validate using
outside data sources. Consistent with the reduced form evidence, they imply that FDA
required clinical trials generate useful information, and there is practically no hospital or
market level observational learning via market usage experience in the EU marketplace.11
Combined with product quality estimates that indicate significant variation in stent quality, this implies the returns to early product testing are large for stents. Without any EU
testing, the market for stents would shrink significantly. Further, the estimates suggest that
required US testing in excess of EU requirements substantially decreases the uncertainty of
using an inferior product and thus significantly increases consumer surplus. It also implies
that the EU enjoys positive spillovers from US testing – if US testing were equal to the
EU, welfare in the EU would decline by 6.4 percent. Our demand estimates also allow us
to calculate technological change in the EU stent market where we find that (from 2004 to
2013) consumer surplus increased by 10 percent, and this increase was driven by an increase
in product variety and not from increases in the mean quality of newly introduced products.
11

The estimate of no observational learning in the EU for coronary stents is not surprising, given that
there is currently no systematic data collected that links stents used to clinical outcomes. It is exactly this
lack of data that has prompted calls for more “post-market surveillance” that we examine in some of our
counterfactuals.

6

We then consider optimal regulatory policy that balances risk from efficacy uncertainty
versus access to new devices. A full model of supply requires work at or beyond the methodological frontiers of the buyer-supplier contracting and dynamic entry game literatures, which
we leave for future research. Instead we consider simple-to-compute cases that approximate
larger and smaller sets of firms that are expected to enter as a function of regulatory policy
and firm behavior, and we explore welfare outcomes and optimal regulatory policy under
these cases. Our estimates imply that EU surplus could increase by as much as 3-7 percent
by requiring more pre-market testing for stents. Indeed, total surplus is maximized when the
premarket trials are at least 16-17 months longer than current EU requirements. Thus, for
stents 2004-13, US regulatory policy is statistically equivalent to the policy that maximizes
surplus in our estimated model. We explore the factors that affect the optimal trial length
calculation and find that the optimal trial length is: decreasing in costs of trials, increasing
in the quality of existing technology, and non-monotonic in the precision of clinical trial
information.
Our final piece of analysis examines optimal policy under counterfactual regimes with
greater “post-market surveillance.” This idea, which is a centerpiece of the 21st Century
Cures legislation, has a straightforward logic. Increased post-market learning could maintain risk reduction while lowering pre-market requirements, thus decreasing entry lags (and
potentially costs). We find that if post-approval learning rates could approach those we
observe from clinical trials, the benefits from such a policy change are substantial.12 An
extreme case, where post-approval learning is as informative as pre-market trials, at zero
incremental cost, would yield an estimated welfare increase of 15-18 percent.13
Our focus on information and market structure is complementary to recent empirical
research on other regulatory tools that affect late-stage product development and entry incentives, such as patent breadth and length (Budish et al. 2015), price regulations (Kyle 2007;
Filson 2012), and regulatory uncertainty and innovation incentives (Stern 2017). Whereas
the focus of that literature is on the extent and timing with which products undergo late
stage R&D/testing and eventually enter the market, we show that, in addition to these
innovation and entry implications, the welfare impact of the product performance information generated can also be large. New medical technologies with uncertain quality can only
achieve their welfare potential if the necessary clinical trial studies are performed to inform
12

The FDA recently introduced a Unique Device Identifier system that could facilitate post-market data
collection. However, there is currently debate regarding if/when UDIs may be added to patient claims data.
13
It is unclear how extreme this case is. On one hand, post-market learning would likely lack the clean
randomization and blinding of a clinical trial, decreasing learning. However, real-world usage patterns might
be the policy effect of interest, and real-world use might see more cases and uncover rare events a clinical
trial could not.

7

their proper use. This also points to one of the limitations our analysis shares with much of
the prior research – we do not consider the impact of changes in regulatory requirements on
earlier stage innovation.
More broadly, our work relates to recent empirical research that estimates model primitives without imposing optimality of the regulatory environment, and thus can use the estimated model to study optimal regulation itself (Timmins 2002; Seim and Waldfogel 2013;
Miravete et al. 2014; Hamilton et al. 2018). Combining this literature with recent developments in modeling consumer demand with learning is essential in allowing us to build upon
the work of Peltzman (1973) in measuring the impact of regulatory information requirements. As we build on established models, we provide an approach that others with similar
data and variation in information regimes might find useful for studying regulation in other
markets, such as the value of price information studied in Brown (2017). Our work also
relates to the literature measuring the value of new products in general (Petrin 2002; Quan
and Williams 2017; Aguiar and Waldfogel 2018), where our integration of quality uncertainty
seems like an important component to account for in many industries, as referenced in the
opening paragraph.
Beyond the economics of information and product quality regulation, our analysis also
speaks to an active and contentious policy debate with potentially large welfare consequences.
The amount of economic activity regulated by the FDA and the notified bodies is significant. As of 2010, medical device sales exceeded $150B or 6 percent of total national health
expenditures in the US and $130B (7.5 percent) in the EU.14 Further, the introduction of
new medical technologies are responsible for significant reductions in mortality; and in so
far as different regulatory regimes affect the availability of these technologies, their welfare
impact extends beyond the direct costs of the devices themselves (Murphy and Topel 2006).

2

Medical Device Regulation in the US and the EU

The term medical device applies to a broad set of product categories, ranging from crutches
to pacemakers to CT scanners. In this study we focus on coronary stents, a blockbuster
device in terms of sales and health impact, but also typical of implantable devices that are
deemed “necessary for the sustainment of life” and thus regulated as Class III devices in the
US and EU. It is for Class III devices that EU and US regulatory approaches diverge most
widely, creating the variation we leverage in our study.15 Coronary stents are a small metal
14

Donahoe and King (2012) and Medtech Europe (2013).
Class I devices are low risk devices such as elastic bandages are subject to ‘general controls’ and do not
require pre-market approval. Class II devices are higher risk in which general controls alone cannot assure
safety and effectiveness (e.g. infusion pumps).
15

8

mesh tube that is inserted into the coronary artery to treat atherosclerosis (the build up of
lesions of plaque that narrow the arteries).
Before detailing these regulatory differences, it is useful to keep in mind some basic
facts about the structure of decision making and the players in the market. First, hospitals
generate revenue by performing a procedure (such as an angioplasty with stent), and the price
for purchasing the device is an input cost the hospital incurs. The physician who performs
the procedure will typically be compensated either as a salaried employee of the hospital,
or on a fee-for-service basis for the procedure, where in either case the financial benefits
to the physician are unrelated to the specific brand of device used. Physicians typically
have strong preferences over which specific product is best to use for a given patient/lesion
type (devices in this class are often referred to as “physician preference items”) because
devices are differentiated in physical characteristics of the implanted device itself (for a stent
examples are shape, strength, flexibility, and type of drug/polymer) and also characteristics
that affect ease of implantation (for stents: unexpanded size and flexibility, and controls and
capabilities of the catheters and balloons used in delivery). The supply-side of the market
is thus a differentiated oligopoly, and prices are typically negotiated between manufacturers
and hospitals, hospital systems, or regional purchasing authorities.
For the purposes of this study, the most important features of the stent market to note
are the constant introduction of new products. These may differ from incumbent products
by offering clinical performance improvements or by design modifications to address less
common niche markets such as small vessel and bifurcated lesions. The two most common
stent types are bare metal (BMS), first introduced to the US in 1994; and drug eluting
(DES), first US introduction 2003, which are coated with a polymer and drug to inhibit scar
tissue growth. Interventional cardiologists are a relatively small and technologically aware
community who stay engaged through close relationships with manufacturers, journals, and
several well-attended meetings each year (Transcatheter Cardiovascular Therapeutics each
Fall, American College of Cardiology in March, and European Society of Cardiology in
August each year, as well as numerous regional affiliated conferences throughout the year)
at which the most recent results of in-progress clinical trials are reported.
2.1

Similarities and Differences in US and EU Regulation

Medical device regulation in the US began with the Medical Device Amendments Act of
1976, placing oversight authority within the FDA. The criteria the FDA is mandated to use
is “safe and effective.” The Act established three classifications of devices (I, II and III),
based on perceived health risk. Class III devices are defined as those used in “supporting or
sustaining human life, of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health,
9

or presenting a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.”
In the US, the approval process for a Class III device generally requires data from randomized clinical trials, involving thousands of patients and costing tens of millions of dollars
to complete.16 The FDA plays a significant role in determining the design, statistical power,
clinical endpoints and duration of the trial (Kaplan and Stern 2018). The FDA also insures
that the proper clinical trial best practices are used (e.g. data management, audits, core
laboratory review), while clinical studies performed outside of the context of obtaining FDA
approval typically lack many of these best practices (Kaplan and Stern 2018). For stents, the
FDA generally requires the trial to demonstrate efficacy on a number of clinically meaningful
end points including target lesion revascularization (TLR), death, and major adverse cardiac
events (MACE) which is a composite of death, myocardial infarction (heart attack), stent
thrombosis, and target lesion revascularization.
In the EU, the regulatory process is quite different, governed primarily by the Medical
Devices Directive of June, 1993, which has been adopted by each EU member state. A
medical device is approved for marketing in the EU once it receives a ‘CE mark’ of conformity.
The CE mark system relies heavily on third parties know as “notified bodies”, which are
independent, commercial organizations that are designated, monitored, and audited by the
member states via “competent authorities.” As of this writing, there are more than 70
active notified bodies within the EU. A firm is free to choose any notified body designated
to cover the particular type of device.17 To obtain a CE mark, a Class III medical device
needs to demonstrate safety and performance. Compliance with this standard can usually be
demonstrated with simpler, cheaper clinical trials than required by the FDA. Once a device
has been approved for use in one EU country, it can be marketed in any member country.18
Despite their differences, both regions require the submission of similar, detailed engineering and manufacturing process information to assess safety and some measures of perfor16
There are two common pathways to bring a device to market: Pre-Market Approval (PMA) for Class
III devices, and the 510(k) for Class II and some Class I devices. Under the 510(k) process the manufacturer
demonstrates the device is ‘substantially equivalent’ to a predicate device. Bench testing and perhaps a
small clinical study are all that are typically necessary. A straightforward 510(k) clearance can typically be
obtained within months.
17
See Guidelines Relating to Medical Devices Directives, http://ec.europa.eu/health/medicaldevices/documents/guidelines/.
18
In both the US and EU, new-to-the-world devices may face the additional hurdle of gaining payor
reimbursement, but the devices we study are second (and later) generation products, so coverage and payment
determination has already been made. Coverage decisions are generally based on cost-effectiveness and
budgetary impact analysis performed at the national level. For the EU countries in our sample, hospitals
are typically paid on a per procedure basis and the hospitals pay for devices used in the procedure as part
of the cost of providing care (Schreyögg et al. 2006). The price of the device is determined through bilateral
negotiations between the device manufacture and either a local or regional purchasing authority (Sorenson
and Kanavos 2011).

10

mance. Thus, insofar as the EU testing requirements successfully prevent “unsafe” devices
from reaching the market, we do not have in-sample variation allowing us to assess the value
of these minimal “safety” standards shared by both regimes. This places our primary focus
on the value of additional FDA “efficacy” testing, which is also the region of focus of the
current policy debates.19
The difference between the two regulatory regimes implies that there will be variation in
the information sets available to physicians on the performance of the stent across devices
marketed in the EU. Devices undergoing FDA required trials in order to enter the US market
will run large, costly, randomized clinical trials while those devices that won’t enter the US
will not. In our sample, all devices that are ultimately granted FDA approval are sold in
the EU well before they are granted FDA clearance. This is the variation we will leverage
to understand the extent to which the additional FDA “efficacy” testing in the human body
generates information that the marketplace values.
It is also important to note that the differences between the EU and the US are largely
a consequence of different histories that led to the passing of the primary medical device
legislation in the two regions (Van Norman 2016). The Medical Device Directive, the centerpiece of the EU medical device regulatory framework, was passed in 1993 when there
was keen interest in a new approach to harmonizing regulatory frameworks across the member states. The EU had just undertaken a long and frustrating harmonization process for
food and drugs. This new approach sought to avoid detailed and bureaucratic government
approval processes, particularly duplicative approvals. This framework was also applied to
other products including toys, pressure vessels, and personal protective equipment. In contrast, the US medical device regulatory framework was established after the Dalkon Shield
injured several thousand women, garnering significant public outcry. The FDA already had
oversight on some aspects of medical devices, and expanding that role was the most viable
political option. At that time, a non-governmental approach to device regulation was never
seriously considered by the Congress.
The gap between the two regulatory systems is the focus of a number of consulting and
government reports. For example, a series of Boston Consulting Group (BCG) reports shows
19
It is common to view “safety and effectiveness” as separate concepts. In our context, they can best be
thought of as lying on a single dimensional continuum. For example, a key endpoint for the FDA in assessing
a stent is Target Vessel Revascularization (TVR), the need for a repeat procedure on the same lesion, but it
is not obvious if a TVR rate of say 10 vs. 5 percent in one month should be categorized as a deficiency in
safety, efficacy, or both. The FDA implicitly acknowledges this is as it does not distinguish different clinical
endpoints for safety and effectiveness for cardiac stents – they categorize the clinical analysis as simply “safety
and effectiveness”. See, for example, http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh docs/pdf15/P150003b.pdf. While
we believe that the single quality/safety dimension assumption is a good approximation of the coronary stent
setting, it might not be generalizable to other health technology environments.

11

that there is no difference in recalls between devices that are marketed in both the US and
the EU. The FDA countered the BCG report with their own case study of 12 devices that
were approved in the EU and were not approved by the FDA. They found that four of those
devices caused significant adverse events in patients, and the other eight devices would not
have met the FDA’s efficacy standard. While there are highly publicized events in which
a device clearly and obviously causes significant harm, those cases are rare. This is not
surprising, given that both the EU and FDA require significant safety testing. Perhaps most
importantly, by focusing on extreme, rare cases of recalls and adverse events, none of these
studies address the primary difference inherent in FDA vs CE Mark requirements for Class
III devices—more precise estimation of product efficacy.
It is important to note that while unsafe stents appear not to have been marketed in the
EU, the clinical trial results suggest meaningful differences in the clinical efficacy of stents.
For example, in Medtronic’s FDA approval for its Endeavor stent, the summary reports
that Endeavor’s 9-month major adverse cardiac event (MACE) rate is equivalent to Boston
Scientific’s Taxus Express II and 20 percent less than Johnson and Johnson’s Cypher stent.
Its target vessel failure (TVF) rate was 8 percent less than the Taxus stent.20 The impact
of TVF is significant as it requires additional interventions to restore vessel function.

3

Data Summary and Reduced Form Analysis

The primary data set used in this study consists of quantities and prices at the producthospital-month level, collected by Millennium Research Group’s (MRG) MarketTrack international survey of hospitals from 2004-2013. This survey, covering approximately 10 percent
of total market activity, is the main source of detailed market intelligence in the medical
device sector. Its goal is to produce representative estimates of product market shares and
prices by region. Importantly, MRG also tracks the number of diagnostic angiographies (a
procedure that must be preformed before a stent can be inserted), providing the number of
patients potentially eligible for a stent in each hospital-month. The countries in our sample
are US, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. These data are quite large
with 494,304 product-hospital-month observations across 372 hospitals in the US and 416
hospitals in the EU.
We supplement the detailed market data with our own searches for product approval
dates in the EU and US in order to validate data coverage within our sample and also to
determine the time in market for products that enter outside of our sample period. In addition, we collected clinical trial data (when available) from various journal articles, conference
20

http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh docs/pdf6/P060033b.pdf

12

abstracts, press releases, and product catalogs. These provide further evidence regarding the
size and length of trials required for US versus EU entry. They also provide clinical outcomes,
which we use to validate our revealed preference estimates of product quality.
Figure 1 summarizes statistics on testing and market access in the EU vs. US. The top
third of the table in panel (a) presents summary statistics for our clinical trial data, listing
data on trials with primary endpoints completed prior to entry in each market. We were
able to find such data for almost all of the products entering the US and 20 percent of the
products that enter the EU. Conditional on publishing a clinical trial online, EU trials are
shorter and enroll fewer patients. On average, by the time a product enters the US, it has
undergone 2 clinical trials, enrolling over 1300 patients and lasting 28 months in total, while
upon entering the EU, the typical product has completed only a single trial with 280 patients
lasting 19 months. This large difference in trial patterns is not surprising given the testing
requirement differentials across the two regions.
Interestingly, the modal/median follow up time for the primary trial endpoint across
all of these trials is 12 months, so the additional time in US trials is driven primarily by
the additional time required in patient recruitment for a larger trial.21 This points to the
primary cost of generating information through clinical trials – more certainty in performance
estimates requires recruiting more patients, which takes more time (delays entry), and is more
expensive (raises fixed costs of entry).22

Figure 1: Stent clinical trials and market structure in the US and EU.
(b) EU usage of stents not in US
EU

1

85.7
2
1313
28

20.1
1
280
19

4 (3)
11 (5)
21 (11)
10
17

21 (5)
39 (8)
109 (22)
-

.2

Market structure data:
Mean manufacturers in market
Mean products in market
Total products in market 2004-13
Mean months EU to US entry
Mean months EU to US entry (DES)
(Usage within hospital in parentheses.)

US

0

Clinical trial data:
Pct products w/ published trials pre-entry
Median number of trials
Median total trial size (patients)
Median total trial time (months)

Share in the EU
.4
.6
.8

(a) EU vs. US: Clinical and Market Data

Jan 05

Jan 07

Jan 09

Currently not in US

Jan 11

Jan 13

Never in US

The bottom two thirds of the table, and the graph in panel (b), show how these pre21

Total trial length equals recruitment time until the last patient is recruited, plus the 12 months until
the primary follow up for the last patient.
22
See Appendix A.2 for more detailed figures and regressions relating number of patients and trial recruiting time for EU and US trials.

13

market testing requirements are correlated with market structure and product usage in the
US and the EU over our sample period. The EU has over three times as many manufacturers
and products as the US (and still nearly two times as many when measured at the hospital
rather than region level). For those products that eventually enter the US, the average
lag between EU and US introduction is 10 months (17 months for the more technologically
advanced DES).
Many of the products to which the EU has greater access are important and frequently
used. In the average month, 49 percent of the stents used in the EU are unavailable in the
US at that point in time, and 23 percent will never be available in the US.
These basic clinical trial and market structure data illustrate the tension between the two
regulatory approaches. The EU enjoys greater access to a broader variety of devices, and
these devices are available earlier than in the US. However, EU consumers have less testing
on the health impact of these products. The goal of our analysis will be to determine, for
our sample of coronary stents 2004-13, whether the extra US testing provides information
that the market values in terms of decreasing uncertainty, the extent to which there is
observational learning outside of clinical trials, and the value of access to more products
earlier in the EU versus the value of any reductions in uncertainty.
3.1

Evidence: Information and Market Response

We next turn to examining the patterns in adoption and diffusion of stents by region and
FDA trial status. Figure 2 illustrates the evolution of three different statistics plotted against
product age (defined as time since introduction to the region) for three subsets of the data:
the US, the EU for products running clinical trials to enter the US, and the EU for other
products. The figures are constructed after controlling for product fixed effects, so that all
patterns are driven by within-product variation over time.23
h
i
^
Panel (a) plots the empirical mean across products of a given age of Ej|a ln(s
/s
)
jt 0t
where sjt is the within region share of product j in month t and s0t is the relevant outside good
share based on the number of reported angiographies – this proxies for the mean perceived
stent utility (which incorporates both the perceived uncertainty and clinical performance)
at age a.24 For the EU products undergoing US trials, this value is lower upon introduction
23

Within product variation, re-centered at mean across all products for each sample to preserve level
^
differences across the samples, so: ln(s
jt /s0t ) = ln(sjt /s0t ) − Et|j ln(sjt /s0t ) + Ejt ln(sjt /s0t ). See Appendix
C.3 for proofs regarding the relationship between the patterns in the moments of the market share (as proxies
for mean utility) distribution and age/information explored here.
24
We chose this measure to balance allowing for some basic controls on the data without putting too much
structure on this exploratory analysis. This would be exactly mean utility in a logit model, so along with
product fixed effects, this measure controls at least in part for competition and substitution. Our subsequent
structural analyses control explicitly for several additional sources of variation.

14

and gradually increases with age, plateauing after approximately two years in the market.
As we discuss in more detail in the next section, this trend is consistent with a model
where consumers learn from US trials and increase average usage as uncertainty is resolved.
However, it is also potentially consistent with observational learning by product experience
in the market, or with drivers of diffusion other than learning. We will use the two other
product subsets and two other statistics to examine these differing explanations.

Figure 2: Usage patterns after entry, by region and trial status.
Within product variation, re-centered at mean across all products, so: ln(s^
jt /s0t ) = ln(sjt /s0t ) − Et|j ln(sjt /s0t ) +
Ejt ln(sjt /s0t ) for each of three samples. Lines fit using fractional polynomials with standard errors clustered by
month. Coefficients in table below from regressions of each dependent variable (disaggregated except for SD) regressed
on age fixed effects: yejt = θa + ejt . ∆θa := θa=24 − θa=1 .

h
i
^
(b) SDj|a ln(s
jt /s0t )

h
i
^
(c) Ej|a P r(s
jht = 0)

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
US

EU (US trials)

24

EU (not)

1
.8
Pr[sj=0]
.4
.6
.2
0

0

-8

.2

-7

Ej[ln(sj/s0)]
-6
-5

SDj[ln(sj/s0)]
.4 .6 .8

-4

1

-3

1.2

h
i
^
(a) Ej|a ln(s
jt /s0t )

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
US

θa=1
ln(sjt /s0t )
-3.39
(0.12)
EU |
-4.69
Ej|a U Strials ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.27)
EU |
-7.01
Ej|a not ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.13)
U S ln(s /s )
SDj|a
0.50
jt 0t
(0.05)
EU |
0.89
SDj|a U Strials ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.18)
EU |
0.99
SDj|a not ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.08)
U S (s
P rj|a
0.50
jht = 0)
(0.05)
EU |
0.77
P rj|a U Strials (sjht = 0)
(0.18)
EU |
0.96
P rj|a not (sjht = 0)
(0.08)
N U S = 317, N EU |U Strials = 380, and N EU |not = 1050
month Nt = 114 in parentheses.
US
Ej|a

EU (US trials)

24

EU (not)

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
US

EU (US trials)

EU |
θa=24
∆θa
∆θa U Strials − ∆θarow
-3.43
-0.04
1.04∗∗∗
(0.14)
(0.18)
(0.29)
-3.69
1.00∗∗∗
(0.09)
(0.28)
-6.57
0.44∗
0.56∗
(0.14)
(0.19)
(0.34)
0.38
-0.11
-0.38∗∗∗
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.20)
0.39
-0.49∗∗∗
(0.05)
(0.19)
0.84
-0.15
-0.34∗∗∗
(0.12)
(0.15)
(0.25)
0.42
-0.08∗
-0.11∗
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.20)
0.58
-0.19∗∗∗
(0.05)
(0.19)
0.94
-0.02∗∗
-0.17∗∗∗
(0.12)
(0.15)
(0.25)
product-month observations. Standard errors clustered by

If product introduction exhibited a slow diffusion of usage due to timing of response to
marketing, sales, or distribution post-launch, then one would expect the same products in
15

24

EU (not)

the US, or other products in the EU, to exhibit a similar pattern. However, neither the US
data nor the EU data for products not undergoing US trials exhibit a meaningful upward
trend in panel (a) – the mean usage patterns in those cases are flat over time after product
introduction. This suggests neither market-specific nor product-specific factors alone drive
the increased usage over time of products in the EU undergoing US trials.
Toh further examine
the learning hypothesis, panel (b) plots the standard deviation
i
^
SDj|a ln(s
jt /s0t ) across products against age. Standard models of learning predict that
this statistic will decrease toward the population’s true quality standard deviation as uncertainty is resolved. As with the mean, this second moment changes over time for the EU
sample of products concurrently in US trials – decreasing as we would expect with learning
– but it does not change for the US sample or EU sample of products not in US trials.
Importantly, both EU samples have the same level of volatility upon EU introduction, suggesting there is a similar amount to be learned about products regardless of US trial status.
However, only those stents in US trials exhibit evidence of learning.
Finally, panel (c) shows how usage at the hospital level evolves with age as
h measured by
i
^
the proportion of zero usage observations at the product-hospital level Ej|a P r(sjht = 0) .
Similar to the aggregate results, the EU sample undergoing US trials begins with slightly
more hospitals using each product on average, and this proportion grows with age, whereas
it stays flat for products not undergoing trials.
The results above highlight that more information, on average, increases a product’s
share. However, information generated in a trial might not be positive and lead to a stent’s
share to decline. In Appendix B.1 we show some example paths for individual products and
discuss one case in detail. CoStar was a new stent technology that was acquired by Johnson
and Johnson prior to running the FDA pivotal trial. While early small sample evidence
was promising, the final trial results on the full sample showed that the device was not as
effective as other existing stents. The impact of that information caused CoStar’s EU share
to tumble. These results are also consistent with the notion, explored more systematically
in Section 3.2, that device manufactures do not precisely know the efficacy of their device
prior to running a large clinical trial of the type required by the FDA.
3.2

Robustness and Alternative Explanations

Placebo Test: PTCA Balloons. One alternative explanation for the above findings
is that the set of manufacturers/products that undergo US trials promote their products
differently than other products in the EU, and they may also market the same products
upon US introduction differently. While we believe the evidence on decreasing variance and
on the same products upon US launch make this unlikely, it is not impossible. To further
16

explore this possibility, we perform a placebo test using percutaneous transcatheter coronary
artery (PTCA) balloons, which are FDA Class II devices and thus face similar regulatory
requirements in both the EU and US. Thus, PTCA should not display the differential signs of
learning we document for stents if our proposed mechanism is true. The results in Appendix
B.2.1 show that we do see more total entry in the EU (presumably due to pre-existing
complementary sales and distribution assets in the US for some manufacturers and not
others); but the differences in amount of entry are smaller than in stents, there is no gap in
time of entry on average, and usage patterns with age show no evidence of learning.
Alternative Explanation: Observational Learning with Different Initial Sample
Size. Another potential explanation for the results in Figure 2 is that there is learning in
the EU sample undergoing US trials, but this is learning is observational. The difference
between the patterns in the two samples is then plausibly driven by the fact that those stents
undergoing US trials enter with higher usage levels, which generate sufficient sample sizes
for observational learning to occur, whereas the EU sample not undergoing trials contains
too many products that do not gain enough early traction to enable learning.
We examine this hypothesis by reformulating the same figures and tests for a set of
products with overlapping support on initial values of ln(sjt /s0t ) at aj = 1, so they all have
similar chances to generate early observational learning. The pattern in Appendix Figure
A5 is essentially identical to that in Figure 2, suggesting that our results are not driven by
selection on initial quality/usage levels.25
Alternative Explanation: Asymmetric Information and Signaling. Another potential explanation that could rationalize Figure 2 is manufacturer signaling. Under this
hypothesis, after the release of EU trial data, manufacturers retain a sufficiently large degree
of private information about expected product quality, so that undertaking costly US trials
is a credible signal of expected product quality to physicians. To produce the observed data
patterns, such a model also needs to include some combination of slow signal diffusion across
hospitals and/or increasing signal strength as a trial continues. We explore this hypothesis
^
by looking more closely at the shapes of the distribution of ln(s
jt /s0t )|a with age.
^
Appendix Figure A6 shows the evolution with age of different quantiles of the ln(s
jt /s0t )|a
distribution. Under a model where manufacturers and physicians are similarly informed
about quality after the release of trials for EU entry, and then learn similarly as data from US
trials is released, the distribution of product quality estimates should converge symmetrically
25

For this matched sample, selection into US trials must be based on level shifts in expected US profit
due to the fact that those products that enter the US all have pre-existing complementary assets for sales
and distribution (while those that don’t enter do not). This is consistent with the challenges firms such as
Biotronik have faced in developing US sales forces. See, “Tipping the Odds for a Maker of Heart Implants,”
New York Times, April 2, 2011.

17

to the true product quality distribution. In an asymmetric information setting, consumers
do not receive direct information about quality, but instead infer quality must be above some
threshold if a manufacturer is willing to continue with costly testing (see Appendix B.2.3 for
more on this intuition). Learning in this way would cause the lower tail of the distribution
for product in US trials to become truncated. In the Figure, the 25 and 75 percentiles
appear to move symmetrically towards the median as information arrives. Below the figure,
we present relevant test statistics. The change in the skewness of the distribution and the
change in the ratio of the 75th-50th percentile to the 50th-25th are both insignificant.
Exploring Other US/EU Differences. We consider the evidence comparing the two
samples within the EU to be the strongest regarding the risk-access tradeoff, and so our
estimation and welfare analysis moving forward will focus on the EU sample only. However,
we still find the comparison between the US and EU informative in considering the broader
policy environment and the extent to which results from the EU sample can be extrapolated
to consider US policy.
We have argued that historical political circumstances have led to greater testing requirements in the US than in the EU, and that the cost of these different testing requirements have
led to more and earlier entry in the EU. Further, we have presented evidence from EU usage
patterns that this differential testing has led to different amounts of information generation,
and that the market values the resulting decreased uncertainty of products with more information. In theory, these differences in entry and usage patterns could be confounded with
other differences in disease incidence, preferences for angioplasty and stents, or variation in
price setting regimes between the US and EU over time. However, all the evidence that we
have been able to gather (detailed in Appendix B.3 and summarized here) indicates that
the patterns in the data described above are unlikely to be explained by other cross-region
differences. Rates of ischemic heart disease, hospital diagnostic procedures, and prevalence
of angioplasty with stenting are all similar between US and EU. Willingness-to-pay for new
technology and prices tend to follow similar trends, but are on level lower in the EU, making
the US a more attractive entry target, all else equal, and pushing in the opposite direction
of the entry levels observed.
3.3

Summary of the Evidence

Our reading of the totality of the evidence we have assembled from stent entry and usage
patterns aligns most closely with a model in which there is uncertainty about new product
performance, learning occurs symmetrically to market players over time, and risk-averse
decision makers factor uncertainty about quality into their product choice. The results imply

18

that there is significant learning from US clinical trials but very little learning observationally
in the marketplace. This second finding is also consistent with institutional details regarding
the lack of clinical follow-ups and systematic data collection on device clinical performance
after market entry, which itself is part of the current policy debate.
We examine alternative plausible explanations, and no other model seems to fit the
full set of patterns in the data. Specifically, the patterns we observe are not consistent
with differential marketing/diffusion, differential demand side factors, differential prices and
lags in reimbursement determination, selection into testing based on uncertainty, or residual
asymmetric information (post EU testing) between manufacturers and regulators/consumers.

4

Model of Demand and Supply with Uncertainty and Regulation

In this section, we specify an empirical model of cardiac stent demand and supply. This
framework incorporates the important institutional details of the industry and is flexible
enough to capture the dynamic patterns in the data we documented in the previous section.
The model allows us to: (1) decompose the various drivers of product utilization in a way
that we could not in the analysis in Section 3; (2) translate the patterns in the data into
measures of welfare; and (3) explore equilibrium outcomes under counterfactual scenarios
related to the current policy debates in medical device regulation.
We begin our description of the model by characterizing the players, the timing and the
information structure of the game. We then detail our demand model where consumers
(physicians) have heterogeneous preferences over stent design characteristics and face uncertainty over the stent’s performance. Physicians are able to learn about stent performance
from clinical trials as well as market and hospital specific experience. We then turn to the
supply side, where we develop a simple model of device manufacturers’ behavior that enables
us to consider the welfare impact of different regulatory policies. The section concludes by
describing the role of the regulator.
4.1

Players, Timing and Information

1. There are two exogenously determined types of medical device manufacturers: U Strial
firms with sunk distribution networks in the EU and US and notU Strial firms with
an EU-only sunk distribution network. A sunk distribution network means that the
marginal fixed cost of introducing a new product is given only by the cost of satisfying
the regulatory approval process.26 In each period t, there is a positive, exogenous
26

There are three key implications of assuming no additional costs of product introduction beyond testing
costs. First, the set of product qualities we estimate from the products who enter in the data {Qj } provides

19

probability that each manufacturer will innovate and produce a new device.
2. The mean performance of a new implanted device j is given by Q∗j ∼ FtU Strial (Q). In order to keep the model tractable, we follow the consumer learning literature (Erdem and
2
Keane 1996) in assuming this distribution is normal FtU Strial (Q) := N (µQUt Strial , σQ
U Strial ).
The dependence of F on t allows for the technology to evolve over time, and F is indexed by manufacturer type, allowing for different prior beliefs regarding the quality
distribution for different manufacturer types.27
3. For each product, prior to the initial period of EU entry, we assume the firm receives a noisy but unbiased i.i.d. signal via product testing, AEU
= Q∗j + νjEU where
j
2
). We assume this testing is costless (at the margin) to the firm given
νjEU ∼ N (0, σEU
its infrastructure in place for ongoing research and development, and the results provide sufficient information to satisfy EU regulatory requirements. We also assume the
resulting posterior information set of the firm Ij1 := (Q1j , σj1 ) is revealed to the EU
regulators via the approval process and to physician consumers upon EU launch.
4. A UStrials firm will begin US trials for a stent if expected discounted lifetime profits
(with a monthly discount premium of ζ) given the required US trial length TUc S :28



E Πj (TUc S )| I 1 = E 

!1−ζ(t−tj −TUc S )

tj +TUc S

X

X

t=tj +TUc S

h

qjht (pjht − mcj )


I 1

(1)

an appropriate estimate of the true distribution of product qualities F (Q). Second, the set of firms who enter
in the data (under additional assumptions in Section 4.3) should be a superset of the firms who would enter
in a counterfactual equilibrium with more restrictive testing requirements. Finally, it implies that no firm
will decide not to enter after learning “bad news” from further testing. Although this is a strong assumption,
it seems to be supported by the fact that 10 percent of EU products in the data generate lifetime profits of
$1.3M or less, and most entries are from existing companies. In addition, our analyses show that this tail of
lower profit products is marginal in its welfare effects, so to the extent that there are some marginal firms
that might for some reason enter under more restrictive entry policies, it seems unlikely that they would
meaningfully affect our analysis.
27
Our GMM estimation approach will recover each Q∗j without parametric restrictions on the distribution,
and the results are reasonably close to normally distributed. We are limited in our ability to allow σQ to
vary as estimation of this parameter relies on pooling the estimated Q∗j .
28
The expected profits for the entry/testing decision are computed using the estimated quality after EU
testing, Ij1 = (Q1j , σj1 ), and taking the expectation over any subsequent learning that will occur. We further
assume that products will exit after the fixed number of periods for which we observe them purchased in
the data. Expected profits are a sum (discounted at one percent per month in our primary specification)
of the profits accrued during this time [tj + TUc S , tj + TUc S ] in the market. Quantities qjht and prices pjht
are equilibrium outcomes and a function of all firms’ beliefs and actions as well as consumer beliefs. We
assume perfect foresight among all players regarding the set of products completing EU testing, their timing
of completing this testing, and their quality estimates at that point, so that I 1 = {Ij1 }j∈J . Expectations
are taken over subsequent learning for own and competitor products from this point.

20

exceed the trial costs.
5. In subsequent periods t = 1, 2, ..., prices pjht are set, quantities qjht are realized via
consumption decisions, and surplus is accrued. Then signals are observed and beliefs
are updated before actions are taken the following period. Letting age a := t − tj
denote the time in months since product j was introduced into the EU, signal Ajha
received by hospital h is given by:
(

νja ∼ N (0, (1 − γ)σA2 c ), ν̃jha ∼ N (0, γσA2 c ) if in clinical trials
νja ∼ N (0, (1 − γ)σA2 ), ν̃jha ∼ N (0, γσA2 )
if not
(2)
where σA and σAc measure the noise of signals generated by market usage and clinical
trials, respectively.29 The parameter γ ∈ [0, 1] allows hospital learning to occur as
weighted combination of market and hospital specific information (γ = 0 corresponding
to perfect correlation in signals across hospitals; γ = 1 corresponding to completely
independent signals).

Ajha = Q∗j +νja +ν̃jha where

Given these signals, beliefs about product quality are updated via Bayes’ rule, resulting
2
in posterior beliefs distributed N (Qjha+1 , σjha+1
) where
Qjha+1

2
σA2 jha+1
σA2 jha+1
σjha
2
Ajha+1 + 2
Qjha ; σjha+1 = 2
σ 2 . (3)
= 2
σjha + σA2 jha+1
σjha + σA2 jha+1
σjha + σA2 jha+1 jha

Next, we describe how the model translates these beliefs into stent demand.
4.2

Demand and Surplus

We now turn to characterizing physician preferences over stents given their information set.
Let h(viht , xj , Q∗j ) be the perfect information, ex post health state for a given individual
i from an implanted stent j at hospital h in period t. Patient/physician characteristics
are denoted by the vector viht , xj is a vector of observable stent characteristics (e.g. bare
metal, drug eluting) that affect its suitability for patient i, and Q∗j the stent’s true mean
performance. Physicians have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences that
incorporate the patient’s health as well the cost of the device to the hospital, pjht : uijht =

− ρ1 exp −ρ(h(viht , xj , Q∗j ) − θp pjht ) , where ρ = −u00 (·)/u0 (·) is the coefficient of absolute
29

We assume that information release from a clinical trial accrues to the market with a consistent signal
each month. This fits with the regular release of interim results at major meetings and in journal articles
and subsequent further diffusion via word of mouth. We have examined and found no evidence of a discrete
demand response in the EU upon US trial completion or FDA approval.

21

risk aversion.30
Physicians choose from the set of available stents at a point in time, Jt , including the
option of not implanting a stent, which has utility normalized to zero.31 The true stent
clinical performance is unobserved at time of implantation, so physicians must make their
decisions based on their current information set, Iht := ({Qjht }Jt , {σjt }Jt ), which summarizes
the expected performance, and uncertainty about that performance, for all available stents.32
In this framework, “ex post regret” occurs any time a patient receives a stent that results
in lower utility than the stent she would receive under perfect information. “Ex post harm”
occurs when a patient receives a stent that results in lower utility than the outside good,
h(viht , xj , Q∗j ) < 0. Thus, a regulatory approach that allows entry of a larger set of products
Jt can make consumers worse off by increasing the likelihood of ex post regret and harm if
that set includes products that perform below average and/or have high uncertainty in their
expected performance.
For each patient, physicians choose the stent that maximizes ex ante expected utility,
R
2
). The normality of the distribugiven their information set, E[uijht |Iht ] = uijht dN (Qjht , σjt
tion of beliefs over Q implies this problem is equivalent to maximization of the mean-variance
2
−θp pjht , and we follow the consumer learnrepresentation Uijht = E[h(viht , xj , Q∗j )|Iht ]− ρ2 σjt
ing literature (e.g. see the review in Ching et al. (2013)) in working with this representation
directly.33
In order to take the model to the data, we parameterize h(viht , xj , Q∗j ) := Q∗j + ξjh +
gijht + (1 − λg )ijht so that:
ρ 2
− θp pjht + ξjh + gijht + (1 − λg )ijht
Uijht = Qjht − σjt
2

(4)

where ξjh captures preference deviations of the physicians at a given hospital over product
features that are known with certainty but unobserved to the econometrician. The deviations
30

This closely follows the modeling of utility over health outcomes in the health insurance choice literature
(Cardon and Hendel 2001; Handel 2013). The conceptual difference is that instead of choosing from insurance
plans that affect ex post consumption over a pre-specified distribution of potential health states, our agents
choose among products that each represent different distributions of potential ex post health states.
31
Because our data consists of product usage, we do not directly observe the set of stents available at
a given hospital. We proceed with the assumption that any hospital could potentially purchase any stent
available in the market at that time.
32
For a stent j and calendar time t, age a is implicit, so we suppress it for ease of notation, e.g. E[Q∗j |Iht ] =
Qjht = Qjha for the appropriate a.
33
Although it is less frequently discussed in the consumer learning and health care contexts, a large literature in portfolio choice has documented that the outcome achieved by maximizing the mean-variance
representation often provides an excellent approximation to the optimal outcome for a consumer who discounts uncertainty, even in cases where the underlying distributions are not normal. In Appendix D.2 we
explore less parametric specifications and find the Normal-Normal learning model provides a parsimonious
approximation that fits the data well.

22

g
are distributed according to the type of the device, ξjh ∼ N (0, σH
) with g ∈ {bms, des}.
Larger values of the standard deviations imply greater variation in tastes across hospitals.
The iid error term, gijht + (1 − λg )ijht , captures the preference deviation relative to the
population average of physician/patient i for device j with characteristic g. This is a random
coefficients utility model where the random coefficients are on indicators for whether the stent
is drug-eluting or bare-metal, which is equivalent to a nested logit specification under the
assumptions in Cardell (1997) where gijht + (1 − λg )ijht is distributed generalized extreme
value with mean zero, scale parameter 1, and 0 ≤ λg < 1.34
We further assume that physicians maximize myopically, treating each patient as she
arrives and ignoring the impact of the current stent choice on future stent choices. Integrating over the distribution of patient/physician i heterogeneity then yields the familiar
nested logit closed forms for product-hospital-month specific: choice probabilities, cpjht :=
∂cpjht pkht
; and exP r[Uijht > Uikht , ∀k ∈ Jt ]; elasticities with respect to price ηjkht := ∂pkht
cpjht
ante expected consumer surplus (relative to the outside option) CSht (Jt , Iht ).35 Combined
with the number of patients receiving diagnostic procedures, Mht , these map directly into
quantities, substitution patterns, and welfare that enter supplier and regulator decisions.

4.3

Supply

A key objective of our paper is to better understand the equilibrium impact of changing
regulations on product performance information generation. Therefore, we need to model
the impact of changing information requirements on the supply-side behavior of stent manufacturers. Increasing information requirements for device approval is costly as it requires
larger clinical trials and trial costs are increasing in the number of trial subjects. A larger
trial also means a longer trial as it takes time to recruit patients. Therefore, increasing
information requirements for device manufacturers can decrease and delay the entry of new
products. The supply-side model should allow for the possibility that increased information
requirements impact the firms’ entry decisions and, conditional on deciding to enter, the
timing of product introduction.
A natural supply-side approach to employ is to estimate the parameters of a dynamic
entry/exit game and use the model to solve for new counterfactual equilibria. However, a
full model of dynamic entry and exit posses conceptual and computational challenges as we
34

When the nesting parameter, λg = 0 ∀g, this is the standard multinomial logit model. As λg → 1,
products within the category become closer substitutes to each other than to goods outside the category.
We have experimented with allowing for finer nest classifications for some of the specialty stents present in
the EU such as inert metal stents and stents designed specifically for bifurcated lesions, but these categories
are too sparsely used (for context, the total market share of bifurcated stents is an order of magnitude lower
than the average BMS) to identify their nesting parameters with any reasonable amount of precision.
35
See Appendix C.1 for the explicit formulas.

23

have a large and continuous state space, requiring approximations of the type explored in
recent papers such as Ifrach and Weintraub (2017). Conditional on entry, the buyer-supplier
network formation problem itself is a complex problem at the frontier of recent research
(e.g. Lee and Fong 2013; Grennan and Swanson 2018; Ho and Lee 2019). Because of these
challenges, we use our demand and learning models to analyze outcomes under two extreme
cases on supply-side behavior. These cases are simple to compute yet informative about the
impact of different policies.
Specifically, we seek to understand the impact of policies requiring (weakly) greater
clinical evidence than under the current EU requirements. We consider such policies as
multiples of the current US trials we observe, and denote them by additional months of
trials required T c (again, we focus on clinical trial length which maps into sample size), and
the fixed cost of running those trials by F C = χT c .36 In our counterfactuals in 6.3, we
discuss how this thought experiment might apply to considering both EU and US policy.
For each T c , the two cases we examine are:
More Entry (M) case, J M : Assume firms enter as if there is no direct cost of longer
trials, χ = 0, iff: E [Πj (T c )|I 1 ] > 0
Less Entry (L) case, J L : Assume firms enter as if trials cost χj = $1.6M per month,37
but also under the belief that other firms enter as if there is no cost to trials, χ−j = 0,
iff: E [Πj (T c )|I 1 , χ−j = 0] > χj T c
Under the assumptions discussed in Section 4.1, these two cases provide reasonable approximations to a superset (M) and subset (L) of products expected to be present in equilibrium in the market at any point in time Jt , given a regulatory policy T c .38 These cases
also help decompose the welfare consequences of more pre-market clinical testing into two
components: 1) delayed entry due to increased trial length requirements; and 2) decreased
entry due to higher trial costs.
36

In reality, there are a mix of trial costs, some up front, some ongoing, and some at the end of a trial.
We do not have detailed estimates of this break-down, and so we make the simplifying assumption that all
are accrued up front. To the extent that trials can be abandoned at significant cost savings, this may slightly
overstate the expected cost of trials. But we have learned of very few trials being abandoned. Also, this
would primarily affect lower expected quality products, which contribute very little to our welfare analysis.
37
$1.6M per month from the survey by Makower et al. (2010) of the costs of US trials.
38
In a prior working paper version of this manuscript (Grennan and Town 2018) we referred to these
cases as “bounds” on firm entry and used them to partially identify counterfactual surplus measures and
optimal policies. The challenge with that approach is that one cannot (to our knowledge) prove these bounds
theoretically for general demand and supply, even under the further assumptions we make regarding timing
and information. Deviations from our timing and information assumptions could cause further violations of
these bounds. For example, anything that would lead to entry of firms who do not enter under current policy
could violate M as an upper bound, and M being an upper bound is essential to L being a lower bound.
Thus we prefer to refer to these as helpful extreme “cases”, moving away from the “bounds” terminology to
avoid confusion regarding the degree of theoretical precision we claim.

24

The M case intuitively approximates a superset of products that might enter because, by
assumption, the same products enter under any T c ≥ 0 as under current EU policy T c = 0.
Thus, the impact of increasing trial length on market structure under M weighs the benefit
of increased potential learning through generating performance information via trials versus
the cost of delayed access to the newest technologies.
The L case approximates a subset of products that might enter. The intuition for this
claim is that while a focal product responds to its own entry costs, under L it acts under the
belief that other products have zero additional costs, i.e. it calculates its expected profits as
if all other firms enter. Because expected profits to a focal firm facing all other firms will
tend to be lower than it would face in the full equilibrium where some firms do not enter
due to the fixed cost of testing, computing L should result in less firms entering than under
the actual equilibrium.
4.4

Modeling the Regulator

We treat the regulator as an agent that determines the device approval policy by choosing
a mean performance threshold treatment effect that increases expected health to h and an
associated significance level α over that treatment effect. After the clinical trial has been
completed, and if the data indicate that P r[h(Q∗j |trial) > h] > 1 − α, the regulator will then
approve the product.39 The regulator also determines the power of the test which, combined
with the choice (α, h) and the underlying quality distribution F , dictates an optimal trial
size N ∗ (h, α), which (given a constant arrival rate of suitable subjects φ per month) implies a
clinical trial length T c∗ (h, α) = N ∗ /φ in months. This is why policy discussions often simply
refer to the “length of trials” to capture the regulatory policy threshold and its temporal and
monetary cost. To correspond with policy discussions and to simplify the analysis without
losing much generality, we treat the regulator as choosing T c with the understanding that
trial length maps into sample size and, in turn, the statistical properties of the trial data.
Regulatory policy affects social surplus through two distinct channels: uncertainty and
access to new products. Uncertainty is affected in that every φ subjects generate a signal,
Aj , so a longer time in clinical trials provides information, which decreases uncertainty and
brings market participants’ estimates of a product’s quality closer to its true quality. Access
is affected directly because an additional month in trials delays consumer access to new
stents by a month. Access is also affected indirectly because trials are costly – an additional
month in clinical trials raises fixed costs of entry by χ, with the total costs F C := χT c . In
39

As noted above, given that trials are costly, the model implies that actual rejections will be rare because
if the information from the trials indicates that the likelihood of device approval is low, the manufacturer will
terminate the trial before its completion. The CoStar case discussed above and in Appendix B.1 provides
such an example.

25

our counterfactual policy analyses in Section 6, we consider potential regulatory objectives
based on consumer or total surplus.40

5
5.1

Model Estimation, Identification, and Results
Estimation and Identification

We estimate the parameters of the demand model using detailed data on prices paid and
quantities of stents implanted at product-hospital-month level. We use only the EU sample
in the estimation. This approach leverages the fact that the data contains: (1) variation in
the information regimes across products, and (2) within the subset of products undergoing
US trials, variation in the amount of information generated over time. The variation in
generated information spans the range of the information gap between the EU and US
policies, which is the primary range of interest in current policy debates. We implement the
estimation via a generalized method of moments algorithm as detailed in Appendix D and
summarized here.
A significant challenge faced in taking the model to the data is the EU choice set is large
relative to the number of choice instances in a hospital-month. As a consequence, there
are a large number of zero market shares at the product-hospital-month level. This issue is
relatively common in fine-grained data and has been a topic of recent concern in the industrial
organization and marketing literatures (Gandhi et al. 2013). Quan and Williams (2017)
(henceforth QW) develop a novel solution that involves matching a combination of micro (in
our case product-hospital-month) and aggregate (product-month) moments to estimate the
distribution of preference heterogeneity across markets (in our case hospital-months) while
explicitly allowing for zeros due to sampling variation. Our estimation strategy combines
the intuition and approach of QW with our learning model. Their insight is aggregation
across markets can generate enough purchase instances that the negligible sampling variation
assumption can be restored to estimate product-specific utility parameters, while moments
at the disaggregate level can still be included to estimate the distribution of heterogeneity
in these parameters across hospitals.
40
Appendix C.2 provides an explicit closed form solution for a simplified case that helps to clarify the
regulator’s tradeoff between access and uncertainty in requiring longer trials (more information):
!
P
Qjt

ρ 2 c
j∈Jt+1 (T c +1) e
c
c
2
c
P
T St (T + 1) − T St (T ) =
σ (T ) − σ (T + 1) − ln
Qjt
j∈Jt (T c +1) e
|2
{z
}
|
{z
}
gain from decreased risk

gain from tech change/entry

26

Following this logic, we rewrite utility to the mean consumer δjht in terms of aggregate
and hospital-specific portions:
ρ 2
ejht
−θp pjht + ξjh + Q
δjht = Qjt − σjt
2
| {z }

(5)

δjt

ejht :=
where Qjt := Eh [Qjht ] is the expected product quality estimate across hospitals, Q
Qjht − Qjt is the product-hospital-month specific deviation from that aggregate expectation,
and ξjh is already defined as a deviation with mean zero across hospitals. Following QW, we
appeal to the law of large numbers in the number of hospitals H and (letting Mh denote the
number of patients treated at h) set observed aggregate market shares equal to aggregated
P
P Mh
h
P
choice probabilities sjt := h PMM
s
=
cpjht , inverting the system to obtain:
jht
h
Mh
h
h

h

δjt (st ; λ, σ) = ln(sjt /s0t ) − λg ln(sjgt ) − (1 − λg ) ln(R(σg )) + θp

X
h

M
P h pjht
h Mh

(6)

where R(σg ) is an adjustment to the mean utility accounting for aggregating over hospital
heterogeneity
"
R(σg ) := Ej|g exp

(

δ̃jht
1 − λg

)#
= exp



(a −tc )/σ 2 +tc /σ 2

2 

 σg2 + γ 1/σ2 +1/σj2 j+(a A−tcj)/σA2 c+tc /σ2 σjt
j
c
Q




EU

2(1 −

j

λg )2

A

j

A

(7)




where the expectation attains from the moment generating function of the normal distribution, and tcj denotes the cumulative time spent in clinical trials by device j by time t. R(·)
follows directly from QW, which requires applying a law of large numbers in the number
of products per category Jg . The only difference is that in our model, heterogeneity across
hospitals at any point in time reflects both fixed preference heterogeneity (represented by
(aj −tc )/σ 2 +tc /σ 2 c
2
,
σg2 , as in QW) and learning heterogeneity (represented by γ 1/σ2 +1/σ2 j+(ajA−tcj)/σA2 +tc /σ2 c σjt
j
j
Q
EU
A
A
the fraction of uncertainty that is due to hospital-specific signals).
Aggregate moments – means: From (6) and (5), we form the standard linear moments:
ξjt = ln(sjt /s0t ) − λgj ln(sjgj t ) − (1 − λgj ) ln(R(σgj )) + θp

X
h

ρ 2
M
P h pjht − Q∗j − σjt
(8)
2
h Mh

where the econometric residual is the difference between the aggregate estimated product
quality and the true product quality ξjt := Qjt − Q∗j , where Ej [ξjt ] = 0 by the unbiased
learning. We interact these residuals with a set of instruments Z d which includes: product

27

P Mh
P
fixed effects to identify product qualities; lagged mean prices
pjht−1 to identify
h
h Mh
the price coefficient (following Grennan (2013) in exploiting the fact that changes in “stale”
long-term contracts help identify demand);41 a polynomial in the size of the within-group
2
] (following Berry and Waldfogel (1999) with a growing choice set over
choice set [Jgt , Jgt
time directly affecting within- vs. out-of-group substitution) to identify the nested logit
substitution parameters λ; and a set of age dummy variables interacted with whether the
2
product is currently undergoing clinical trials to jointly identify − ρ2 σjt
. Further information is
2
(σA ) and heterogeneity across hospitals (γ, σ H ).42
required to separately estimate learning σjt
Aggregate moments – variances: The learning and demand model additionally implies
that the variance of the prediction errors is tightly related to the aggregate uncertainty about
product quality
2
2
Ej [ξjt
|(ajt , tcjt ) = (a, tc )] = σjt
(a, tc ) .
(9)
−1
2
2
2
Recall that σjt
(a, tc ) = 1/σQ
+ 1/σEU
+ (a − tc )/σA2 + tc /σA2 c , and in particular, note
that this second moment is independent of the risk aversion parameter, ρ. Thus, variation
in usage identifies the learning signal parameters σA as age a and time in trials tc vary.
We further impose a consistency assumption that the variance of the estimated product
quality parameters equal the prior belief about the distribution of product qualities that
2
enter the EU market V arj (Q∗j ) = σQ
. Combined with the variance moments (9) in the first
period a product is introduced (when ajt = 0, tcjt = 0), this also identifies the information
−1
2
2
2
.
+ 1/σEU
(a = 0, tc = 0) = 1/σQ
provided by EU trials, σEU because σjt
These two sets of aggregate moments clarify how learning is identified by the degree to
which the variance in product-specific quality estimates decreases over time. Risk aversion
is then identified by how choice probabilities increase (or don’t) as learning decreases uncertainty.43 This relates directly back to the reduced form evidence in Figure 2. For products in
41

Grennan (2013) estimates the model using quasi-differences ξjt − ρξjt−1 , appealing to changes in information over time. We account for that in part by controlling for the evolution of uncertainty directly, but we
could use quasi-differences in addition. Our attempts to do so resulted in difficulty converging to estimates
that fit the data well, presumably due to extracting too much of the signal from the data.
42
A simple and semi-parametric way to estimate Equation (6) would be to regress the inclusive shares
ln(sjt /s0t ) on product and age fixed effects interacted with whether a product is in clinical trials or not to
allow for differential learning rates. In this research design, the age fixed effects – paired with the exogenous
variation in learning – would then capture the combined treatment effect of risk aversion and learning on
utility. However, because we are interested in questions that involve market reactions to different learning
rates and levels of uncertainty, we need to add structure via the learning model to disentangle these forces.
Comparison to the fixed-effect model in Appendix D.2 provides a useful benchmark for assessing the fit of
the more parsimonious and parametric learning model, which we consider quite good.
43
The typical discussion of identification of learning versus risk aversion in the related literature estimating
similar models from aggregate market share data (see Ching et al. (2013) for an overview) notes, correctly,
that in the context of the Normal-Normal model, the two are in principle separately identified by the shape
and level of the first moment over time. As those models are almost always estimated via maximum likelihood

28

trials, the variance decreases with age, identifying learning. As this variation decreases, the
mean inclusive share increases, identifying risk-aversion. Observational learning is identified
by the dynamic behavior of share volatility for products not in a US trial. These parameters
are identified using the within-product variation, conditional on the product fixed effects
(whose parameters provide estimates of the product qualities Q∗j ).
Micro-moments: The parameters left to be identified are those measuring the dispersion
in hospital preferences σ H and the extent to which learning signals differ across hospitals,
γ. We follow the strategy developed in QW, adding hospital level micro-moments based on
the probability of observing a zero market share for each product-hospital-month,
P r [sjht = 0] = (1 − cpjht (σ H , γ))Mht .

(10)

We match this probability to the data by simulating (over the distribution of ξjh ) moP
ments equating the empirical proportion of zeros to the model’s predictions h 1{sjht =0} =


Eh (1 − cpjht (σ H , γ))Mht . The distribution of preference heterogeneity across hospitals σgH
is then identified by the extent to which large variance in ξjh is needed to match the zeros
in the data for each product category, on average over time. The extent of hospital-specific
learning, γ, is identified by how that proportion of zeros changes with learning as age and
time in trials change.
5.2

Demand Parameter Estimates

The parameter estimates from the model are presented in Table 1. We focus on interpretation
and validation of the estimates from our full, preferred model described in the previous
section. Appendix D.2 presents further results with a less parametric learning model, simpler
utility models nested within our preferred model, and alternative models of observational
and hospital-specific learning / diffusion of information.
The demand estimates are sensible. Turning first to the utility parameters that capture
physician preferences and substitution patterns. The parameter on price, θp , is negative and
statistically significant indicating that demand is downward sloping but relatively insensitive
to stent price. Both nesting parameters (λdes , λbms ) are also statistically significant and imply
that products within the same nest are much closer substitutes than products in different
des
bms
nests. The estimated standard deviations (σH
, σH
) of preferences across hospitals ξjh are
both significant and economically meaningful. At nearly 0.2 logit utils, they are an order of
magnitude larger in effect than the 0.03 util effect from a $316 change in price (one standard
or bayesian methods, they implicitly use information from the second moment as well in estimation. Our
use of GMM makes explicit the value of the second moment in identifying learning.

29

Table 1: Estimates of demand/learning model parameters
Preference/substitution parameters:
θp (utils/$)
λdes
0.10E-3
0.81
(0.04E-3)

(0.02)

Learning process parameters:
U Strials
not
σQ
σQ
0.26
0.34
(0.01)

(0.02)

λbms
0.82

des
σH
0.19

bms
σH
0.18

ρ · θp (1/$)
3.26E-3

(0.01)

(0.04)

(0.02)

(1.47 E-3)

2
1/σEU
18.79

2
1/σA
c
1.61

2
1/σA
0.00

γH
0.00

(0.67)

(0.23)

(0.10)

(2.75)
g

2 +ξ
Estimates for demand model ln(sjt /s0t ) = λgj ln(sj|g ht ) + R(σHj , γH ) − θp pjt + Q∗j − ρ2 σjt
jt with separate nests for DES
2
and BMS, and additional E[ξjt ] moments to identify learning, and P r[sjht = 0] moments to identify heterogeneity in
preferences and learning across hospitals. NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months.
Standard errors in parentheses, estimated via delete-10 jacknife, clustered by month (NT = 114).

deviation and 26 percent of mean DES price). These results are all consistent with qualitative
reports of strong physician brand preferences, the importance of DES/BMS-patient match,
and estimates of coronary stent demand in other studies (Grennan 2013, 2014; Grennan and
Swanson 2018).
We also estimate that physicians are risk averse in their selection of stents with a coefficient of absolute risk aversion of ρ · θp = (3.26 × 10−3 $)−1 . This estimate is within the range
of estimates of risk aversion in well identified studies such as Cohen and Einav (2007).44
In addition to the uncertainty and risk aversion measures, the utility and learning models
are linked through a rational expectations assumption on the distribution of product qualities
F (Q∗j ). Our demand model includes product fixed effects, and under our assumption of
unbiased learning, the coefficients on these dummy variables provide consistent estimates for
the true product quality for each product introduced to the EU market {Q∗j }. These product
quality estimates then provide a nonparametric estimate for F (Q) (plotted in Appendix
Figure A11), and rational expectations requires that consumers’ priors about F (Q) are
consistent with this distribution.
In Figure 3, panel (a) we show that our revealed preference estimates of Q∗j are correlated
with the clinical quality measure target vessel revascularization (TVR) rate in the sample of
products for which we were able to collect clinical trial data. This result provides support
for the validity of our approach as the revealed preference estimates from our demand model
44

As noted in Train (2015) (and more recently in Brown (2017) using a model very similar to ours), an
ex post utility maximizing agent will also discount uncertainty when forced to make decisions over multiple
uncertain options because of a “winners curse” phenomenon, even with risk neutral demand. Intuitively, in
hospital-time markets where quality is overestimated (Qjht > Q∗j , the cases with ex post bad news) product
j will also be used more that it should be (exactly because quality is overestimated), and conversely when
quality is underestimated. This interaction means that increasing the second moment of beliefs decreases ex
post welfare for risk neutral consumers. We report such an ex post loss number in Table 2, but we prefer the
model with risk aversion and ex ante welfare measure for their link to the broader literatures on consumer
learning and preferences over health states.

30

align with the clinical trial results.45 We return to the product quality estimates themselves
when we consider the role of technological change in generating gains from access to new
products in Section 6, but we first discuss their role in the learning model.
U Strials
not
The variation in product performance estimates are σQ
= 0.26 and σQ
= 0.34. This
uncertainty exceeds the magnitude of heterogeneity in preferences across hospitals suggesting
that, without additional information, consumers selecting a new product for insertion face
a non-trivial probability that it will perform worse than expected. These estimates imply
greater device performance variation for EU-only devices. Also, consistent with the reduced
form evidence (now controlling for a variety of other factors that influence demand), the
estimates imply that there is significant learning in the EU from FDA clinical trials as 1/σA2 c
much greater than zero. The estimates also imply no experiential learning as 1/σA2 is very
2
small and not significantly different from zero. The estimated precision of EU trials 1/σEU
implies that the learning from trials pre-EU introduction is equivalent to almost 12 months
of US trials. Finally, the estimates imply no hospital specific learning. The parameter γH
is a precise zero, suggesting information accruing to the market is highly correlated across
hospitals (ruling out correlation less than 0.8 with 95 percent confidence).

6

Technological Change, Uncertainty, and Optimal Trial Length
in the Coronary Stent Market

With the parameters of the model estimated, we now turn to answering several policy relevant
questions. Specifically, we use the model and the estimated parameters to: (1) calculate the
size and source of technological change as new stents are introduced during our sample; (2)
assess the role of information in affecting risk and resulting consumer usage patterns; and
(3) estimate the optimal regulatory policy to balance the risk-access tradeoff under existing
and alternative market and information environments.
6.1

Technological Change in the EU Coronary Stent Market 2004-2013

Not only does the rate of technological change in medical care have an important impact
on aggregate welfare (Murphy and Topel 2006), it is also a key determinant of the optimal
regulatory policy towards product information provision. The rate of technological change
affects the value of access to the newest devices relative to those already available in the
market. Typically, estimates of the value of a medical technology focus solely on measuring
clinical outcomes and do not assess preferences and substitution patterns. Here we apply
45

Here we focus on TVR, but the same pattern holds for major adverse cardiac events (MACE).

31

the tools that are standard in the industrial organization literature to assess welfare improvements associated with coronary stents over time. We compute the rate of technological
change by calculating the ex post average treatment effect (ATE) for each stent, i.e. the
mean surplus (relative to the outside option) of having stent j implanted on the average
∗
angiography patient: AT E(Q∗j ) := θscale ln(1 + eQj ).46
Figure 3: Clinical Quality, Revealed Quality, and Technological Change.
(a) Correlation between Q∗j and TVR
Estimated ATE(Qj) ($)
200 400 600 800 1000

0

0

Estimated ATE(Qj_preUS) ($)
200 400 600 800 1000

(b) Rate of Technological Change

N Products: 38

Jan 04
0

5
10
15
TVR rate from Clinical Trial Data

20

Jan 06

47
Jan 08

Undergo US Trials

50
Jan 10

55
Jan 12

EU Trials Only

Figure 3, panel (b) presents these results, plotting the ATE for each product introduced
against calendar time of the product introduction. During our sample period, the trend of
mean product quality over time is flat.47 However, the set of devices available grows from 38
to 55 over this same time period, which translates into a meaningful increase of 9.6 percent
in the utility consumers receive from access to coronary stents.
This finding is salient for analysis of the optimal regulatory policy. If technological change
is driven by increases in average product quality, the impact of changing costs of entry with
changing regulatory standards of evidence will likely have a smaller impact on welfare than
if the change is, as we find here, driven by increases in product variety. Niche products will
by their nature have smaller market opportunities and thus find it more difficult to incur the
46

Because we are concerned that they lack of price sensitivity we estimate may not accurately scale utils
into dollars if physicians are imperfect agents for patients/hospitals, we choose θscale to normalize the total
surplus per stenting procedure to $5,000, which is the approximate median of the estimated dollars in quality
adjusted life years from the procedure relative to a coronary artery bypass graph surgery (a more invasive
alternative to receiving angioplasty and a stent) among studies reported in the Cost Effectiveness Analysis
Registry (https://research.tufts-nemc.org). Scaling into dollars using the standard approach of the inverse of
the price coefficient θ1p = 10, 482, would approximately double all related consumer welfare estimates. This
alternative scaling is only for translating welfare measures into dollars – we continue to use the estimated
θp in quantity and elasticity calculations, as revealed preference indicates this is the level of price sensitivity
that best fits the demand patterns in the data.
47
This is likely in part due to increasing quality of alternative treatments, such as less-invasive and
beating-heart CABG (Kalyanasundaram and Karlheinz 2014).

32

fixed cost of greater testing.
6.2

Uncertain Quality and Market Outcomes

Optimal regulatory policy should also take into account the potential welfare loss due to
the risk that new products may not improve health much as expected. The magnitude of
this uncertainty effect depends upon the mean and variance of expected quality levels across
products as well as the amount of information consumers possess.
Table 2 explores the role of uncertainty in the market by using the demand model to
calculate the percent of patients undergoing a diagnostic angiography who receive a stent
TS
), and the expected ex post
relative the outside good (1 − s0 ), total surplus per stent ( 1−s
0
P
difference between the realized and expected utility from the chosen stent ( j Ei [Q∗j −Qjt |j =
P sjt (Q∗j −Qjt )
arg maxk Uikht ] = j 1−s
). Here we posit hypothetical markets where all products
0t
have uncertainty in their quality, varying from the unconditional uncertainty of the quality
distribution σQ (if there were no testing/learning at all – the first column), to the estimated
uncertainty upon first entering the EU σ 1 = σT c =0 (after undergoing EU requirements – the
second column), to varying lengths of US trials σT c . In order to focus purely on the role
of uncertainty, this is a partial equilibrium analysis as we do not consider firms’ strategic
responses to these different parameters via pricing or entry.
Table 2: The effect of uncertainty on number of stenting procedures, surplus per
stent implanted, and expected ex post loss (all reported numbers take the average across
all months in our period of study).
σQ

σT c =0

σT c =6

σT c =12

σT c =18

σT c =24

σT c =30

= 0.31

= 0.19

= 0.16

= 0.14

= 0.13

= 0.12

= 0.11

12.5

24.0

26.4

27.9

29.0

29.7

30.3

(2.5)

(1.4)

(1.3)

(1.3)

(1.3)

(1.4)

(1.4)

($)

5776

6103

6184

6238

6276

6304

6327

(176)

(167)

(167)

(168)

(169)

(170)

(171)

E[Q∗j − Qjt |j ∗ ] ($)

-1096

-560

-429

-348

-292

-252

-221

(127)

(23)

(37)

(41)

(41)

(39)

(37)

1 − s0 (%)
TS
1−s0

Table 2 makes several important points. First, without any learning (and holding the
strategies of the firms constant), the stent market would shrink significantly due to the large
amount of performance uncertainty. This can be seen in the first column of the table in
which the percentage of consumers having a stent implanted is about half that of the cases
with testing. This implies that clinical testing and information gathering of the type done
currently in the EU provides the necessary information to make this market operate.48
48

We see this point as illustrative and potentially an underestimate of the value of EU testing. In
addition to the partial equilibrium caveat applying to this entire table, the EU process may solve asymmetric

33

Second, modest increases in the information available to consumers generates significant
improvements in welfare. Moving from a world in which there are no clinical trials to one in
which there is EU testing plus an FDA clinical trial of 6 months leads to meaningful increases
in the number of procedures performed and the surplus created, and decreases in expected
ex post loss due to choice “mistakes” per procedure.49 Increasing additional required FDA
trial length beyond 6 months generates smaller increases, with the difference between 18 and
24 or 30 months of trials not statistically different from zero at typical thresholds.
We can also use this framework to calculate the impact of the beneficial information
spillover from US testing to the EU. Comparing the estimated total surplus from the observed
data and our model to the hypothetical σT c =0 case, we calculate that if the US were to stop
requiring additional testing beyond the EU levels, and the EU were to hold its current policy
fixed, that EU total surplus would decrease by 6.4 percent.
Finally, these effects are driven by symmetric yet imperfect information, rather than
the informational asymmetries which have been the central concern in much of the quality
information literature. This suggests that in the case of regulating testing/disclosure, taking
into account uncertainty and amount of information provided can be just as important as
solving asymmetric information problems.
6.3

Optimal Clinical Testing Regulation

Next, we turn to the fundamental question that motivates this paper: In an industry where
new products are developed with uncertain quality, what is the optimal amount of premarket testing to require? To answer this question, we use our demand and supply model
to calculate counterfactual equilibrium outcomes under different regulatory policies. We
start with a baseline of current EU requirements, and we consider the effects of requiring
incrementally longer trials by T c months (where recruitment timing and thus information for
these trials is assumed to mimic our estimates from current US trials). This is the primary
region in which the policy debate has been focused, with the EU considering increasing
testing requirements and the US considering loosening them.
There are a few important caveats to note in using our estimated model to examine
EU and US policies. Considering EU policy is relatively straightforward, as the model is
estimated directly on EU data. Beyond the standard cautions regarding extrapolations
information problems in addition to providing testing signals, making this result further out of sample both
in data and conceptual terms.
49
Appendix Figure A2 provides additional results on how these effects vary with quality of new products
relative to the outside option – the key insight from that analysis is that the value of reducing uncertainty
increases as mean product quality increases because higher quality products are used more frequently, so in
this sense quality and information are complements.

34

in any counterfactual modeling exercise, a key decision is how to account for the potential
information spillovers the EU receives from ongoing US trials. We address this by calculating
optimal policies in our estimated model with and without this spillover.
Using our model to consider US policy requires a bit more care. First, one needs to assume
the estimated EU preferences and learning patterns reasonably proxy US preferences and
learning patterns over stents. The reduced form evidence in Figure 2 suggests this is a
reasonable assumption, but it nevertheless remains an untestable one. Second, we need to
determine how large are the fixed costs of US entry beyond regulatory testing might affect
entry decisions of manufacturers that do not enter the US in the data. The precise nature
and size of these costs are outside of our modeling exercise, and we set them to zero in
these counterfactuals. This makes our counterfactual modeling more akin to the thought
experiment of a US where more firms have incurred these costs, which might be what we
would expect in the longer-run if the US were to loosen its testing policy, making it more
attractive for firms to incur the costs of setting up sales and distribution.
In our baseline analysis, we model any policy change as taking place at the beginning
of our data period, January 2004, so products having entered before then are not directly
affected. For products entering after January 2004, there are several effects: First, entry is
delayed by T c months. Second, fixed costs of entry increase by $1.6M×T c . This may cause
some firms to decide not to run these additional trials and not enter the market. Third,
for products that do enter
faced by consumers upon entry decreases

 the market, uncertainty
c

−1

. Finally, quantities and surplus generation adjust
according to σ 2 (T c ) = σ12 + σ21 + σT2 c
Q
EU
A
in equilibrium to the set of products in the market and information about product quality. In
our primary estimates, we hold prices fixed at the observed prices in the data and calibrate
marginal costs for each product to be half the minimum price observed for that product in
the data. As discussed in Section 4.3, we impose several simplifying assumptions on supplier
behavior to develop cases that are relatively easy to compute, yet still informative regarding
policy in this market.
Figure 4 plots expected surplus measures versus T c for the more entry (M) and less
entry (L) cases developed in 4.3. Recall both of these cases incorporate the benefit of more
clinical testing decreasing uncertainty, but in M the only cost is delayed access by T c months,
whereas L incorporates the further cost of products not entering if their expected profits do
not exceed the fixed costs of testing. Thus, the cases are identical by construction at no
trials beyond the current EU requirements T c = 0, but as T c increases they are driven apart
by fewer products entering in L. The surplus values are calculated by using the learning and
demand models to simulate the 10 year period we study, and computing a sum of payoffs,
discounted at a one percent per month nominal rate after January 2004. In order to focus
35

on the economic tradeoffs of pre-market clinical testing, the graphs and the first row of the
table below them are computed without any learning after products enter the market (such
as spillovers of US trial information to EU consumers). The second row of the table makes
the same computations, but allows for the fact that the EU learns from US trials for products
that undertake them.50 We discuss the results without US spillovers first, and turn to the
implications of such spillovers at the end of this subsection.
Appendix E reports further details on this exercise including information on the computation, additional figures for the number of new products entering, fixed costs, and producer
surplus. We also report multiple robustness checks to assumptions regarding costs, pricing, and discounting. We find that variations in marginal cost assumptions or modeling
price changes using a bargaining equilibrium make very small and statistically insignificant
differences in our results. The implications of discounting are more substantive – because
products having entered prior to January 2004 are not directly affected in our counterfactuals, it takes time for more of the products in the market to be ones that have benefited
from more testing, so that less discounting of the future favors more testing. In the extreme
where surplus is computed as an undiscounted sum over our 10 year period, surplus gains
are 40-80 percent larger than those reported below, and optimal testing times tend to be
slightly longer (though often not statistically different).51
The left subfigure (a) of Figure 4 (and the left panel of the table below) shows the results
for consumer surplus. Under both M and L cases, the benefits of risk reduction documented
in Table 2 dominate the cost consquences and result in surplus increasing as trial length
grows from the current EU baseline, T c = 0. Despite the fact that the sets of products in
the two cases quickly diverge (by T c = 3 the M and L cases involve 78 and 46 new products
entering over our 10 year sample, respectively), this has a relatively small effect on consumer
surplus for low values of T c because the first products not entering are on average lower
quality (beliefs after initial EU testing Q1j are sufficiently correlated with true quality Q∗j
that this is the case). As trial lengths increase, however, the benefits of learning begin to
50

Here we assume the set of products that undergo US testing and the amount of testing required are
held fixed as they are observed in the data. Because we estimate that there is no learning outside of
trials in the EU market, EU policy does not affect US policy through that mechanism. It is possible that
learning from increased EU trials could provide further certainty about product quality that would change
US testing/entry decisions for some products (or that “harmonization” efforts across the regions might allow
some trial evidence to count in both), which would result in EU policy affecting US policy and thus require
consideration of equilibrium between the two regulatory regimes.
51
We chose 1 percent nominal per month as it roughly the upper envelope of cost of capital estimates for
medical device firms (Harrington 2012). Intermediate discount rates give intermediate results, as one might
expect. Using OMB suggested real rates of 7 and 3 percent for regulatory analysis (and average inflation
2004-13 of 2.36 percent) yields surplus gains 10-20 percent and 20-50 percent larger than those at 1 percent
nominal per month. These are differences for regulator discounting only. Firms discount expected profit
calculations at 1 percent nominal per month in all of our L case entry calculations.

36

Figure 4: Optimal Regulation: Red markers represent estimates for M (more entry)
and L (less entry) cases. Blue lines demarcate optimal trial lengths T c∗ .
(b) Total Surplus, ∆T S(T c )
8

8

(a) Consumer Surplus, ∆CS(T c )

M case
L case

0

0

Total Surplus (% change)
2
4
6

Consumer Surplus (% change)
2
4
6

M case
L case

0

6
12
18
24
Time in Clinical Trials (Months beyond EU required)

State of Market at Policy Change
Jan 2004
Jan 2004, EU given US spillovers

30

0

6
12
18
24
Time in Clinical Trials (Months beyond EU required)

30

∆CS(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
5.2
6.7

c∗
(months)
TCS
(L)
(M)
16
17

∆T S(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
3.9
6.3

TTc∗S (months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

2.0

3.1

11

13

1.0

2.7

6

13

(1.1)

(1.3)

(4)

(3)

(0.8)

(1.2)

(4)

(3)

(2)

NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors, clustered by month
(NT = 114) using a delete-10 block jacknife, in parentheses.

taper off. The products exiting in L are of increasingly high quality, causing M and L to
diverge in the consumer surplus implications of longer trials. Our estimates suggest that the
c∗
= 16 months
optimal policy implications for the two cases are, however, quite similar at TCS
for L and 17 for M. The additional consumer surplus generated at the optimum under these
c∗
cases differs more at ∆CS(TCS
) = 5.2 percent for L and 6.7 for M (though this is not a
statistically significant difference at standard confidence levels).
The total surplus results in the right panel of Figure 4 are roughly similar to the consumer
surplus findings, with a few notable differences. First, the gap between the M and L cases
is larger. This is due primarily to the widening gap in fixed costs of testing incurred by
producers, which drives the lower bound on total surplus to decrease more rapidly.52 The
spread in additional total surplus generated at the optimum is wider at ∆T S(TTc∗S ) = 3.9
percent for the L case and 6.3 percent for the M case (but again we cannot reject these are
52

For example, by T c = 12 the bounds on firm entry have widened and span 76 to 32 new products
entering over our 10 year sample. See Appendix Figure A13 for entering products, fixed costs, and producer
surplus plots. Note that the increase in producer surplus with testing is partially driven by the fact that
greater testing benefits Jan 2004 incumbents by delaying competition.

37

the same at typical significance levels). In the consumer surplus analysis the optimal trial
length is the same for both cases. Note that the difference between the L cases for consumer
and total surplus generated by testing suggests a rationale for why private incentives may
not induce firms to test optimally – producer surplus gains are often outweighed by the fixed
costs.
These results speak to the policy debates in the EU and US over the medical device
approval pathway. They support those who advocate for stronger clinical requirements in
the EU. The results also support the FDA argument that reductions in their standards for
device approval will reduce consumer welfare. Our results stand in contrast to Peltzman’s
(1973) influential analysis of the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments to the Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act which required proof of efficacy and made the testing procedures required to
prove that efficacy subject to FDA oversight. He concludes that the Amendments led to a
significant decrease in welfare. Of course, we are comparing a different time and product
market than Peltzman considered. And Peltzman’s analysis does not speak to the optimal
informational requirements pharmaceutical manufacturers should face when introducing a
new molecular agent. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis is the first that provides an
estimate of the optimal policy on the amount of information creation in regulating product
testing.
With the caveats mentioned above, we find that the current FDA policy for stents (the
mean lag between US and EU entry is 10 months for all products and 17 months for DES)
falls near our confidence interval for the optimal policy in terms of both consumer and total
surplus maximization. These results also suggest that surplus could be increased in the
EU (5-7 percent consumer and 3-6 percent total) by increasing the pre-market clinical trial
requirements, but these numbers do not take into account information spillovers from US
trials to the EU. Incorporating the spillovers from products undergoing US testing (shown
in the second row of the table at the bottom of Figure 4), the potential surplus gains are
cut by more than half, and in the L case the total surplus gains from further testing are no
longer statistically significantly different from zero. This provides one partial justification
for the low amount of testing that has been required in the EU.
6.4

Sensitivity of Optimal Regulation to Key Parameters

Table 3 explores comparative statics on several important parameters to help better understand the factors that determine the optimal regulation. In order to more clearly focus on
the trade-offs between risk and access, we do not include any post-market learning (such as
spillovers from the US to EU) in these computations. Thus, the first row here is identical to
the analysis without spillovers in the last Section, providing a baseline for the other analyses.
38

Appendix E reports outcomes for more extensive sets of parameter values than shown here.
Table 3: Sensitivity of Optimal Regulation to Key Parameters: .
State of Market at Policy Change
Jan 2004
Jan 2004, FC * 2
Jan 2004, FC * 5
Jan 2004, no DES
Jan 2004, no stents
Jan 2004, σQ * .5
Jan 2004, σQ * .75
Jan 2004, σQ * 1.33
Jan 2004, σQ * 2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .5
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .75
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 1.33
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 5

∆CS(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
5.2
6.7

c∗
TCS
(months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

∆T S(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
3.9
6.3

TTc∗S (months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

3.9

6.7

9

17

2.4

6.3

7

17

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.3)

(1.9)

(6)

(2)

(2)

1.7

6.7

7

17

0.0

6.3

0

17

(1.1)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(0.4)

(1.9)

(2)

(2)

3.6

4.6

7

17

2.4

3.9

6

17

(2.0)

(2.3)

(4)

(5)

(1.6)

(2.3)

(3)

(5)

5.4

6.1

7

8

3.7

5.4

7

8

(2.5)

(2.8)

(3)

(4)

(2.1)

(2.7)

(3)

(4)

0.1

0.2

1

5

0.0

0.1

0

1

(0.3)

(0.5)

(2)

(3)

(0.1)

(0.5)

(1)

(4)

2.2

3.1

8

13

1.3

2.9

6

13

(1.3)

(1.5)

(4)

(3)

(1.0)

(1.4)

(4)

(3)

8.6

10.2

19

19

6.9

9.6

17

19

(2.1)

(2.2)

(3)

(3)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(4)

(3)

12.1

13.7

19

19

10.2

13.1

18

19

(2.3)

(2.4)

(3)

(3)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(4)

(3)

0.0

0.1

0

1

0.0

0.1

0

1

(0.1)

(0.5)

(2)

(4)

(0.0)

(0.4)

(0)

(4)

1.5

2.6

7

13

0.7

2.4

6

13

(1.2)

(1.5)

(4)

(4)

(0.9)

(1.4)

(5)

(4)

3.5

4.9

16

17

2.2

4.6

8

17

(1.6)

(1.8)

(4)

(3)

(1.4)

(1.7)

(5)

(3)

6.9

8.4

13

17

5.5

8.0

16

17

(1.9)

(2.1)

(3)

(2)

(1.8)

(2.0)

(3)

(2)

9.6

10.7

13

17

7.9

10.2

13

17

(2.1)

(2.2)

(3)

(3)

(1.9)

(2.1)

(3)

(3)

14.2

15.3

10

12

12.6

14.5

9

11

(2.3)

(2.3)

(2)

(2)

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2)

(2)

NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors, clustered by month
(NT = 114) using a delete-10 block jacknife, in parentheses.

Fixed Costs of Trials: The second panel of Table 3 reports the relationship between
optimal trial length and the costs of trials. By construction, this only affects the L case, and
as trial costs move toward zero, the L case converges to the M case. As trial costs increase
from our assumed $1.6M/month, optimal trial length and the additional surplus generated
c∗
from testing both decrease. For costs double the base case, the L case estimates are TCS
=
c∗
9 months and ∆CS(TCS ) = 3.9 percent, which are statistically significantly less than the M
case. Once costs exceed five times the base case, we can no longer reject that the consumer
surplus generated at the optimal under the L case is equivalent to the EU status quo of
T c = 0. Point estimates reach zero at fixed costs 10 times those we assume. As expected,
39

the amount of optimal testing under a total surplus criterion declines even more quickly as
fixed costs of testing increase.
Less Existing Substitutes / Larger Quality Increase Due to Technological Change:
The third panel of Table 3 reports the estimates from two different scenarios that demonstrate how the impact of regulatory policy changes as the quality of existing technology
decreases (and thus new potential entering technologies represent a larger increase in the
average quality and variety available in the market). We calculate the optimal trial length
as described above but remove (1) all DES; and (2) all stents that were introduced prior to
2004 from the analysis – thus any change in trial length impacts the availability of DES (a
significant technological improvement) or of any stent. There are two opposing forces here
relative to our baseline. The complementarity between quality and information discussed at
the end of Section 6.2 applies here – lower quality incumbent technology means new products
will be used more, increasing the value of uncertainty reductions. On the other hand, lower
quality incumbents also means the benefit to accessing new technologies sooner is higher.
We find that optimal trial lengths tend to decrease as the quality of existing technology decreases, indicating that the (relative change in the) value of access dominates the value of the
complementarity between quality and uncertainty reduction for the scenarios we consider.
However, we find that welfare is still improved by increasing trial length relative to current
EU policy (though by less than in the baseline, due to the tradeoff just discussed, and L
cases under total surplus are no longer statistically distinguishable from zero).
Uncertainty of Innovation Quality: The fourth panel documents that the benefit of
product testing is tightly linked to the prior uncertainty surrounding the quality of innovations, σQ in our model. As prior uncertainty decreases, optimal policy involves less testing.
The point estimates become small and statistically indistinguishable from current EU policy
when σQ is half of our estimate. As prior uncertainty increases, the surplus gains from that
testing also increase dramatically. For example, for σQ double of our estimate, the L case
c∗
c∗
estimates are TCS
= 19 months and ∆CS(TCS
) = 12.1 percent, a surplus more than double
that of the optimal in our baseline estimates at similar trial lengths.53
Precision of Learning in Clinical Trials: The fifth and final panel documents how
changes in the precision of learning from clinical trials, 1/σA2 c , influences optimal policy.
As one might expect, the faster the learning from testing, the more surplus that can be
generated by testing. However, the length of optimal testing follows an inverted-u shape
as the precision of testing increases. For clinical trial learning precision at one fifth of our
53

Appendix Table A5 shows results for changing risk aversion, which has similar effects to changes in
prior risk, with even larger changes in optimal trial length and surplus at similar multiples.

40

parameter estimate, the optimal policy is short and are statistically indistinguishable from
no additional testing beyond the current EU level. As precision increases, optimal trial
length and surplus generated increases until it reaches is apex near our baseline parameter
estimate. As precision increases beyond our point estimate, the optimal trial length decreases
in precision (for consumer surplus this happens around 0.75, and for total surplus about 1.3,
times our baseline optimal value). For precision five times our estimate, the optimal L case
c∗
c∗
estimates are TCS
= 10 months and ∆CS(TCS
) = 14.2 percent, a surplus almost triple at a
trial length less than two thirds that of our baseline.
The intuition for this result is that increasing trial precision causes testing to approach
“complete learning” more rapidly. Thus, for any amount of testing, the learning benefit is
greater in level, but the slope of the benefit from additional learning also flattens out at a
shorter trial length. We find this result both interesting and encouraging in that the learning
rate from trials is something that policy might hope to influence (e.g., through encouraging
surrogate endpoint validation as discussed in Budish et al. (2015)).
6.5

The Value of Post-market Learning

One frequently proposed change to FDA regulatory policy is to relax pre-market clinical
standards and increase post-market surveillance. This policy proposal has a direct connection to our model as intends to increase the rate of post-market approval learning. In the
language of our model, this implies increasing the precision of the signals that arrive outside
of FDA required clinical trials, 1/σA2 . We estimate the post market learning rate is effectively
zero for the set of products in our data. There are several potential reasons for this finding.
For reasons that are familiar to economists, observational learning from real world use make
it difficult to infer the causal treatment effect of the device as there is no randomization into
treatment and control groups. More fundamentally perhaps, there is currently no infrastructure in place to systematically collect data, perform analysis, and disseminate performance
results.
We analyze this policy by varying σA (assuming no additional costs), and calculating the
corresponding optimal trial length TTc∗S (σA ) under a total surplus maximization metric and
total surplus generated T S(σA , TTc∗S (σA )) at the optimal. Figure 5 displays the results.
When observational learning approaches clinical trial learning in precision, there is no
reason to run additional pre-market trials at all (again assuming required EU testing establishes symmetric information). There is no longer a tradeoff between access and learning
because learning can happen after access is granted.54 Total surplus is increased up to 18
54

If the welfare of pre-market clinical trial participants is for some reason treated differently than that
of post-market users, then there is still a consumer surplus gain to removing uncertainty prior to market

41

Figure 5: The Value of Post-Market Surveillance: Plots of optimal trial length
2
(left panel (a)) and total surplus (right panel (b)) as observational learning precision 1/σA
2
varies from zero to the clinical trial precision 1/σAc .
(b) Total Surplus, T S(σA , TTc∗S (σA ))

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
Learning Rate Post-Market (Ratio vs. Clinical)

20
15
10
5

TS vs. Pre-Market only policy (% change)

1

M case
L case

0

20
5

10

15

M case
L case

0

Optimal Months in Clinical (beyond EU required)

(a) Optimal Trial Length, TTc∗S (σA )

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
Learning Rate Post-Market (Ratio vs. Clinical)

1

percent relative to no observational learning. To calibrate the value of this increased welfare
due to increased post-market learning, baseline estimates of utilization of coronary stents in
the US and a value of $5,000 per treatment (from the clinical literature cited earlier) yields
a $576 million per year increase in welfare.55
Before reaching this extreme, as the precision of observational learning decreases (relative
to clinical trial learning), it is optimal to require longer pre-market clinical trials.56 The
lesson from this policy experiment is clear. The argument that requiring shorter trials with
post-approval testing can improve consumer welfare has merit. However, the gains from
this policy critically depend on the rate and cost of learning via post-market surveillance.
The viable rate of post-market learning will, in turn, depend on the investments made in
collecting, generating, and disseminating performance information.

7

Conclusion

The tradeoff between access to new products and consumer risk in regulating the information
required for market entry is important in a variety of industries, and, in particular, in
medical devices. Informed by qualitative and quantitative evidence that the US regulatory
environment requires more information than the EU via pre-market testing, we develop and
access. See Appendix Figure A14.
55
In 2009, over 640,000 stent procedures were performed in the US (Auerbach 2012).
56
Part of the tradeoff with this T S metric is driven by our assumption that post-market learning is costless
on the margin and pre-market trials are costly. The decrease in optimal pre-market trial length is slightly
less dramatic under the CS metric considered in Appendix E.7.

42

estimate a structural model with products introduced when quality is still uncertain, learning
over time, and regulator and manufacturer decisions regarding product testing and market
entry and pricing. We then conduct welfare analyses of counterfactual policies affecting: (1)
the length of clinical trials required before market entry; and (2) observational learning after
market entry.
For coronary stents 2004-13, we estimate that clinical testing is critical to market function.
Without any testing, quality uncertainty plus risk aversion combine to keep many consumers
from choosing a stent over alternative treatments. We estimate that the US is close to the
optimal policy in terms of trading off testing versus access to innovation, but the EU is too
lax (despite free-riding off of information generated by US trials). We also estimate that if
it is possible to achieve post-market learning rates close enough to those we observe from
clinical trials, then embracing recent calls for more active “post-market surveillance” could
further increase total surplus by as much as 18 percent.
We additionally conduct a number of comparative static exercises to examine how optimal policy changes with the parameters of our model, and one takeaway is that results vary
enough within reasonable parameter ranges that extrapolating to policy for other products
should be done with care. The model we develop provides guidance for how this extrapolation should depend on the uncertainty in quality of new product introductions, the rate of
technological improvement, the learning rate in (and cost of) clinical trials, and the observational learning rate for any type of device being considered. But it is difficult to give precise
guidance without clear estimates or assumptions regarding these parameters.
At a more phenomenological level, the coronary stent case we analyze here will tend to
be most similar to other Class III medical devices, where EU controls involving materials,
manufacturing, and smaller clinical trials will typically satisfy FDA safety requirements, and
the primary policy debate regarding pre-market clinical trial size focuses on the amount of
information generated regarding product efficacy. These devices are also typically used by a
relatively small community of specialist surgeons whose expertise and attention to new technology make the assumption of symmetric information among players a reasonable first-order
approximation. Also similar in this regard would be considering clinical trial requirements
and off-label prescribing of pharmaceuticals by specialists, though these may tend to diverge
to the extent that they have meaningful side effects, and thus properly modeling learning and
consumer surplus would involve allowing for multidimensional heterogeneity in information
and preferences over treatment efficacy and side effects.57 Further from our context would
57

In particular, oncology comes to mind, where many cancers are treated with various “cocktails” that
combine drugs and have not been tested the same way in which they are often used in practice. In general,
off-label prescribing refers to when a drug that is FDA approved for treating a particular disease state is
prescribed to treat a different disease state. Thus the drug still has a baseline level of safety, given its

43

be cases where a drug (or device) is used by generalists or other providers less expert and
informed in the specific technology area, where asymmetric information might play a larger
role. Finally, furthest from our context would be areas where considering any regulation at
all, even basic safety testing, is the policy margin of interest.
Because the model is quite general and the type of data we use is available for many
markets, we hope that we have provided a starting point for analysis of regulation and market
structure in other industries where new product development and testing are important. As
discussed above, other product areas may also suffer from asymmetric information problems
or allow more learning via usage. Extending the model to allow for these features and to
further explore the extent to which certification solves asymmetry (in addition to amount)
of information problems offers another promising (and challenging) area for future research.
We also hope to have provided a building block in the push toward a more complete picture of how regulation affects market structure, innovation, and ultimately welfare. While
our exercise here, estimating the welfare effects of the access/uncertainty tradeoff for an
exogenously given set of “mid-stage” innovations, is an important step towards better understanding this phenomenon, a more complete understanding would allow for the regulatory
regime to effect research and development at even earlier stages. Analysis of this type would
require a significant extension to the theory and additional data on innovative activities of
the firms. Developing this type of early-stage innovation data, in a way that links to product
markets, is a challenge shared with the innovation literature more broadly (Sampat 2018).

References
Ackerberg, D. A. (2003). Advertising, Learning, and Consumer Choice in Experience Good
Markets: An Empirical Examination. International Economic Review, 44(3):1007–1040.
Aguiar, L. and Waldfogel, J. (2018). Quality predictability and the welfare benefits from new
products: Evidence from the digitization of recorded music. Journal of Political Economy,
126(2):492–524.
Berry, S. and Waldfogel, J. (1999). Free entry and social inefficiency in radio broadcasting.
RAND Journal of Economics, 30(3):397–420.
Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. RAND
Journal of Economics, 25(2):242–262.
approval, but the body of evidence regarding its efficacy for the off-label disease state tends to be less than
that required to obtain FDA approval.

44

Brown, Z. Y. (2017). An empirical model of price transparency and markups in health care.
Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Budish, E., Roin, B., and Williams, H. (2015). Do firms underinvest in long-term research?
evidence from cancer clinical trials. American Economic Review, 105(7):2044–2085.
Cardon, J. H. and Hendel, I. (2001). Asymmetric information in health insurance: Evidence from the national medical expenditure survey. The RAND Journal of Economics,
32(3):408–427.
Ching, A. T. (2010). A dynamic oligopoly structural model for the prescription drug market
after patent expiration. International Economic Review, 51(4):1175–1207.
Ching, A. T., Erdem, T., and Keane, M. P. (2013). Learning models: An assessment of
progress, challenges, and new developments. Marketing Science, 32(6):913–938.
Cohen, A. and Einav, L. (2007). Estimating risk preferences from deductible choice. The
American Economic Review, pages 745–788.
Collard-Wexler, A., Gowrisankaran, G., and Lee, R. S. (2014). Bargaining in bilateral
oligopoly: An alternating offers representation of the” nash-in-nash” solution. NBER
Working Paper #20641.
Crawford, G. and Yurukoglu, A. (2012). The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel
television. American Economic Review, 102(2).
Crawford, G. S. and Shum, M. (2005). Uncertainty and learning in pharmaceutical demand.
Econometrica, 73(4):1137–1173.
Dranove, D. and Jin, G. (2010). Quality disclosure and certification: Theory and practice.
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4):935–63.
Erdem, T. and Keane, M. P. (1996). Decision-Making Under Uncertainty: Capturing Dynamic Brand Choice Processes in Turbulent Consumer Goods Markets. Marketing Science,
15(1):1–20.
Filson, D. (2012). A markov-perfect equilibrium model of the impacts of price controls on the
performance of the pharmaceutical industry. RAND Journal of Economics, 43(1):110–138.
Gandhi, A., Lu, Z., and Shi, X. (2013). Estimating demand for differentiated products with
error in market shares.

45

Gowrisankaran, G., Nevo, A., and Town, R. J. (2014). Mergers when prices are negotiated:
Evidence from the hospital industry. The American Economic Review, 105(1):172–203.
Grabowski, H. and Wang, Y. R. (2008). Do faster food and drug adminstration drug reviews
adversely affect patient safety? an analysis of the 1992 prescription drug user fee act.
Journal of Law and Economics, 51(2):377–406.
Grennan, M. (2013). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical
devices. American Economic Review, 103(1):145–177.
Grennan, M. (2014). Bargaining ability and competitive advantage: Empirical evidence from
medical devices. Management Science, 60(12):3011–3025.
Grennan, M. and Swanson, A. (2018). Diagnosing price dispersion. Working paper.
Grennan, M. and Town, R. J. (2018). Regulating innovation with uncertain quality: Information, risk, and access in medical devices. NBER working paper 20981.
Hamilton, B. H., Jungheim, E., McManus, B., and Pantano, J. (2018). Healthcare access,
costs, and treatment dynamics: Evidence from in vitro fertilization. forthcoming in the
American Economic Review.
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When
nudging hurts. American Economic Review, 103(7):2643–82.
Harrington, S. E. (2012). Cost of capital for pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and medical
device firms. In The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of the Biopharmaceutical Industry.
Oxford.
Ho, K. and Lee, R. S. (2019). Equilibrium provider networks: bargaining and exclusion in
health care markets. American Economic Review. forthcoming.
Horn, H. and Wolinsky, A. (1988). Bilateral monopolies and incentives for merger. RAND
Journal of Economics, 19:408–419.
Ifrach, B. and Weintraub, G. (2017). A framework for dynamic oligopoly in concentrated
industries. The Review of Economic Studies, 84(3):1106–1150.
Kalyanasundaram, A. and Karlheinz, P. (2014). Comparison of revascularization procedures
in coronary artery disease. Medscape. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/164682.
Kamenica, E. and Gentzkow, M. (2011). Bayesian persuasion. American Economic Review,
101(6):2590–2615.
46

Kaplan, A. V. and Stern, A. D. (2018). The central and unacknowledged role of the us
food and drug administration in the design and execution of medical device pivotal trials.
JAMA Cardiology, 3(1):5–6.
Kyle, M. (2007). Pharmaceutical price controls and entry strategies. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 89(1):88–99.
Lee, R. S. and Fong, K. (2013). Markov-perfect network formation an applied framework for
bilateral oligopoly and bargaining in buyer-seller networks. working paper.
Makower, J., Meer, A., and Denend, L. (2010). FDA impact of us medical technology
innovation: A survey of over 200 medical technology companies. Stanford University
Report.
Miravete, E. J., Seim, K., and Thurk, J. (2014). Complexity, Efficiency, and Fairness in
Multi-Product Monopoly Pricing. Technical report, Working paper.
Murphy, K. and Topel, R. (2006). The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political
Economy, 114(3):871–904.
Nistor, C. and Tucker, C. E. (2015). Certification intermediaries: Evidence from the medical
device industry. working paper.
Olson, M. K. (2008). The risk we bear: The effects of review speed and industry user fees
on new drug safety. Journal of Health Economics, 27:175–200.
Peltzman, S. (1973). An evaluation of consumer protection legislation: The 1962 drug
amendments. Journal of Political Economy, 81(5):1049–1091.
Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan.
Journal of Political Economy, 110(4):705–729.
Philipson, T., Berndt, E. R., Gottschalk, A. H., and Sun, E. (2008). Cost-benefit analysis
of the FDA: The case of the prescription drug user fee acts. Journal of Public Economics,
92(5-6):1306–1325.
Quan, T. and Williams, K. (2017). Product variety, across market demand heterogeneity,
and the value of online retail. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 2054.
Roberts, J. H. and Urban, G. L. (1988). Modeling multiattribute utility, risk, and belief
dynamics for new consumer durable brand choice. Management Science, 34(2):167–185.

47

Sampat, B. (2018). A survey of empirical evidence on patents and innovation. NBER working
paper 25383.
Schreyögg, J., Stargardt, T., Tiemann, O., and Busse, R. (2006). Methods to determine
reimbursement rates for diagnosis related groups (DRG): a comparison of nine european
countries. Health Care Management Science, 9(3):215–223.
Scott Morton, F. and Kyle, M. (2012). Markets for pharmaceutical products. In Pauly, M.,
McGuire, T., and Barros, P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2, chapter 12.
Elsevier.
Seim, K. and Waldfogel, J. (2013). Public monopoly and economic efficiency: Evidence
from the pennsylvania liquor control board’s entry decisions. American Economic Review,
103(2):831–62.
Sorenson, C. and Kanavos, P. (2011). Medical technology procurement in europe: a crosscountry comparison of current practice and policy. Health Policy, 100(1):43–50.
Spence, M. A. (1975). Monopoly, quality, and regulation. Bell Journal of Economics,
6(2):417–429.
Stern, A. D. (2017). Innovation under regulatory uncertainty: evidence from medical technology. Journal of Public Economics, 145:181–200.
Stern, A. D., Kramer, D. B., Ouellet, M., and Kesselheim, A. S. (2017). Review times and
adverse events for cardiovascular devices. Nature, 1(0013):0013.
Timmins, C. (2002). Measuring the Dynamic Efficiency Costs of Regulators’ Preferences:
Municipal Water Utilities in the Arid West. Econometrica, 70(2):603–629.
Train, K. (2015). Welfare calculations in discrete choice models when anticipated and experienced attributes differ: A guide with examples. Journal of Choice Modelling, 16:15–22.
Van Norman, G. A. (2016). Drugs and devices: comparison of european and us approval
processes. JACC: Basic to Translational Science, 1(5):399–412.

48

ELECTRONIC APPENDICES—NOT FOR PRINT PUBLICATION

A
A.1

Data Appendix
Dataset construction

The dataset used in this paper is from Millennium Research Group’s Marketrack survey of
catheter labs, the source that major device manufacturers subscribe to for detailed market
research. The goal of the survey is to provide an accurate picture of market shares and
prices of medical devices. For our purposes, the key variables in the data are the price paid
and quantity used for each stent in each hospital in each month. In addition, the hospitals
report monthly totals for different procedures performed, such as diagnostic angiographies.
The data span January 2004 through June 2013 and cover the US and EU markets.
There are three main challenges in constructing a usable dataset from the raw survey
data. First, the survey was not as concerned with collecting price data as it was with collecting quantity data. Second, the survey measures stent usage rather than availability,
and our data go back only to 2004, so it is not always possible to infer regulatory approval
dates from the data (and while our independent research found most introduction dates,
we were not able to find all). Finally, there is some apparent misreporting in the survey.
The following tables illustrate how key sample summary statistics compare across our cleaning steps for the EU and US datasets. These steps are summarized below; full detail can
be found in the Stata code used to execute them, cleaning-eu-data-3-sample.do and
cleaning-us-data-3-sample.do.

EU dataset modifications
Raw data
Rm. suspect q
Rm. if q¿2*diagnostics
Rm. suspect diagnostics
Rm. outlier p
Rm. unknown entry
Final sample

Diagnostic
procedures

No. of stents
implanted

No. of BMS
products

No. of DES
products

Average
stent age

Stent-hospitalmonths

Hospitalmonths

Hospitals

151
161
152
151
148
150
160

108
98
107
108
106
108
95

3.8
3.3
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.2

3.3
2.8
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
2.8

54.3
54.5
54.3
54.4
54.4
54.0
54.6

88,144
61,098
86,672
87,349
81,646
87,516
54,771

15,064
13,477
14,812
14,933
14,149
14,995
12,313

542
540
537
542
532
541
524

Diagnostic
procedures

No. of stents
implanted

No. of BMS
products

No. of DES
products

Average
stent age

Stent-hospitalmonths

Hospitalmonths

Hospitals

137
147
138
138
136
147

76
68
76
76
75
67

2.2
1.9
2.2
2.2
2.2
1.8

2.5
2.1
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.1

36.8
37.8
36.7
36.8
37.1
38.0

68,603
44,218
67,783
67,857
66,293
41,779

17,183
14,631
16,982
16,997
16,720
13,900

526
509
517
526
525
478

US dataset modifications
Raw data
Rm. suspect q
Rm. if q¿2*diagnostics
Rm. suspect diagnostics
Rm. outlier p
Final sample

49

The table rows record the sample means for key summary statistics across various cleaning
steps. The summary statistics are means of quantities calculated at the hospital-month
level. The means reported are of the total number of stents implanted; the total number of
diagnostic angiographies; the number of different bare-metal stents (BMS) used; the number
of different drug-eluting stents (DES) used; and the weighted average age, in months, of the
stents used. The table also shows the total number of stent-hospital-month observations,
number of hospital-month observations, and number of hospitals in each sample.
The table rows correspond to different samples. The first row of each table summarizes the raw EU and US survey data. The second row drops hospital-months with suspect
total quantities. The criteria for dropping are threefold. First, we drop hospital-months
for which the total quantity of stents changes by more than 50% relative to the previous
month in which the hospital appears in the data. Second, for “low-quantity” hospitals with
mean monthly stent quantities below 15, we drop hospital-months with usage strictly greater
than 1.5 standard deviations from the hospital’s mean. For “high-quantity” hospitals with
mean monthly stent quantities (weakly) greater than 15, we drop hospital-months with usage
strictly greater than 3.0 standard deviations from the hospital’s mean. Third, for hospitalmonths with flagged quantity changes that were accompanied by a 30% or greater change
in diagnostic angiography procedures, the hospital-months were undropped. Diagnostic angiography procedures are performed prior to coronary stent implantation, so large changes in
monthly stent quantities should be accompanied be similarly large changes in angiographies.
The third and fourth rows of the table drop hospital-months with suspect diagnostic
angiography counts. Diagnostic angiographies should be bounded below by some multiple of
the number of stents used; in our data and anecdotally according to clinicians, there are on
average about two stents implanted per procedure. The third row drops hospital-months if
the number of diagnostic angiographies is less than two times the number of stents implanted
in that hospital-month. The fourth row drops hospital-months if the number of diagnostic
angiographies is more than 2 standard deviations away from the hospital’s mean and if the
ratio of angiographies to stents was 2 standard deviations from the hospital’s mean.
The fifth row of the table drops hospital-months with problematic prices. We drop
hospital-months with outlier prices based on a regression of log-price on the hospital’s number
of BMS products and number of DES products used that month, in addition to a hospital
fixed-effect. Hospital-months with products whose regression residuals were more than 2
standard deviations from the mean of all residuals were dropped.
The sixth and penultimate row of the E.U. table drops hospital-months with positive
quantities for stents for which E.U. regulatory approval dates are not known. Since the age
of the product is an important component of our analysis, the products for which an entry
50

date could be pinned down with reasonable certainty must be removed from the analysis.
This drop affects only a few products, none of which were frequently used. There are no
products for which the US approval dates could not be ascertained.
The final row in each table reports summary statistics for the final sample, which drops
all observations that meet one or more of the dropping criteria described above.
A.2

Clinical trial data

Our collected clinical trial data, and a detailed document on the sources, are available in the
online archive and upon request from the authors.
In addition to clarifying the differences between EU and US trial policy and validating
our product quality estimates, the trial data make clear the strong relationship between
the size of clinical trial in terms of patients and the time spent on the trial via the time it
takes to recruit patients. Figure A1 plots the data on patients and length of recruitment in
days for smaller and larger trials (broken down to roughly correspond to the scale of trials
required for “EU” and “US” approval). One can see from the fitted lines that larger trials
take longer. The fit is not perfectly linear, as there are of course idiosyncracies to particular
trials, but especially for the larger “US” trials, which tend to be run by professional units
within large firms or third party research organizations that do this as their core business,
the fit is reasonably tight, implying an average arrival rate of 186 patients per month.

Figure A1: Relationship between trial size and time.
(b) Large “US” Trials
1000
Time Recruiting (Days)
200 400 600 800
0

0

Time Recruiting (Days)
200 400 600 800

1000

(a) Small “EU” Trials

0

100

200
Patients in Trial

300

400

51

0

1000

2000
Patients in Trial

3000

4000

B

Robustness and Alternative Explanations: Supplemental Figures and Discussion

B.1

Evidence of learning from individual products

Figure A2: Learning patterns for selected individual products. Three representative products that receive good and bad news from trials or not much (useful) news at all.
Left panel (a) plots mean utility estimate for each product ln(sja /s0a ) by age since introduction into the EU. Right panel (b) plots absolute differences |ln(sja /s0a ) − ln(sja+1 /s0a+1 )|
by age, which should be larger with more uncertainty, and converge toward zero with
learning.
(b) |ln(sjt /s0t ) − ln(sjt+1 /s0t+1 )|

0

−10

Inclusive Share (Mean)
−8
−6
−4

−2

Inclusive Share Change Between Months
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5

(a) ln(sjt /s0t )

0

12
24
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
US trials success

∆t ln(sjt /s0t )|a=1
∆t ln(sjt /s0t )|a=12
∆t ln(sjt /s0t )|a=24

US trials failed

36

0

No US trials

mean
0.24
0.17
-0.11

12
24
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
US trials success

s.d.
1.14
0.50
0.30

p25
-0.16
-0.04
-0.31

p50
0.12
0.08
-0.06

US trials failed

p75
0.60
0.27
0.11

36
No US trials

N
27
29
32

Averaging across products conditional on age provides patterns in the data that have direct relation to expected patterns in our model. However, these averages cloud heterogeneity
across products. Figure A2 provides two types of evidence of this variation. First, the figures
in the panels provide patterns for a few individual products, illustrating how learning does
not always bring good news, and lack of learning brings a volatile mix of good and bad over
time. Second, the table below the panels provides summary statistics on the raw changes in
usage patterns with age ln(sjt /s0t ) − ln(sjt+1 /s0t+1 ) for products in the EU, undergoing US
trials.
The patterns documented previously regarding decreases in volatility and increasing mean
usage with age might be worrisome if they were driven by increasing usage for all product
with age that then asymptotes as in a diffusion process. The table on the raw usage changes
52

show this is not the case—there is a large fraction of changes that are ”bad news” for
products.
B.1.1

Case Study: CoStar and the Role of Bad News

Here we focus on a clear example of the impact of bad news. A small firm named Conor
Medsystems developed a drug-eluting stent with an intuitively appealing new design for
drug release that performed well in small early trials (CoStar I (87 patients) and EuroStar
I (149 patients)), which were received enthusiastically at conferences in late 2005 through
2006. During this period, pivotal US trials were begun. The stent saw growing market
share after receiving a CE mark and being released in the EU in February 2006.58 In
November 2006, Johnson & Johnson was sufficiently optimistic about CoStar to buy Conor
for $1.4B. J&J took over CoStar’s pre-market notification submission to the FDA. In May
2007 J&J announced the results of a large US trial (CoStar II (1675 patients)), where safety
evidence was good but efficacy was disappointing with TLR rates 8% for CoStar versus 4%
for its competitor and the control stent, Taxus. Shortly after, J&J announced that it was
terminating its FDA mandated clinical trials as the stent was failing to meet its primary
endpoints.59

−9

ln(sj/s0) in EU
−8
−7
−6

−5

Figure A3: Evolution of ln(sjt /s0t ) for CoStar.

6 6
n000
Jait 2
mm

05

T

CT

20

S

DE

Su

or 07
ial
on Jan d Tr
C
e
s
ail
ire
qu
eF
c
s
lea
JA
J&
Re

8

n0

Ja

The CoStar story demonstrates many of the themes of our analysis. CoStar’s usage
rose as early trial results were communicated at physician conferences and it underwent US
trials. As more information was generated via the clinical trial, that information is reflected
in the inclusive share. Presumably J&J shared this optimism and did not possess differential
information, even after due diligence that would have made it privy to the same information
58
59

See http://www.ptca.org/pr conor/20060217.html
See http://www.investor.jnj.com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid=241182.

53

as Conor. And when trial results on efficacy were unfavorable, market share dipped and the
product was pulled from the market.
B.2
B.2.1

Robustness and Mechanism Tests: Supplemental Figures and Discussion
Placebo Test: PTCA Balloons

One alternative explanation for the findings in Figure 2 would be that the set of manufacturers/products that undergo US trials promote their products differently than other products
in the EU, and also differently than for the same products upon US introduction. While
we believe the evidence on decreasing variance and on the same products upon US launch
make this unlikely, it is not impossible. To further explore this possibility, we perform a
placebo test using percutaneous transcatheter coronary artery (PTCA) balloons, which are
FDA Class II devices and thus face similar regulatory requirements in both the EU and US.
Thus PTCA should not display the differential signs of learning we document for stents if
our proposed mechanism is true. The results here show that we do see more total entry
in the EU (presumably due to pre-existing complementary sales and distribution assets in
the US for some manufacturers); but the differences in amount of entry are smaller than in
stents, there is no gap in time of entry on average, and usage patterns with age show no
evidence of learning.
As another check that our results are indeed capturing learning in the EU from US clinical
trials, we perform a “placebo” type analysis by looking at a device where we know such trials
are not required. We perform the analysis on PTCA balloons catheters, which are often used
to clear a blockage in the artery before the stent is placed. Standard balloons (ones that
do not have drug coatings or special cutting capabilities) typically have little, if any, gap
between US and EU approval requirements. This is evident in the lag between US and EU
introduction of on average two months (here we calculated entry from first observation in the
data instead of looking up press releases, and so the confidence interval includes zero when
sampling error is taken into account). Despite this lack of lag for those products introduced
in both the US and EU, we still observe many balloons introduced only in the EU because
they are sold by the same sales force as stents, but are much lower revenue products, so
that only a few companies enter the US market for the purpose of selling balloons only.
During our ten year sample, 40 manufacturers sell 113 different balloons in the EU and 6
manufacturers sell 40 different balloons in the US. Thus we can execute our same research
design on balloons, with the expectation of no differential learning between products that
are EU only versus those that enter the US as well.
Figure A4 shows the results of this placebo test, comparing EU data for products that do

54

Figure A4: PTCA Balloons—EU only, products that enter US vs. not.
(b) SDj|a ln(sjt /s0t )

Inclusive Share (Within)
−7 −6.5 −6 −5.5 −5 −4.5 −4 −3.5 −3

Inclusive Share: StDev Across Products (Within)
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2

(a) Meanj|a ln(sjt /s0t ) (within product)

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
EU (enter US)

EU |
Meanj|a trials
EU |not

Meanj|a

EU |trials

SDj|a

EU |
SDj|a not

ln(sjt /s0t )

ln(sjt /s0t )
ln(sjt /s0t )

ln(sjt /s0t )

24

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)

EU (don’t enter US)

EU (enter US)

24

EU (don’t enter US)

xa=1
-4.22

xa=24
-3.25

x24 − x1
0.96

not
(xtrials
− xtrials
) − (xnot
24
1
24 − x1 )
0.37

(0.17)

(0.27)

(0.32)

(0.33)

-6.52

-5.93

0.60

(0.16)

(0.18)

(0.21)

0.62

0.59

-0.03

0.85

0.81

-0.04

0.01

N = 789 product-month observations (all in EU). Standard errors clustered by month Nt = 114 in parentheses.

and do not enter the US as well. The results illustrate the importance of looking at learning
evidence in the volatility along with trends in means as well as the importance of having
comparison groups to be able to look at differences-in-differences. There is no evidence of
learning in the volatility figure. Mean usage of products in both groups trend up slightly
with age, but these trends are statistically identical, suggesting a slight diffusion process
that affects all balloons in the EU that is not driven by learning about product quality.
B.2.2

Alternative Explanation: Observational Learning with Different Initial
Sample Size

Another potential explanation for the results in Figure 2 is that there is learning in the EU
sample undergoing US trials, but this learning is observational (all or in part). The difference
between the patterns in the two samples is then plausibly driven by the fact that those stents
undergoing US trials enter with higher usage levels, which generate sufficient sample sizes
for observational learning to occur, whereas the EU sample not undergoing trials contains
too many products that do not gain enough early traction to enable learning.
55

We examine this hypothesis by reformulating the same figures and tests for a set of
P
products with overlapping support on initial values of J1a j ln(sja /s0a ) at aj = 1, so they
all have similar chances to generate early observational learning. The pattern in Appendix
Figure A5 is essentially identical to that in Figure 2, suggesting that our results are not
driven by selection on initial quality/usage levels.60

Figure A5: Stent usage patterns after product entry, by region and trial status
(subsample matched on age = 1 usage)
(b) SDj|a [ln(sjt /s0t )]

(c) P rj|a [sjht = 0]

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
EU (US trials)

24

1
.8
Pr[sj=0]
.4
.6
.2

0

EU (not)

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
EU (US trials)

θa=1
EU |
Ej|a U Strials

0

0

-8

.2

-7

Ej[ln(sj/s0)]
-6
-5

SDj[ln(sj/s0)]
.4 .6 .8

-4

1

-3

1.2

(a) Ej|a [ln(sjt /s0t )]

θa=24

24

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)

EU (not)

∆θa

EU (US trials)

EU |U Strials

∆θa

EU (not)

− ∆θarow

1.40∗∗∗

-5.27
-3.87
(0.26)
(0.15)
(0.30)
EU |
-5.56
-5.70
-0.13
1.54∗∗∗
Ej|a not ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.33)
(0.31)
(0.46)
(0.56)
EU |
0.82
0.42
-0.40∗∗∗
SDj|a U Strials ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.18)
(0.05)
(0.19)
EU |
0.84
0.72
-0.12
-0.28
SDj|a not ln(sjt /s0t )
(0.08)
(0.12)
(0.15)
(0.25)
EU |
0.78
0.54
-0.24∗∗∗
P rj|a U Strials (sjht = 0)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.05)
EU |
0.95
0.96
0.01∗∗
-0.25∗∗∗
P rj|a not (sjht = 0)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.05)
N EU |U Strials = 197 (8 products), and N EU |not = 159 (10 products) product-month observations. Standard errors
clustered by month Nt = 114 in parentheses. ∆θa := θa=24 − θa=1 .

B.2.3

ln(sjt /s0t )

Alternative Explanation: Asymmetric Information and Signaling

Another potential explanation that could rationalize Figure 2 is manufacturer signaling.
Under this hypothesis, after the release of EU trial data, manufacturers retain a sufficiently
60

For this matched sample, selection into US trials must be based on level shifts in expected US profit
due to the fact that those products that enter the US all have pre-existing complementary assets for sales
and distribution (while those that don’t enter do not). This is consistent with the challenges firms such as
Biotronik have faced in develop US sales forces. See, “Tipping the Odds for a Maker of Heart Implants,”
New York Times, April 2, 2011.

56

24

large degree of private information about expected product quality, and so undertaking
costly US trials signals expected product quality to physicians. To produce the observed
data patterns, such a signaling model also needs to include some combination of slow signal
diffusion across hospitals and/or increasing signal strength as a trial continues. We explore
this hypothesis by looking more closely at the shapes of the distribution of ln(sjt /s0t ) with
age.
Appendix Figure A6 shows the evolution with age of different quantiles of the ln(sjt /s0t )|a
distribution. Under a model where manufacturers and physicians are similarly informed
about quality after the release of trials for EU entry, and then learn similarly as data from US
trials is released, the distribution of product quality estimates should converge symmetrically
to the true product quality distribution. In an asymmetric information setting, consumers
do not receive direct information about quality, but instead infer quality must be above
some threshold if a manufacturer is willing to continue with costly testing (see Appendix
Figure A7 below for more on this intuition). Learning in this way would cause the lower
tail of the distribution for product in US trials to become truncated. In the Figure, the
25th and 75th percentiles appear to move symmetrically towards the median as information
arrives. Below the figure, we present relevant test statistics. The change in the skewness of
the distribution and the change in the ratio of the 75th-50th percentile to the 50th-25th are
both insignificant.

Figure A6: Symmetry of changes in quality distributions
(b) EU, not

-8

-5.5

-5

-7.5

ln(sj/s0)
-4.5 -4

ln(sj/s0)
-7
-6.5

-3.5

-6

-3

(a) EU, in trials

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
mean




µ−p50
σ



ln(sjt /s0t )

j|a

p75−p50
p75−p25 j|a

ln(sjt /s0t )

p25

p50

24

0

p75

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
mean

p25

p50

24
p75

EU, in trials
θa=1

θa=24

∆θa

EU, not
θa=1

θa=24

∆θa

0.06

-0.08

-0.14

-0.09

-0.11

-0.01

0.49

0.41

-0.08

0.53

0.42

-0.10

N = 383 product-months (in EU; US trials). Standard errors clustered by month Nt = 114 in parentheses.

57

Our test of information symmetry in Figure A6 relies upon the intuition that symmetric learning (as we assume in our model) suggests that the inferred distribution of product
qualities should tighten from both ends of the distribution as learning occurs (and also shift
up if consumers are risk averse). This contrasts with a model where suppliers have private
information about their product qualities, where consumer learning should take the form of
realizing that manufacturers who engage in costly testing must have product quality exceeding some threshold, which suggests that the inferred distribution of product qualities should
tighten from the bottom as learning occurs. Figure A7 illustrates these ideas graphically.

Figure A7: Learning effects on inferred product quality distributions under
symmetric and asymmetric information mechanisms.
(b) Asymmetric Info (Hypothetical)

.2

Density

.1

.2

0

0

.1

Density

.3

.3

.4

.4

(a) Symmetric Info (Our Estimates)

−10

−8

−6
−4
ln(sj/s0) in EU
Pre−learning

−2

0

−10

Post−learning

−8

−6
−4
ln(sj/s0) in EU
Pre−learning

−2

0

Post−learning

The left panel (a) plots two distributions directly from our EU data for stents undergoing
US trials: (Pre-learning) plots the density of ln(sjt /s0t )|a=1 ; and (Post-learning) plots the
density of ln(sjt /s0t )|a=12 . As one would expect from Figure A6, the distribution shifts up
and tightens symmetrically after 12 months in US clinical trials.
The right panel (b) plots the same pre-learning distribution, and displays the expected
post-learning distribution from applying a truncated learning rule ln(sjt /s0t )|a=1,ln(sjt /s0t )>−6 .
The plot illustrates the type of distribution we might expect if there were learning with
asymmetric information. This is clearly different from the symmetric model and from our
data, which is why our test in Figure A6 fails to reject the null hypothesis of symmetric
learning.

58

B.3

EU vs. US: Other Differences Driving Entry and Diffusion Patterns?

In theory it could be that the differences in usage patterns between the US and EU are
driven by differences in disease incidence, preferences for angioplasty and stents, or variation
in price setting regimes between the US and EU. However, all the evidence that we have been
able to gather indicates that these explanations do not plausibly explain the patterns in the
data described above. For example, the average ischemic heart disease mortality rate is very
similar between the US and the EU, suggesting that the disease incidence is also similar.
The 2010 mortality rate in the US for ischemic heart disease was 126.5 deaths per 100,000;
and the corresponding figure for the EU is 130.0 per 100,000.61 This modest differential
seems unlikely to account for the stark differences of entry rates between the two regions.

Figure A8: Comparison of diagnostic procedure patterns, EU vs. US. Left
panel (a) plots the distribution of number of diagnostic procedures across hospitals—the
US and EU are nearly identical. Right panel (b) plots the distribution across hospitals of
the probability that a diagnostic procedure results in stenting—the EU is shifted slightly
to the right of the US, with a mean of 32 versus 28 percent.
(b) Percent Resulting in Stenting

0

0

.01

.002

Kernel density
.02
.03

Kernel density
.004
.006

.04

.008

(a) Diagnostic Angiographies

0

200
400
600
Diagnostic angiographies per lab−month
EU

800

US

0

20

40
60
80
Percent angiographies resulting in stenting
EU

100

US

Prior to performing an angioplasty in which a stent may be inserted, the patient must
undergo a diagnostic angiography. In this procedure, the blood flow through the coronary
artery is visualized and this information is used to determine whether the patient should
receive a stent or some other medical intervention. If the difference in the number of stents
available between the EU and the US was driven by higher demand for stents, then it should
show up in the data with the EU performing a larger number of angiographies or having
a higher rate of stenting conditional on the angiography rate. Figure A8 documents the
61

OECD Health at a Glance, 2013.

59

distributions of the number of diagnostic angiographies performed across the hospitals in
our data and percent of those diagnostic procedures resulting in a stenting procedure across
hospitals in the US and EU samples. The distributions are close to identical statistically,
with the EU having a few more small volume hospitals and hospitals that are more likely
to place a stent conditional upon a diagnostic procedure. In the EU, 32 percent of patients
received a stent conditional on an angiography while in the US that figure was 28 percent.
Like the evidence on heart disease prevalence, this small difference seems unlikely to explain
the large disparity in entry rates between the two regions.

Figure A9: Comparison of usage and price patterns EU vs. US.
(b) Average Price Paid

0

0

Price in US dollars
1000

Percent of all stents implanted
20
40
60
80

2000

100

(a) DES Share of All Stents

Jan 04 Jan 05 Jan 06 Jan 07 Jan 08 Jan 09 Jan 10 Jan 11 Jan 12
EU

Jan 04 Jan 05 Jan 06 Jan 07 Jan 08 Jan 09 Jan 10 Jan 11 Jan 12 Jan 13

US

EU DES

US DES

EU BMS

US BMS

Figure A9 documents that DES usage as a percentage of all stents used is lower in the EU
but follows similar patterns to the US over time. If the increased DES entry in the EU was
driven by higher demand, we would expect the opposite pattern. Figure A9 also shows that
the prices and hence profits per stent sold are lower in the EU. This is true for both BMS
and DES and is true over our entire sample period. Both of these patterns are likely the
result of lower reimbursement levels for stent procedures overall, lower DES reimbursement
levels in particular, and more competing devices in the EU market. These findings suggest
that conditional upon FDA approval, average variable profit in the US is higher making it a
more attractive entry target than the EU. This, in turn, suggests that the differential entry
rates are driven by differences in regulation and not underlying demand.

60

C

Theory Appendix

This appendix provides formulas and proofs to supplement the results provided in the body
of the paper.
C.1

Nested Logit Demand Formulas

Choice probabilities are given by:
cpjht = P r[Uijht > Uikht , ∀k ∈ Jt ]

1−λgj
P


δjht
δjht
g exp
exp 1−λgj
1−λgj
k∈Jt j


=P
P

1−λgj
δjht
P
δjht
gj exp
gj
gj exp
gj
1+
gj
1−λ
k∈J
Jt ⊂Jt

t

k∈Jt

(11)

1−λ

2
− θp pjht + ξjh is the mean ex-ante expected utility across patients
where δjht := Qjht − ρ2 σjt
given beliefs regarding the mean stent performance characteristics and the variance of those
beliefs. The corresponding elasticity of choice probabilities with respect to own price is given
by


1 − λgj cpjht|g − (1 − λgj )cpjht
∂qjht pjht
p
= −θ
pjht .
(12)
ηjht :=
∂pjht qjht
1 − λgj

The ex-ante expected consumer surplus (relative to the outside option) as a function of
information and choice set is


1−λgj 


X
X
δjht




exp
(13)
CSht (Jt , Iht ) = θscale ln 1 +
 .
g
j
1−λ
gj
gj
Jt ⊂Jt

j∈Jt

where θscale is set to make fully informed the average treatment on the treated vs. nonstent alternatives for DES introduced to the US equal to $5000, as motivated by the clinical
literature discussed in the body of the paper.
5000 = θscale

C.2

1

X

|JDES,U S | j∈J

DES,U S

ln (1 + exp (δjht ))


1+exp(δjht )
exp(δjht )

(14)

Regulator’s Total Surplus Tradeoff: Illustrative Case

The general total surplus function is complicated by the entry policies of firms, tracking
observational learning for firms that entered the market at different times, and potential

61

distortions due to heterogeneity in marginal costs and price markups. To clearly see the core
tradeoff between uncertainty and access in the model, it is helpful to consider a simple case
of a simple logit demand model with testing and entry costless, no observational learning,
homogenous marginal costs (normalized to zero for convenience), and no distortions in usage
due to price. In this case, the regulator’s tradeoff simplifies as follows:
ρ

P
T St (T c + 1) − T St (T c ) = ln

j∈Jt

(T c +1)

P

j∈Jt (T c )

P
= ln

j∈Jt (T c +1)

P

j∈Jt (T c )

2

eQjt − 2 σjt (T

c +1)

!
− χ |Jte (T c + 1) \ Jte (T c )|

2 (T c )
Qjt − ρ2 σjt

e

ρ

2

c +1)

ρ

2

c)

eQjt − 2 σjt (T
eQjt − 2 σjt (T

!
(15)


ρ 2 c
=
σ (T ) − σ 2 (T c + 1) − ln
|2
{z
}
|
gain from decreased risk

P

j∈Jt+1 (T c +1)

P

j∈Jt (T c +1)

{z

eQjt

!
(16)

eQjt

gain from tech change/entry

}

where (15) follows from no fixed costs, and (16) follows from no observational learning and
recognizing χ = 0 ⇒ Jt (T c ) = Jt+1 (T c + 1).
C.3

Learning and Risk Aversion Predictions for Shares

The data exploration section explores several patterns of distribution of market shares, conditional on age. This Section provides further justification for the relationship between these
patterns and learning / risk aversion.
Prediction 1 (Learning): If initial product quality is uncertain σQ > 0, then learning
1/σA2 > 0 implies that expected volatility in product-specific quality estimates (demeaned by true product quality) converge by decreasing with age to zero V arj|a (δja −
δ̄j ) &a→∞ 0.
Proof: It is clear from the model setup and Bayes’ rule that nonzero precision of the
learning process 1/σA2 > 0 (in and/or out of trials, so here we suppress that subscript)
implies convergence of quality estimates to the true quality Qaj −→a→∞ Q∗j and the
convergence of uncertainty about that estimate to zero σja &a→∞ 0 for any product
j. Our further claim is that evidence for this learning will be found by looking at

62

measures of volatility of the mean utilities across products:
lim V arj|a (δja − δ̄j ) =

a→∞

=

=
=
&

lim V arj|a (Qaj − Q∗j ) − 0

a→∞

!
a
2
2
X

σEU
σ
lim V arj|a
Q∗ + τj + 2 A 2 Q1j − Q∗j
2
a→∞
aσEU
+ σA2 τ =1 j
aσEU + σA
#2
"
a
2
2
X
σ
σEU
τj + 2 A 2 (Q1j − Q∗j )
lim Ej|a
2
2
a→∞
aσEU + σA τ =1
aσEU + σA



2
2
2
σEU
σA2
1
2
lim
aσA +
σj2
2
2
2
2
a→∞
aσEU + σA
aσEU + σA
0
(17)

where the first equality follows from the mean utility specification used in the body of
the paper (and relies on linear separability of the quality term). The second substitutes
for Qaj using Bayes’ rule. The third from distributing the Q∗j term and the fact that
the term inside brackets has expectation zero. The fourth from distributing the square
and taking expectations. And monotonically decreasing convergence of that quantity
to zero is clear. Q.E.D.
Prediction 2 (Risk Aversion): If consumers (doctors making decisions on behalf of their
patients) are risk averse (ρ > 0), then expected product usage, conditional on age, will
increase strictly as learning occurs (Ej [δja ] %a→∞ Q).
Proof: This again follows from the basic structure of the learning model. Consider the
quantity of interest:
ρ a
lim Ej [Qaj ] − σj2
a→∞
2
= Ej [Q∗j ] − 0

lim Ej [δja ] =

a→∞

= Q̄

(18)

where the first line follows from the mean utility specification. The second line follows
a
a
from the convergence of {Qaj } and {σj2 }. And σj2 &a→∞ 0 and ρ > 0 guarantee the
convergence is increasing and strictly so. Q.E.D.

63

D

Demand/Learning Estimation: Supplementary Details

D.1

Demand/learning estimation algorithm

The estimation approach is to construct a generalized method of moments estimator that
matches the observed market shares in the data (and knowledge of which products are in
clinical trials when) to the demand and learning model. The Matlab code for this estimator
is available in the electronic archive code4RegulatingInnovation.zip. This appendix outlines
the main steps of the algorithm.
1. Construct an initial estimator for σQ using the empirical equivalent from the Q∗j from
the estimator using age by trial status fixed effects instead of the learning model.
2. Guess initial values for learning precisions (σEU , σA , σAc ) and hospital heterogeneity
des
bms
(σH
, σH
, γH ).
2
2
3. Compute the full vector of σjt
implied by σQ
, the learning precision parameters, and
which products are in trials when.

4. Least squares then gives an estimator for the linear parameters (ρ, Q∗j , θp , λg ).
5. Repeat 2-4 until minimize the GMM objective function.
6. Recompute σQ using the empirical equivalent from the Q∗j from this stage.
7. Repeat 2-6 until σQ converges.
D.2

Robustness and Alternative Structural Demand Models

Table A1 displays results for several robustness checks on our demand/learning model specification. The first two columns use age fixed effects, interacted with a dummy variable
indicating whether the product is in US clinical trials, to provide a less parametric way to
capture how demand changes over time with age and trial status. The first column (NL)
estimates a simple nested logit model, shutting down any variation in preferences across
hospitals. The second column (NLQW) estimates the Quan and Williams (2017) model.
The results show how across hospital heterogeneity is important for fitting the data as the
criterion function reaches a lower minimum with this added flexibility. As expected, this
acts as a selection correction for the product-hospital-months with zero shares, which shifts
the product fixed effect estimates.
The third column (NLQWNN) adds the structure of the Normal-Normal learning model
in place of the age and trial status fixed effects. There are two primary differences: (1) the
64

Table A1: Estimates of physician preference and learning model parameters
θp

(utils/$1000)

λdes
λbms

NL
0.21

NLQW
0.20

NLQWNN
0.10

σA (qjt−1 )
0.10

H Lags
0.11

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.05)

0.88

0.84

0.81

0.81

0.81

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.02)

0.91

0.88

0.82

0.82

0.81

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

des
σH
bms
σH

ρ · θp

0.14

0.19

0.19

0.19

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.04)

0.07

0.18

0.18

0.18

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(1/$1000)

2
1/σEU
2
1/σA
c
2
1/σA

3.36

3.29

3.66

(1.70)

(2.30)

(1.99)

18.82

18.75

18.52

(2.16)

(2.09)

(2.74)

1.73

1.70

1.88

(0.51)

(0.60)

(0.70)

0.00

0.00

0.00

(0.00)

(0.15)

(0.13)

γH
βq

( σ12 /100)

0.00

A

(0.00)

µlag

0.00

(months)

(0.10)

Qj
σQ |U Strials
σQ |not
age × U Strials FE
min(GM Mcriterion )
RM SE(ξjt )

-2.06

-2.58

-2.37

-2.37

-2.41

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.10)

(0.35)

(0.31)

0.27

0.30

0.26

0.26

0.27

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

0.30

0.36

0.34

0.34

0.34

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

Y
101.47
0.413

Y
15.47
0.401

N
15.53
0.281

N
15.54
0.279

N
15.54
0.297

2 +ξ
Estimates for demand model ln(sjt /s0t ) = λgj ln(sj|g t ) − θp pjht + Q∗j − ρ2 σjt
jt with separate nests for DES and BMS.
NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors in parentheses and are
clustered by month (NT = 114).

learning model parameterization forces learning to be smooth over time (vs. the nonparametric fixed effects); and (2) the learning model uses the rational expectations assumption to
link the product fixed effect estimates Q∗j to how demand evolves with age and trial status.
Under rational expectations, the fixed effect estimates must be consistent with the prior
distributions F U Strials (Q) and F not (Q), and the precision parameters in the learning model
2
(1/σEU
, 1/σA2 c , 1/σA2 ) link the prior to how the variance and levels moments of product usage
evolve with age and trial status.
2
in
Figure A10 plots the age fixed effects in NLQW and uncertainty discounts − ρ2 σjt
NLQWNN versus age. The left panel shows the products in US trials; the right panel
65

products not in US trials. The patterns show that: (1) With regards to the smooth parameterization of the learning model, the fit is still quite close to the pattern of the age fixed
effects, so the parametric form imposes very little on the data (this can be seen in the figures
and also in the min(GM Mcriterion ) (fitting the aggregate usage, aggregate volatility, and hospital moments) and RM SE(ξjt ) (of aggregate usage moments only) in the table being close
for the two models). (2) The rational expectations assumption allows the model to extract
much more information from the data – the prior is now linked to the fixed effects, and so we
can infer the amount of learning from EU trials/approval from the gap between that and the
variation in usage patterns at age = 1. Pinning uncertainty to these two points then allows
us to infer the amount of uncertainty remaining as learning does or doesn’t occur, and it then
requires the product quality estimates Q∗j to adjust for this. Finally, the NN learning model
separates learning/uncertainty and risk aversion parameters – these structural parameters
have a clear interpretation that allows for validation of the results, and they allow estimation
of counterfactuals where the nature of uncertainty/learning might change due to regulatory
changes.

Figure A10: Comparison of estimates from fixed effect and learning models.
Plots the estimated discount due to uncertainty versus product age in Normal-Normal
2 vs. model with age and age × U Strials fixed effects.
learning model − ρ2 σjt

Partial Effect of Age on Utility
-.7 -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1

(b) Not in US Trials

Partial Effect of Age on Utility
-.7 -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1

(a) In US Trials

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
age FE

24

NN

0

12
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)
age FE

24

NN

Returning to Table A1, the final two columns show the results for two extensions of our
model. Column 4 allows observational learning in the market place to be a function of past
demand, σA (qjt−1 ), in order to check that the lack of market learning that we estimate is not
being driven by low usage levels. This is similar in spirit to our “overlapping Qj,age=1 ” test
in the reduced form section, and like that test, we do not find any evidence of observational
learning for products not in US trials, even for those that are used in large quantities.
66

The final column, HLags, reports the estimates for a model that allows different hospitals
to learn with different random lags from each information shock. The goal is to allow for
the patterns in the data to potentially be generated by an information diffusion process that
is not intrinsically linked to information generation (in which case we might be conflating
this diffusion process with the trial information generation process, which is the process the
regulator controls most directly). Specifically, each hospital receives each signal with a delay
of a number of months drawn from a Poisson(µlag ) distribution, and we estimated µlag using
simulated GMM. Similar to the hospital signal correlation parameter in our preferred model,
this lag parameter is identified by the difference in the aggregate vs. hospital level patterns
of usage. The estimate does not suggest that learning lag heterogeneity across hospitals
explains the patterns in the data.
D.2.1

Estimated product quality distributions

Figure A11: Estimated Quality Distributions. Density plots of the product fixed
effect parameters {Q∗j } and market expectations upon EU entry {Q1j }.
(b) f (Q∗j |U Strials)

0

0

.2

kdensity Qj
.5
1

kdensity Qj1
.4
.6
.8

1

1.5

(a) f (Q1j |U Strials)

-3.5

-3

-2.5
-2
Estimated Qj1

Undergo US Trials

-1.5

-1

EU Trials Only

-3.5

-3

-2.5
-2
Estimated Qj

Undergo US Trials

-1.5

-1

EU Trials Only

One advantage of the GMM algorithm vs. ML (besides the ability to use instruments,
which is of course important) is that it allows a nonparametric distribution of product quality
estimates. Figure A11 plots the distribution of Q1j (left panel (a)) and Q∗j (right panel (b)).
The results help to validate several of the maintained assumptions. The distributions are
not perfectly normal, but appear to be symmetric and reasonably approximated by normals
(especially since the tails are inherently difficult to estimate). Also, it does seem that the
U Strials distribution may indeed be best thought of as a different distribution with a slightly
higher mean and smaller variance. But the distribution does not appear to have a different
67

shape in a way that would make the two groups difficult to compare or that would suggest
an asymmetric information signaling equilibrium.

E

Counterfactuals: Supplementary Details

E.1

Partial equilibrium effect of risk: dependence on quality relative to outside
option

Table A2 replicates Table 2 in the paper body, allowing the mean qualities to vary by shifting
the entire quality distribution by plus or minus a standard deviation of the logit horizontal
error term. As referred to in the paper, the effects of decreasing risk become more dramatic
as mean quality increases relative to the outside option.
Table A2: The effect of uncertainty on number of stenting procedures, surplus per
stent implanted, and expected ex post loss.

Baseline Q∗j

1 − s0 (%)

p
π/6

p
π/6

σT c =12 =
0.143
27.9

σT c =18 =
0.131
29.0

σT c =24 =
0.121
29.7

σT c =30 =
0.113
30.3

(2.5)

(1.4)

(1.3)

(1.3)

(1.3)

(1.4)

(1.4)

6103

6184

6238

6276

6304

6327

(176)

(167)

(167)

(168)

(169)

(170)

(171)

E[Q∗j − Qjt |j ∗ ] ($)

-1096

-560

-429

-348

-292

-252

-221

(127)

(23)

(37)

(41)

(41)

(39)

(37)

33.8

52.9

56.1

58.0

59.2

60.1

60.8

1 − s0 (%)

(5.0)

(1.8)

(1.6)

(1.6)

(1.6)

(1.6)

(1.6)

($)

6525

7458

7663

7795

7887

7955

8007

(301)

(233)

(230)

(232)

(234)

(236)

(238)

E[Q∗j − Qjt |j ∗ ] ($)

-1083

-554

-425

-344

-289

-249

-219

(127)

(23)

(36)

(40)

(40)

(39)

(37)

3.9

8.1

9.1

9.8

10.2

10.6

10.9

1 − s0 (%)

(0.9)

(0.6)

(0.6)

(0.6)

(0.6)

(0.6)

(0.6)

($)

5533

5611

5634

5651

5663

5672

5679

(137)

(138)

(138)

(139)

(139)

(139)

(139)

E[Q∗j − Qjt |j ∗ ] ($)

-1102

-563

-432

-350

-294

-254

-223

(127)

(23)

(37)

(41)

(41)

(40)

(38)

TS
1−s0

E.2

σT c =6 =
0.160
26.4

5776

TS
1−s0

Q∗j −

σaEU =0 =
0.185
24.0

($)

TS
1−s0

Q∗j +

σQ =
0.312
12.5

Algorithms for computing equilibrium counterfactuals

The Matlab code for the counterfactuals is available in the electronic archive code4RegulatingInnovation.zip.
This appendix outlines the main steps of the algorithms.
For each potential T c = 0, 1, ..., 30 (and given estimated or comparative static parameter
values) we calculate the M and L cases as follows:

68

M case:
1. Simulate r = 1, ..., 20 draws from the posterior signal distribution for each observation,
given σjt (T c ) and qualities at EU entry Q1j .
2. Restrict sample to products that would be active in each month J M (T c ) = Jt+T c .
3. Given J M (T c ), use demand/learning models to compute equilibrium quantities and
surplus measures for each r.
4. Estimate expected surplus measures using mean of r realizations.
L case:
1. Given M case results and χT c = 1.6E6 ∗ T c , restrict sample to products that would
enter, under the naive assumption that firms assume other products enter as if χ = 0
(i.e. single agent entry, assuming competing against J M (T c ) \ j), such that


!1−.01(t−tj −T c )

tj +T c

X

X

t=tj +T c

h

E

qjht (pjht − mcj )


|I 1 , χ−j = 0 > χj T c

, with the expectation computed as the mean across the r simulations of the profits
for product j competing against J M (T c ) \ j (i.e. exactly the expected product profits
from the M case). The set of products that would enter is J L (T c ).
2. Given J L (T c ), use demand/learning models to compute equilibrium quantities and
surplus measures for each r.
3. Estimate expected surplus measures using mean of r realizations.
In the Appendix where we also model pricing, equilibrium prices are also computed
simultaneously with quantities. Standard errors for counterfactuals are calculated using a
nonparametric delete-10 jackknife, blocked at the month level.
E.3

Distribution of Profits Over Product Lifetime and Across Products

The counterfactual L case with fixed costs of entry require calculation of expected lifetime
profits under the assumption that all firms who enter in the EU do enter in equilibrium.
This number can be directly acquired from the EU data for the 41 of 109 products that both
enter and exit the market during our sample period. However, for the other 68 products
whose lifetimes are truncated at the beginning or end, we need to extrapolate.
69

Figure A12: Distribution of Profits Over Age and Across Products.
(b) Distribution of Lifetime Profits
over Products

0

Fraction of Products
.2
.4
.6

Fraction of Lifetime Profits
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

.8

(a) Cumulative Profits Over the
Product Lifecycle

0

12
24
Age Since Introduction to Region (Months)

36

0

200
400
600
Lifetime Profits ($ Millions)

mean
s.d.
10ptile median 90ptile
Products with full lifetime during sample period:
Months in sample
21.5
19.8
5
15
47
Profit per month ($1000s)
179
612
18
70
211
Products with censored lifetime:
Months in sample
53.1
34.9
10
46
100
Profit per month ($1000s) 1,347 2,119
41
262
4,067
Distribution of lifetime profits (extrapolated where necessary):
Lifetime Profit ($M)
72.6 141.5
1.3
10.5
304.3

800

N
41
41
68
68
109

We perform this extrapolation by estimating the percent of cumulative lifetime profits the
average product has earned at each age. We then use this percent to extrapolate the missing
profits, for whatever age at which the truncation occurred. We do this unconditionally on
any covariates besides age.
In our counterfactuals, we hold take time from entry until exit as exogenously given,
and we use this same extrapolation to calculate expected lifetime profits for any product
that has not exited by the end (or entered by the beginning) of the sample period in the
counterfactual. Our counterfactual estimates are robust to a variety of approaches to this
extrapolation. This is in part because the extrapolation is typically for the beginning or end
of lifetime tail of product profits, so that lifetime profit projections are not very sensitive to
the method we choose. Further, the products that are marginal in the sense that they exit
as entry costs increase, are also marginal in their contribution to consumer surplus.
Also notable here is the distribution of estimated lifetime profits in the last row of the
table at the bottom of Figure A12, which makes it clear that many products with quite
low profitability enter the EU. This supports our assumption that the products in the EU
market represent a reasonable approximation to the set of products developed that firms

70

might consider testing and bringing to market.
E.4

Additional Results for E[πj (T c )],J (T c ), P S(T c ), F C(T c )

Each of our counterfactuals fully characterizes outcomes (under our M and L cases), but
we only show results for CS and T S in the body of the paper. Figure A13 shows: (a) the
distribution of expected profits across products given their information sets upon EU entry
and beliefs about other product entry, (b) the number of new products entering, (c) variable
producer surplus, and (d) fixed cost expenditures on trials.
Figure A13: Additional Results for E[πj (T c )],J (T c ), P S(T c ), F C(T c ) Computed
for our baseline scenario of a change in policy in January 2004 (no spillovers).
(b) New Products Entering

20

40

60

M case
L case

0

0

Fraction of Products
.2
.4
.6

New Products Entering (count)

80

.8

(a) Expected Profits Distribution

0
100
200
300
400
Expected Lifetime Profits at EU Entry ($ Millions)

0

6
12
18
24
Time in Clinical Trials (Months beyond EU required)

2500

(d) Fixed Costs of Trials

1000

1500

2000

M case
L case

500

4450

4500

Fixed Costs of Trials ($M)

M case
L case

0

4400

Producer Surplus w/o FC ($M)

4550

(c) Firm Variable Profits

30

0

6
12
18
24
Time in Clinical Trials (Months beyond EU required)

30

0

6
12
18
24
Time in Clinical Trials (Months beyond EU required)

30

Several highlights from these results are discussed in the body of the paper. The full results here provide a more complete picture of how delay of entry from longer trials (subfigure
(b), M case) affects the choice set of products available for our period of study. Additionally,
they show how fixed costs of additional trials (subfigure (d)) plus the distribution across
products of expected profits (subfigure (a)) can further combine to limit the set of products
71

available (subfigure (b), L case). The bulk of this decreased entry due to larger fixed costs
of testing comes from the 76 percent of products whose expected lifetime profits are below
$25M.
E.5

Robustness of Counterfactual Estimates to Modeling Assumptions

The paper makes a number of modeling assumptions to facilitate the counterfactual computations. Here we explore robustness of the results to the extent to which the government/regulator discounts future surplus, and to the assumptions on marginal costs and
prices. Table A3 shows the results.
The assumed amount of discounting has rather large effects on the amount of surplus
generated by optimal testing. The reason for this is that it takes time for many products
used in the market to be products that have benefited from further testing, whereas the
costs of lack of access to new products are more uniformly distributed in time. Thus more
heavily discounting the future reduces the benefit from further testing. However, this effect
is primarily borne out in the level of surplus gain from optimal testing, with the amount of
increased testing under optimal policy changing little with the discounting applied.
Table A3: Robustness: Discounting, Marginal Costs, and Pricing. Top row
repeats our baseline results (discounted at one percent nominal per month, mcj = .50 ∗
min(p|gj ), and prices held fixed). Subsequent rows modify these assumptions as indicated
in the first column.
State of Market at Policy Change
Jan 2004
Jan 2004, Govt. Discount 7% real
Jan 2004, Govt. Discount 3% real
Jan 2004, No Govt. Discount
Jan 2004, mcj = .25 ∗ min(p|gj )
Jan 2004, mcj = .75 ∗ min(p|gj )
Jan 2004, Pricing Modeled

∆CS(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
5.2
6.7

c∗
(months)
TCS
(L)
(M)
16
17

∆T S(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
3.9
6.3

TTc∗S (months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

5.8

7.3

18

18

4.5

6.9

16

17

(2.1)

(2.2)

(4)

(3)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(4)

(3)

(2)

6.6

8.2

19

19

5.2

7.7

16

19

(2.1)

(2.2)

(4)

(3)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(4)

(3)

7.7

9.5

19

19

6.2

8.9

16

19

(2.1)

(2.2)

(4)

(3)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(4)

(3)

5.4

6.7

13

17

3.9

6.3

13

17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

5.2

6.7

16

17

3.8

6.3

13

17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

5.2

6.6

13

17

4.0

6.7

13

18

(1.7)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.8)

(4)

(3)

NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors, clustered by month
(NT = 114) using a delete-10 block jacknife, in parentheses.

Turning to marginal costs and prices, our primary specification holds prices fixed in the
counterfactual and assumes marginal costs at half the minimum price observed within each
72

product group (g ∈ {bms, des}) for the purpose of computing firm expected and realized
profits. The bottom rows of Table A3 show that results change very little, if at all, when
we change marginal costs to be either one quarter or three quarters the group minimum, or
when we instead model pricing and use that model to estimate marginal costs and compute
new equilibrium prices in the counterfactuals.
E.5.1

Pricing: model, identification, estimation, and results

Here we describe the pricing model and estimation for the robustness check where we model
pricing explicitly.
In the EU, device pricing practices vary somewhat across countries and hospitals, but are
typically negotiated between manufacturers and either the hospital or some regional body
responsible for procurement for a set of hospitals. For this Appendix, we model this process
using a static Nash Equilibrium of Nash Bargaining models for each period, following the
theory developed in Horn and Wolinsky (1988) and Collard-Wexler et al. (2014) and recent
empirical work by Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), Grennan (2013), and Gowrisankaran
et al. (2014). These approaches assume that prices maximize the bilateral Nash product
!bjt (H)
max
pjHt

X

πjH (Jt , Iht , pjHt )

h∈H

!bHt (j)
X

CSht (Jt , Iht , pjHt ) − CSht (Jt \ {j}, Iht , pjHt )

,

h∈H

(19)
for each j ∈ Jt in each market (group of hospitals in bargaining unit H in each month t),
taking other prices in the market {pkHt }k∈Jt as given. Here πjH := qjht (pjHt − mcj ) are
manufacturer variable profits at marginal cost, mcj , for each device. CSht is the hospital
level consumer surplus. The parameters bjt (H) and bHt (j) are the Nash bargaining weights,
determining the extent to which equilibrium prices weight manufacturer profit (minus its
outside option of not producing the stent) versus hospital surplus (minus its outside option
of optimal choice for each patient from a choice set that excludes j).62
With the demand and learning model parameter estimates in hand, we turn to estimating
the parameters from the bargaining model between hospitals and device manufacturers. To
take the bargaining model to the data, we follow Grennan (2013) and rewrite (19) as
pjHt = mcj +

X
M
bjt (H)
P ht
AVjht (Jt , Iht , pjHt , mcj ; θD ) ,
bjt (H) + bHt (j) h∈H h∈H Mht

62

(20)

P
Assuming constant returns to scale in distribution and manufacturing on the margin at h∈H qjht .
We also follow previous work in maintaining the Nash-like assumption that other prices remain the same
in the case of disagreement, which is consistent with “passive beliefs” in the theory literature that provides
noncooperative foundations for this concept.

73

where the added value of product j to hospital h is defined as




CSht (Jt , Iht , pjHt ) − CSht (Jt \ {j}, Iht , pjHt )
+ pjHt − mcj
qjht
(21)
To estimate the structural parameters, the bargaining weights and the marginal costs, we
use our utility model estimates. We calculate the substitution patterns by simulating ηjht ,
the elasticities across hospitals as defined in Equation (12), over the distribution of hospital
g
level unobservables fH (ξjh ; σHj ) (suppressing dependence on hospital-specific learning for
simplicity since 1/σA2 and γH are both estimated to be zero). Similarly, we use the consumer
surplus equation derived from the utility function in Equation (13) to compute the buyer
surplus portion of the added value.
Because of physicians may be imperfect agents for patients and/or hospitals, estimated
physician price sensitivity measures may not reflect the correct scaling for measuring hospital
and/or consumer surplus. For this reason, we deviate slightly from the standard demand
estimation approach in that we add a scaling coefficient to relate consumer surplus derived
from consumer utility maximization to estimates of the dollar value of quality adjusted life
years obtained in clinical studies. We normalize the total surplus per stenting procedure
to $5,000, which is the approximate median of the estimated dollars in quality adjusted
life years from the procedure relative to a coronary artery bypass graph surgery, a more
invasive alternative to receiving angioplasty and a stent.63 This alternative scaling is only
for translating welfare measures into dollars—we continue to use the estimated θp in quantity
and elasticity calculations, as revealed preference indicates this is the level of price sensitivity
that best fits the demand patterns in the data.
In addition to the standard set of issues that the bargaining literature has identified
in estimating marginal costs and bargaining parameters, we face two additional challenges.
First, the challenge in estimating demand at the hospital level means that our demand
estimates only provide the distribution of added values across hospitals, not the hospitalspecific added values. Second, because we only observe a sample of hospitals, we do not
have added value measures for all hospitals in a group H in cases where our hospitals may
negotiate as part of a group.
We address both of these supply estimation challenges by aggregating our estimation
strategy across hospitals to the product-month level. Otherwise, we follow Grennan (2013,
AVjht :=

∂qjht pjHt − mcj
1+
∂pjht
qjht

63

Among studies reported in the Cost Effectiveness Analysis Registry (https://research.tufts-nemc.org).
We could also scale into dollars using the standard approach of the inverse of the price coefficient θ1p = 10, 482,
which would approximately double all related consumer welfare estimates.

74

2014): We assume the econometric error enters relative bargaining weights multiplicatively:
mcj := µC
g

;

bjt (H)
βj
:=
νjHt
bHt (j)
βH

(22)

where µC
g allows marginal cost to vary across BMS/DES, and βj are product-specific bargaining parameters to be estimated. Substituting into Equation (20), rearranging and taking
logs to obtain a linear equation in the unobservable, and aggregating over hospitals gives the
equations at the product-month level that we take to the data:
X Mht
h

Mt


ln

pjht − γj
AVjht


= ln(βj ) +

X Mht
|h

Mt

(− ln(βh ) + ln(νjht ))
{z

(23)

}

ν̃jt

The parameters (βj , γj ) can then be estimated by a GMM algorithm, assuming Ejt [ν̃jt |Zjt ] =
∂ ν̃
0 for a set of instruments including product-specific constants and ∂γjtj .
Table A4 presents the parameter estimates from the bargaining model. As we estimate
the parameters at the product level, we present the means and standard deviations of those
estimates. The first two variables are the elasticity and average value parameters that come
from the demand model that feed into the bargaining model. The price elasticity is somewhat
higher from DES stents and the typic BMS stent adds $1155 of value while the average DES
stent adds significantly more value at $1424.
Table A4: Structural parameter estimates for pricing model
p
ηjht

BMS

DES

mean
-0.25

sd
0.11

(0.06)

(0.06)

(172)

-0.42

0.14

1424

224

361

0.60

0.14

(0.32)

(0.11)

(312)

(60)

(117)

(0.08)

(0.04)

(117)

(0.08)

(0.04)

($)

sd
118
(41)

mcj
mean
87

bjt (H)
bjt (H)+bHt (j)

AVjht
mean
1155

($)

sd
-

(124)
(124)

-

mean
0.41

sd
0.12

(0.06)
(0.06)

(0.04)
(0.04)

NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors clustered by month
(NT = 114) using a delete-10 block jacknife in parentheses.

The next two sets of variables are parameter estimates from the bargaining model. The
marginal cost estimates align with expectations and prior literature. BMS cost an average of
$87 to produce while DES are more costly at $361. Finally, the last two columns present the
bjt (H)
estimates of the relative bargaining weights, bjt (H)+b
. The results imply that for BMS,
Ht (j)
hospitals retain the majority of the surplus (manufacturers obtain 41 percent on average)
from the implantation of the device, with a modest amount of variance across products.
75

However, for the newer DES technology, on average, the manufacturers receive the majority
of the surplus (60 percent).64
E.6

Additional Comparative Static Counterfactual Results

Table A5 provides results for a more complete set of comparative static parameter values than
those shown in the body of the paper in Table 3. The key takeaways were discussed in the
body of the paper. We supply the full set of numerical values here for the interested reader.
We find these useful in considering the robustness of our estimated results for coronary
stents 2004-13, and also for thinking about how these results might extrapolate to other
product categories with different primitives. Perhaps the most non-obvious and important
qualitative result is the nonlinearity of optimal testing length with respect to the precision
of information generated by testing. As mentioned in the body of the paper, this thought
experiment is tightly linked to pushes for validating more intermediate/surrogate endpoints
(e.g. for stents this would be measuring 6 month “loss” in the target vessel diameter instead of
revascularization or mortality endpoints) that could allow trials to generate more information
with smaller sample sizes.

64

The DES bargaining parameter is nearly double that in Grennan (2013) in the US 2004-07 subsample,
but this corresponds closely to the magnitude of our alternative scaling of consumer surplus, and may also
be related to lower reimbursements to hospitals and the different competitive environment for DES in the
EU relative to the US.

76

Table A5: Sensitivity of Optimal Regulation to Key Parameters: Full results for
all parameter values we have explored.
State of Market at Policy Change
Jan 2004
Jan 2004, FC * .1
Jan 2004, FC * .2
Jan 2004, FC * .5
Jan 2004, FC * 2
Jan 2004, FC * 5
Jan 2004, FC * 10
Jan 2004, σQ * .5
Jan 2004, σQ * .75
Jan 2004, σQ * .9
Jan 2004, σQ * 1.1
Jan 2004, σQ * 1.33
Jan 2004, σQ * 2
Jan 2004, ρ * .5
Jan 2004, ρ * .75
Jan 2004, ρ * 1.33
Jan 2004, ρ * 2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .5
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * .75
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 1.33
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 2
2
Jan 2004, 1/σA
c * 5

∆CS(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
5.2
6.7

c∗
TCS
(months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

∆T S(T c∗ ) (%)
(L)
(M)
3.9
6.3

TTc∗S (months)
(L)
(M)
16
17

(1.8)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

6.6

6.7

17

17

5.9

6.3

17

17

(1.9)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(1.8)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(2)

6.5

6.7

17

17

5.7

6.3

17

17

(1.9)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(1.8)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

6.2

6.7

14

17

5.0

6.3

13

17

(1.9)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(1.8)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

3.9

6.7

9

17

2.4

6.3

7

17

(1.6)

(1.9)

(4)

(2)

(1.3)

(1.9)

(6)

(2)

1.7

6.7

7

17

0.0

6.3

0

17

(1.1)

(1.9)

(3)

(2)

(0.4)

(1.9)

(2)

(2)

0.0

6.7

0

17

0.0

6.3

0

17

(0.3)

(1.9)

(1)

(2)

(0.0)

(1.9)

(0)

(2)

0.1

0.2

1

5

0.0

0.1

0

1

(0.3)

(0.5)

(2)

(3)

(0.1)

(0.5)

(1)

(4)

2.2

3.1

8

13

1.3

2.9

6

13

(1.3)

(1.5)

(4)

(3)

(1.0)

(1.4)

(4)

(3)

4.0

5.3

11

17

2.7

5.0

11

17

(1.6)

(1.8)

(4)

(3)

(1.4)

(1.7)

(4)

(3)

6.4

7.9

18

18

5.0

7.5

16

17

(1.9)

(2.1)

(3)

(3)

(1.8)

(2.0)

(4)

(2)

8.6

10.2

19

19

6.9

9.6

17

19

(2.1)

(2.2)

(3)

(3)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(4)

(3)

12.1

13.7

19

19

10.2

13.1

18

19

(2.3)

(2.4)

(3)

(3)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(4)

(3)

0.8

1.2

6

6

0.2

1.1

3

6

(0.5)

(0.7)

(2)

(2)

(0.3)

(0.6)

(2)

(2)

2.7

3.6

9

13

1.8

3.3

6

13

(1.2)

(1.3)

(3)

(3)

(1.0)

(1.3)

(3)

(3)

9.6

11.2

19

19

7.7

10.6

18

19

(2.6)

(2.7)

(3)

(3)

(2.4)

(2.6)

(5)

(3)

16.3

20.0

20

26

14.1

19.1

20

26

(4.1)

(4.3)

(3)

(2)

(3.9)

(4.1)

(3)

(3)

0.0

0.1

0

1

0.0

0.1

0

1

(0.1)

(0.5)

(2)

(4)

(0.0)

(0.4)

(0)

(4)

1.5

2.6

7

13

0.7

2.4

6

13

(1.2)

(1.5)

(4)

(4)

(0.9)

(1.4)

(5)

(4)

3.5

4.9

16

17

2.2

4.6

8

17

(1.6)

(1.8)

(4)

(3)

(1.4)

(1.7)

(5)

(3)

6.9

8.4

13

17

5.5

8.0

16

17

(1.9)

(2.1)

(3)

(2)

(1.8)

(2.0)

(3)

(2)

9.6

10.7

13

17

7.9

10.2

13

17

(2.1)

(2.2)

(3)

(3)

(1.9)

(2.1)

(3)

(3)

14.2

15.3

10

12

12.6

14.5

9

11

(2.3)

(2.3)

(2)

(2)

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2)

(2)

NJHT = 407, 191 product-hospital-months and NJT = 4, 888 product-months. Standard errors, clustered by month
(NT = 114) using a delete-10 block jacknife, in parentheses.

77

E.7

Post-Market Surveillance and Consumer Surplus

Figure A14: The Value of Post-Market Surveillance (Consumer Surplus): Plots
of optimal trial length (left panel (a)) and total surplus (right panel (b)) as observational
2 varies from zero to the clinical trial precision 1/σ 2 .
learning precision 1/σA
Ac

5

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
Learning Rate Post-Market (Ratio vs. Clinical)

1

20
15

M case
L case

10

10

15

M case
L case

c∗ (σ ))
Consumer Surplus, CS(σA , TCS
A

5

TS vs. Pre-Market only policy (% change)

(b)

0

20

c∗ (σ )
Optimal Trial Length, TCS
A

0

Optimal Months in Clinical (beyond EU required)

(a)

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
Learning Rate Post-Market (Ratio vs. Clinical)

1

As noted in the paper, the CS metric generates tighter bounds and greater returns to
optimal pre-market policy. The CS metric is of special interest in the post-market surveillance case because it is derived from only the risk-access tradeoff, not the fixed costs savings
from less trials. As a result, optimal pre-market trial length decreases less quickly with
post-market learning under the CS criterion.

78

