                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       TESTING FOR CHANGES IN THE SES-MORTALITY GRADIENT WHEN THE
                 DISTRIBUTION OF EDUCATION CHANGES TOO

                                           Thomas Goldring
                                             Fabian Lange
                                         Seth Richards-Shubik

                                         Working Paper 20993
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20993


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




Thomas Goldring was supported in part by Carnegie Mellon University's Program in Interdisciplinary
Education Research (PIER) funded by grant number R305B090023 from the U.S. Department of Education.
This paper uses data obtained from the public-use file of the National Longitudinal Mortality Study.
The file is provided to persons interested in research by the U.S. Census Bureau. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Longitudinal
Mortality Study, the Bureau of the Census, or the project sponsors: the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, the National Cancer Institute, the National Institute on Aging, and the National Center for
Health Statistics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Thomas Goldring, Fabian Lange, and Seth Richards-Shubik. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Testing for Changes in the SES-Mortality Gradient When the Distribution of Education Changes
Too
Thomas Goldring, Fabian Lange, and Seth Richards-Shubik
NBER Working Paper No. 20993
February 2015
JEL No. I14,J11

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a flexible test for changes in the SES-mortality gradient over time that directly accounts
for changes in the distribution of education, the most commonly used marker of SES. We implement
the test for the period between 1984 and 2006 using microdata from the Census, CPS, and NHIS linked
to death records. Using our flexible test, we find that the evidence for a change in the education-mortality
gradient is not as strong and universal as previous research has suggested. Our results indicate that
the gradient increased for females during this time period, but we cannot rule out that the gradient
among males has not changed. Informally, the results suggest that the changes for females are mainly
driven by the bottom of the education distribution.


Thomas Goldring                                       Seth Richards-Shubik
H. John Heinz III College                             H.John Heinz III College
School of Public Policy and Management                School of Public Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University                            Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue                                    5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                  Pittsburgh, PA 15213
tlpg@cmu.edu                                          and NBER
                                                      sethrs@andrew.cmu.edu
Fabian Lange
McGill University
Department of Economics
855 Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2T7
fabolange@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Persistent differences in health and longevity across socioeconomic status (SES) are well-
established, and a growing literature claims that these differences have increased over recent
decades.1 Some authors further suggest that in the U.S. longevity among some low SES
groups, as measured by education, declined not just relative to high SES groups, but also
in absolute terms. Olshansky et al. (2012, p. 1808), for instance, claim that “along the
educational and socioeconomic status gradient, those at the top are gaining modest amounts
of longevity, but whites at the bottom are losing ground at a faster pace—that is, they are
either experiencing a decline in life expectancy or a slower rate of increase relative to those
at the top.”2 The evidence for these claims stems largely from comparing mortality rates
across categories of educational attainment over time.
    However, at the same time that mortality rates conditional on education changed, the
distribution of educational attainment in the U.S. has also changed dramatically. For exam-
ple, among women aged between 25 and 84, the share with less than a high school diploma
declined from 25.8% to 14.0% between 1984 and 2006 (Table 1). These large changes in the
distribution of education imply that the absolute level of education cannot be a stable marker
of SES over time. This raises the question of what it means to measure changes in the SES-
mortality gradient by comparing mortality rates across education categories. For example,
over the last 35 years, longevity among those with “less than a high school diploma” declined
relative to the more educated, suggesting that the SES gradient of mortality widened. How-
ever, having “less than a high school diploma” today also means belonging to a smaller and
potentially more disadvantaged group. So does the relative decline in longevity for this group
truly represent a widening in the SES gradient of mortality? Fundamentally, the question
becomes whether it is possible to infer how the SES gradient in mortality changes over time
using mortality rates conditional on education given that the education distribution itself
has changed so dramatically.3
    1
     The literature originates with Kitagawa and Hauser (1973). For a comprehensive recent review, see
Hummer and Lariscy (2011).
   2
     Most of the literature uses educational attainment as the principal indicator of SES in order to examine
socioeconomic differentials in adult mortality (see, for example, Hummer and Lariscy, 2011; Olshansky et al.,
2012). There are two main reasons for this. First, contrary to occupation and work-related measures of SES,
education is available as a measure of SES for the retired, the unemployed, and those out of the labor force.
Second, education is fixed throughout adulthood and thus less vulnerable to issues of reverse causality when
examining its relation with health among adults (Preston and Taubman, 1994).
   3
     Dowd and Hamoudi (2014) discuss this issue in a critique of the literature, and Olshansky (2013)
acknowledges the problem. However we are not aware of any work that has proposed how to account for



                                                     2
         Table 1: Female mortality rates by educational attainment and time period

                                               1984–89                       2002–06
            Educational                Population     Mortality     Population      Mortality
            Attainment                   Share         Rate           Share          Rate
            Less than grade 12            0.258          0.060          0.140            0.064
            Grade 12                      0.426          0.050          0.402            0.045
            More than grade 12            0.317          0.044          0.458            0.036
            Notes: These figures are calculated from the National Longitudinal Mortality Study
           and the National Health Interview Survey – Mortality Linked Files (see Section 3
           for details). The mortality rate is the average probability of death within the 5-year
           time period at the top of the column (the period 1984–89 runs from April 1984 to
           March 1989, whereas 2002–06 runs from January through December). All statistics
           are standardized by age, race, and region to the distribution in the 2000 NHIS.


    In this paper, we develop a new method to investigate changes in the relationship between
mortality and SES, while accounting for changes in the distribution of education over time.
The data directly inform us about (i) the share of the population in each education group,
and (ii) mortality conditional on educational attainment. We propose a nonparametric
test to assess whether the observed education shares and mortality rates at two points in
time could be consistent with the same underlying relationship between SES and mortality.
We then apply this test to data from the U.S. covering the period from 1984 to 2006.
As detailed below, we confirm the standard conclusion that the gradient has increased for
females. However we fail to find evidence that the gradient has increased for males. This
contrasts with a number of studies, including our own, that have found increases in the
gradient for males (under different—typically parametric—specifications).
    To demonstrate the concurrent changes in education and mortality, Table 1 summarizes
education shares and mortality rates for females aged between 25 and 84 in 1984–89 and
2002–06.4 In just two decades, the fraction who did not complete grade 12 decreased sharply
from 0.258 in 1984–89 to 0.140 in 2002–06. Conversely, the fraction with at least some
college education increased from 0.317 to 0.458. For mortality rates, Table 1 displays two
important patterns. First, in both time periods mortality rates fall with educational at-
tainment. Second, mortality rates conditional on education decline over time for those who
these shifts in the distribution of education in a systematic fashion.
   4
     Details on the data used to construct this table can be found in Section 3 below.




                                                     3
completed 12 years of education as well as those who completed more than 12 years of edu-
cation. The decline is more pronounced among the latter. At the same time, mortality rates
increased among those with less than 12 years of education. Together, these changes imply
that between 1984 and 2006 the mortality gradient in absolute levels of education increased.
    But has the underlying SES-gradient in mortality also increased? Having less than a high
school diploma in 2002–06 implies being in the bottom 14.0% of the education distribution,
whereas in 1984–89 it meant being in the bottom 25.8%. It is likely that in 2002–06, as
compared to 1984–89, those with less than a high school diploma are less favorably selected
from the population in terms of their social status and economic resources. Thus the dif-
ferences in mortality rates between this group and the rest of the population might widen
not because the underlying SES-mortality gradient increased, but rather because this group
is increasingly drawn from lower in the SES distribution. This leads to an empirical prob-
lem in determining from observed changes in the education-mortality relationship whether
the underlying SES-mortality gradient has truly increased or whether the observed changes
are entirely due to the change in the distribution of education. Our nonparametric test is
specifically intended to address this issue.
    The testing procedure relies on two assumptions that are implicit in much of the literature:
that individuals can be ranked by their SES; and that education is a primary marker of
SES, in the sense that those with more education are assumed to have greater SES. These
assumptions allow us to determine the range in the SES distribution to which any individual
belongs. For example, from the data in Table 1, a female with less than 12 years of education
in 1984–89 is known to be part of the bottom 25.8% of the SES distribution. By contrast,
a female with 12 years of education ranks above the bottom 25.8% and below the top
31.7%. A final assumption we require is that mortality declines (weakly) with rank in the
SES distribution. Given these assumptions, we derive a non-parametric test of the Null-
Hypothesis that the underlying relationship between SES and mortality is unchanged.
    Our test works as follows. In each time period, the education distribution implies a par-
tition of the SES distribution, and we can estimate the mortality rate in each element of this
partition. Under the null hypothesis we can, without recourse to parametric assumptions,
make basic predictions for how mortality rates in each element of this partition will change
as the distribution of education shifts over time. In particular, if an education group shifts
downward in the SES distribution, then the mortality rate for that group should increase
relative to the population at large. For example, the segment of the SES distribution asso-
ciated with 12 years of education in 1984–89 ranges from percentile 25.8 to percentile 68.4,


                                               4
whereas in 2002–06 it ranges from the percentile 14.0 to percentile 54.2. Therefore this seg-
ment shifted down in the SES distribution. Under the null, mortality should have increased
in this segment relative to the population average. In this manner, we can construct a set of
testable predictions for the null hypothesis that the SES-mortality gradient has not increased
over time.
    In practice, we implement our testing procedure separately for each gender using six
education groups. Our proposed testing procedure thus amounts to a multiple one-sided
hypothesis test for the mortality rates associated with the six different levels of education.5
While multiple two-sided hypothesis tests are straightforward to implement using standard
methods and software packages, multiple one-sided hypothesis tests of the type we are con-
sidering here are less straightforward. In Section 2.2 we adapt results from Kodde and Palm
(1986) and Wolak (1989) to our context and thereby derive the required test statistics and
critical values.
    When we implement this test on the 1984–89 and 2002–06 time periods, we fail to reject
the hypothesis that the SES-gradient in mortality has remained unchanged for males, but
we do marginally reject the hypothesis of no change in the gradient for females. The failure
to find evidence for a change in the SES-mortality gradient for males, however, could reflect
a lack of power of our proposed test. We address this lack of power by considering another
implication of our null model, which is that any combination of education groups that shifts
upward in the rank distribution should have lower mortality. Nevertheless, we still fail
to reject the null hypothesis that the gradient has not changed among males using this
alternative test. However we strongly reject the null that the SES-mortality gradient among
females remained unchanged between 1984–89 and 2002–06.
    As a final substantive point, we wish to comment on which part of the support of the SES
distribution seems to be responsible for the strong rejection of the null hypothesis among
females between 1984–89 and 2002–06. Visually examining the mortality function over the
education distribution, we find that the strongest indication against a stable SES-mortality
gradient comes from the very bottom of the distribution. Mortality differences between
those with a high school diploma only and those with greater educational attainment have
remained relatively stable (in absolute numbers) since the 1980s, although there is some
indication of an increasing difference between those with a high school diploma and those
   5
    We implement the test on three rather than just the two time periods discussed in the introduction.
Appendix Table A1 presents the information analogous to Table 1 for the full set of education intervals, both
genders, and all three time periods.




                                                     5
with a four-year college degree. But it is primarily at the bottom of the education distribution
that we observe a widening in the relationship between mortality and education over time.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines an analytical
framework and develops testing procedures for the relationship between SES and mortality.
Section 3 describes the data used in this paper. Section 4 presents and describes the results
of the statistical tests. Section 5 concludes.


2       Analytical Framework
In this section we first model the latent relationship between an individual’s socioeconomic
status (SES) and her mortality rate. We then use this framework to develop nonparametric
testing procedures to examine whether the relationship between mortality and SES has
changed over time.


2.1     Mortality Model
The literature commonly uses education as the primary marker of SES (e.g., Preston and
Taubman, 1994; Hummer and Lariscy, 2011; Olshansky et al., 2012), and we follow this
approach. To begin, we define SES directly as an individual’s relative position within society.6
Accordingly each individual, i, is associated with a rank, ri ∈ [0, 1], which expresses her SES.7
The exact rank of an individual is unobserved, but we do observe their level of educational
attainment, ei . Because we take education to be the primary marker of SES, we suppose
there is a monotonic relationship between education and SES.8 We state this formally with
the following assumption.

Assumption 1 The relationship between the discrete levels of educational attainment and
the continuous values of latent socioeconomic status is monotonic: ri < rj =⇒ ei ≤ ej and
ei < ej =⇒ ri < rj .
    6
      A thorough discussion of the concept of SES is well beyond our scope. However some notion of relative
position appears in most definitions. See Oakes and Rossi (2003) for an interesting review and discussion of
issues in defining and measuring SES in research on health outcomes.
    7
      Naturally SES may depend on multiple attributes. The existence of a well defined ranking assumes these
attributes can be collapsed into a single index.
    8
      Which way the causation runs between SES and education is irrelevant for our purposes. We only require
that education is an accurate marker of SES in the sense that those individuals with higher education are
understood to be of higher SES. Of course if there are multiple attributes behind SES then it need not be
monotonic in education. We make this simplifying assumption to facilitate the analysis, and leave for future
research the possibility of extending our approach to multiple attributes.


                                                     6
This assumption implies that the observed education distribution partitions the latent SES
distribution in the population. Denote by K the number of different levels of educational
attainment observed in the data. Based on these categories we can define a partition of the
SES distribution.

Definition 1 (Education Partition) An education partition, Pt ∈ [0, 1]K+1 , is a vector at
time t with K + 1 increasing thresholds pkt in the distribution of SES, where p0t ≡ 0, pK
                                                                                        t ≡ 1,
and k = 0, . . . , K.
                                    Pt = (p0t , p1t , . . . , pK
                                                               t )

For example, the vector associated with the education distribution for females in 1984–89 in
Table 1, column 2 is P1983−88 = (0, 0.258, 0.684, 1).9
    We measure mortality as the probability of death over a five-year time period, t.10 This
is a function of the individual’s SES, education, and age, ait , and the function can change
over time to reflect both overall changes in mortality and possible changes in the gradient.
To define the function, let Dit be an indicator for whether individual i dies during period t;
then the mortality function can be expressed as follows.

Definition 2 (Mortality Function) A mortality function mt (·) gives the probability of
death during period t conditional on SES (r), educational attainment (e), and age (a).

                                    mt (r, e, a) ≡ Pr(D = 1 | r, e, a, t)

    Assumption (1) implies that SES fully determines education. Accordingly there is no
variation in education conditional on SES that might be used to separately identify the
effects of education and SES. Therefore, to proceed with our analysis, we subsume any
independent effect of education on mortality in the effect of SES on mortality and write
the mortality function as mt (r, e, a) = mt (r, a).11 Additionally, throughout the empirical
   9
     For this vector, K = 3. The correspondent vector associated with the education distribution for females
with K = 6, in Appendix Table A1, is P1983−88 = (0, 0.122, 0.257, 0.683, 0.819, 0.942, 1).
  10
     All subsequent references to an individual’s ”mortality rate” or their ”probability of death” refer to the
probability of death within a 5-year time period.
  11
     This is clearly not an innocuous assumption. For instance, it is possible that education has a direct
causal effect on mortality by enabling individuals to comprehend medical advice or by leading them to make
better health decisions (Kenkel (1991); Lange (2011)). The strength of such a link between education and
mortality might vary over time. By assuming education to have no independent effect, we focus attention on
the relative aspects of individuals in society, not their overall education. If the functional role of education
in producing health changes over time, then this will be interpreted by us as a change in the SES gradient.
Education is of course a primary determinant and marker of SES and therefore changes in the functional
role of education do indeed reflect changes in the SES gradient. In this sense, our interpretation is correct.


                                                       7
analysis we fully adjust for age. Thus, for the remainder of the exposition, we will also keep
age implicit and write mt (r).
   Assumption (2) below restricts the mortality function to decrease in SES.

Assumption 2 Mortality weakly decreases in SES: ri > rj =⇒ m (ri ) ≤ m (rj ).

Together with Assumption (1), this implies that mortality declines with education. The
evidence presented in section 3.2 provides strong support for this prediction.
    We are interested in discovering how mt (r) changes over time. The problem in answering
this question is that we cannot observe an individual’s rank, r, so we cannot estimate the
function mt (r) directly. However, we can calculate the mortality rate for each interval
defined by the education partition. In our framework this is expressed as follows:
                                           ´ pkt
                                             pk−1
                                                    mt (r) dr
                                   Mtk =      t
                                                                , k = 1, . . . , K.
                                              pkt − pk−1
                                                     t


The mortality rate conditional on education approximates the underlying mortality function,
mt (r), as a step function. This is illustrated in Figure 1.12 For example, consider the middle
group in Figure 1. For that group, we know that r lies between 0.3 and 0.7, and we observe
an average five-year mortality rate of 6 percent. The unobserved relation between mortality
and r over this segment ranges from approximately 5 to 7 percent.


2.2       A Nonparametric Test for Changes in the SES-Mortality Gra-
          dient
Based on the model above, we develop and implement nonparametric tests of the hypothesis
that the gradient of the relationship between SES and mortality, i.e., mt (r), has remained
unchanged between two time periods t1 and t2 . The alternative hypothesis is that the
gradient has increased over time in some arbitrary fashion.
   While we test the null that the SES-mortality gradient is constant, we do allow for a
common shift of mortality over time. We could accommodate such a shift using either an
additive or multiplicative time-varying term, gt , in the mortality function. Under the null,
the remainder of the mortality function is constant over time. Hence we formulate the null
 12
      Figure 1 is not based on real data and is for illustrative purpose only.




                                                         8
  Figure 1: An example of a latent mortality function and an observed mortality function

hypothesis as either:

                        H0 : mt (r) = m(r) + gt       or H0 : mt (r) = m(r) · gt .                         (1)

In what follows, we focus on the additive case.13 The null hypothesis implies that the
mortality function at times t1 and t2 should be identical once we remove a constant term
from each period; i.e.,
                            mt1 (r) − gt1 = mt2 (r) − gt2 = m(r).                     (2)

Therefore we proceed by using mortality functions that are demeaned within each time pe-
riod.14
  13
    It is simple to extend our methodology to the multiplicative case by taking the log of the mortality rates.
  14
    To see how demeaning within each time period yields mortality´functions that will be the same across
                                                                                                   ´1     time
                                                                     1
periods, note that the overall average mortality rate in period t is 0 mt (r)dr = gt +µ, where µ ≡ 0 m(r)dr.



                                                      9
    Because the mortality rates at exact ranks r are unobservable, we must work with the
average mortality rates for each interval defined by the education partition. To derive a
testable implication from the model, we first identify those elements of the partition where
the intervals in the distribution of SES shift downward from one time period to the next.
These are intervals (pk−1   k          k−1 k                 k−1
                      t1 , pt1 ) and (pt2 , pt2 ) such that pt2  < pk−1
                                                                    t1  and pkt2 < pkt1 . Then from
the monotonicity of m̄(r) we have the implication that
                                          ˆ   pkt                                        ˆ   pkt
                                    −1           2                                −1           1
                    pkt2   −   pk−1
                                t2                    m̄(r) dr ≥   pkt1   −   pk−1
                                                                               t1                    m̄(r) dr.   (3)
                                          pk−1
                                           t                                             pk−1
                                                                                          t
                                              2                                              1



In words, an interval that shifts downward over time would have increasing mortality (in the
demeaned mortality function). For example, one can see in Figure 1 that if the intervals were
to shift left the mortality rate would increase within each interval. The exact magnitude of
this increase is unknown without knowledge of the underlying mortality function; we only
know that the average mortality rate must increase. Thus the model yields a one-sided null
hypothesis of weakly increasing mortality for each interval that shifts downward over time.
    Because this downward shift occurs for multiple education groups, the model yields a joint
one-sided prediction under the null hypothesis. The alternative is that mortality decreases
for one or more intervals in the partition (relative to the overall mortality rate in each period),
even though that interval shifts downward in the distribution of educational attainment. In
the data, we observe that all K groups in the education partition shift downward over time.
Thus the null hypothesis states that the vector of changes in the demeaned mortality rates
for the K education groups lies in the positive orthant of RK . This null is tested against the
alternative hypothesis that the vector of changes lies somewhere in the remainder of the space
(i.e., some of the changes are negative). Tests for such hypotheses are developed in Kodde
and Palm (1986) and Wolak (1989) and are closely related to multiple one-sided tests with
point-valued nulls (e.g., Kudo (1963); Gouriéroux et al. (1982)). The Wald statistic for these
tests uses only those elements of the vector that violate the null, and these are standardized
by the inverse of their variance matrix as in a typical Wald statistic for a two-sided test. The
null distribution of this test statistic is a mixture of chi-squares, one for each possible number
of violations, where the mixture weights are the probability of that number of violations.
As suggested in Wolak (1989), we compute these weights via simulation using the estimated
variance matrix for the vector of mortality changes among all groups. (Additional detail is
Subtracting this from mt (r) yields m(r) − µ, and we can set µ = 0 without loss of generality.




                                                              10
provided in the appendix.)
   To compute the test statistic we need the mortality rate (after demeaning mortality across
the whole population within each period) for each partition element k in time periods t = 1
and 2. These mortality rates are standardized to the joint population distribution of age,
race, and region in 2000, as noted in Section 3. We recover the demeaned mortality rates
and their joint variance matrix using a dummy variable regression that includes a constant
term for each time period, µt , and constrains the coefficients on the indicators for the K
education groups to add to zero:

                                              K
                                              X
                                Dit = µt +          βtk 1(ki = k) + uit , t = 1, 2                            (4)
                                              k=1


where in each period t the sum of the βtk weighted by the share of individuals in group k is
constrained to be equal to zero (i.e., k βtk (pkt − pk−1
                                      P
                                                     t   ) = 0, t = 1, 2), and uit is a mean-zero
           15
error term. The variance matrix estimate is robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered on
the individual in cases where an individual appears in multiple time periods.


2.3       Augmented Test with Upward Shifts
It is possible that our test has weak power against certain violations of the null hypothesis,
particularly from changes in the gradient toward the bottom of the education distribution.
Therefore we consider an alternative version of the test that has greater power to detect such
changes in the gradient.
    To explain this test, note that in its simplest form, an increase in the gradient would be
represented as a rotation of a linear relationship, as in Figure 2. Here it is apparent that
the power to detect such a change with the above test comes from the top of the education
distribution, which is to the right of the intersection of the two underlying mortality functions
(the solid gray line in the first period and the dashed gray line in the second period). Only
to the right of the intersection is it possible that the mortality rate in an interval might
have declined even though the interval shifted downward (i.e., the black dashed line that
runs from the 60th to 100th percentile). Thus, violations of the null could only be detected
toward the top of the education distribution. We could increase the power of our test against
alternatives such as that represented in Figure 2 by reconfiguring the education partition
in an appropriate fashion. In particular, we could combine intervals in the later years so
 15
      Note that uit has only two points of support because Dit = 0 or 1; i.e., this is a linear probability model.


                                                         11
              Figure 2: Simple example of a gradient that steepens over time

that we obtain upward shifts in intervals toward the bottom of the education distribution.
Under the null, any segment that shifts upward should have lower mortality. Thus for this
alternative test we create an interval that shifts upward over time by combining the lowest
groups in the education partition in the later time period. Then the full prediction under
the null is that mortality should increase for those intervals that shift downward but should
decrease for those that shift upward over time. Figure 2 indicates how we could find evidence
against this, if for example the lowest interval in the second time period extended to the 30th
or 40th percentile, in which case the mortality rate in that combined group would increase.
    When we implement this test in our data, we compare the lowest interval in the first
period with the combination of the lowest two intervals in the second period. For example,
we combine the bottom two intervals in 2002–06 in Figure 3 below, which then extends
beyond the lowest interval in 1992–96 and (barely) beyond the lowest in 1984–89. We use



                                              12
only this single combination of the first and second elements because the third element, Grade
12, is a large group that reaches the middle of the distribution, while the power to detect
violations in this manner is likely to come from the bottom of the education distribution. We
also include the top interval in this test, which shifts downward and therefore is predicted
to have increasing mortality.16


3      Data
3.1     Sample Description
Our data come from two sources: the National Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS) Public
Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) linked
to the National Death Index (NDI).17 The NLMS consists of data from Current Population
Surveys in the early 1980s and a subset of the 1980 Census combined with death certificate
information. The NHIS sample covers respondents to the NHIS from 1986 to 2000 which
have been linked to deaths recorded by the NDI through 2006.18 The NLMS and NHIS are
particularly useful since educational attainment is self-reported during the year the individual
is interviewed in the base sample. This removes the need to rely on education as recorded on
death certificates. Education data from death certificates is often missing and known to be
subject to nonrandom measurement error (Sorlie and Johnson, 1996). Furthermore, data in
the NHIS is gathered during face-to-face interviews, which reduces (but does not eliminate)
exaggerated claims of educational attainment (Black et al., 2003).
     We restrict our analysis to non-Hispanic blacks and whites between 25 and 84 years old.19
Following Cutler et al. (2011), we restrict the analysis to individuals surviving at least one
year from the baseline interview. This is necessary since the base samples do not include
the institutionalized population, which includes those in nursing homes. The concern is that
  16
     We only use the top interval, not the top two, because it is unlikely that the intersection between the two
underlying mortality functions in some alternative hypothesis would be this high in the SES distribution.
Accordingly we may have better power against such alternatives by only using the top interval.
  17
     Information on the NLMS is available at: https://www.census.gov/did/www/nlms/index.html. In-
formation on the NDI is available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ndi.htm. Information on the NHIS linked
mortality files is available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/data_linkage/mortality/nhis_
linkage.htm.
  18
     Linked mortality data to NHIS surveys are available from the date of NHIS interview through the last
quarter (October–December) of 2006.
  19
     Age was top-coded at 85 years in the NHIS from 1997 onward, so we restrict to a maximum of 84 years
of age in order to include individuals from the more recent survey years.



                                                      13
                Table 2: Construction of mortality time periods by data source

       Data Source    Survey Years      Mortality Time Period                        Sample Size
       NLMS           Early 1980s       April 1, 1984 – March 31, 1989                  674,539
       NHIS           1986–1990         January 1, 1992 – December 31, 1996             280,666
       NHIS           1986–2000         January 1, 2002 – December 31, 2006             686,645


the institutionalized have higher death rates than the rest of the population. Conditional on
surviving one year, mortality rates for the institutionalized population closely resemble those
for the entire population (Meara et al., 2008). All mortality rates are standardized to the age,
race, and Census region distribution in the NHIS survey in 2000 and are calculated separately
by gender, so that trends do not reflect changes in the distribution of these characteristics.20
    We use our two data sources to estimate mortality rates in three 5-year time periods,
which allow us to analyze trends in mortality by SES rank over time. Our construction of the
three mortality time periods is summarized in Table 2. All records in the NLMS are assigned
a common starting point of April 1, 1984. We calculate mortality rates by identifying those
in the sample who died during the subsequent 5-year period. The precise mortality time
period is April 1, 1984 to March 31, 1989, which we abbreviate as 1984–89. We construct
two 5-year mortality time periods from the NHIS, from January 1, 1992 to December 31,
1996 and from January 1, 2002 to December 31, 2006. For the former we pool the annual
interview samples from 1986 to 1990, and for the latter we use all available interview samples
from 1986 to 2000. Our three constructed samples all consist of individuals who are alive at
the start of their respective mortality time period.
    Prior to 1992, the CPS asked for the highest grade level a respondent had attended, and
a separate question verified whether the respondent had actually completed that grade. In
the NLMS, grade levels are grouped at lower levels; categories include grade 1 through grade
4, grade 5 and grade 6, and grade 7 and grade 8. Grades 9 through 6 years of post-secondary
education are available year-by-year.
    From 1986 to 1996, educational attainment in the NHIS was measured as the highest
completed year of schooling ranging from 1 year of schooling to 18 or more years of schooling.
From 1997 to 2000, the concept used to measure educational attainment changed to an
educational achievement approach, using a combination of years of schooling as well as
  20
    Montez and Berkman (2014) find subtle differences by region in trends in the education-mortality gra-
dient.



                                                   14
specific degrees attained such as “some college but no degree,” “associate degree,” and
“bachelor’s degree.” The highest completed year of schooling ranges from 1 year of schooling
to 12 years of schooling, followed by a range of post-secondary options. We recoded the post-
secondary options as follows: some college but no degree = 13 years of schooling; associate
degree = 14 years of schooling; bachelor’s degree = 16 years of schooling; master’s degree,
professional degree, or doctoral degree = 18 years or more of schooling.
    For the main analysis we divide the population into six groups by educational attainment.
The definitions of four of the six education groups do not change across the three constructed
samples; they are: individuals who completed grade 12, those who completed some college (1
to 3 years, with or without an associate degree), those who completed 4 years of college, and
those with more than 4 years of post-secondary education. The definitions of the remaining
two groups at the bottom of the education distribution change slightly across the three
constructed samples in order to keep the fraction in the lowest group approximately constant
over time. For the 1984–89 mortality time period, these two groups are individuals who
completed grade 8 and below, and those who completed grade 9 through grade 11. For
1992–96, they are those who completed grade 9 and below, and those who completed grade
10 and grade 11. For 2002–06, the two groups are those who completed grade 10 and below,
and those who completed grade 11.


3.2    Education and Mortality Rates: The Raw Data
Appendix Table A1 displays the 5-year standardized mortality rates (by age, race, and
region) and the population shares in each education group and in each time period. The
same information is displayed graphically in Figure 3 for males and Figure 4 for females. In
the discussion that follows we refer to the statistics given in the appendix table and displayed
in these two figures.
    Figure 3 shows male mortality by percentiles of educational attainment for the three
samples from different time periods defined in Table 2. There are six education groups that
partition the distribution of educational attainment. The share of the population in each
education group corresponds to the length of the horizontal line segments. For instance, we
see that the share of males with more than 4 years of post-secondary education increased
slightly from 10.4% in 1984–89 to 11.4% in 1992–96 and finally 12.0% in 2002–06. The
average mortality rate for each group is represented on the vertical axis. For example, we
see that the average mortality of males with more than four years of post-secondary education



                                              15
             Figure 3: Observed mortality rates by SES for males (1984–2006)

fell relatively slowly from 0.055 to 0.049 between the 1980s and 1990s and then decreased
more rapidly to 0.036 between the 1990s and 2000s.
    Figure 3 illustrates three findings regarding the relation between mortality and education
over time. First, mortality declined rapidly over the last three decades across the education
distribution. Second, there are large disparities in mortality by education and these dispar-
ities persist over time. A third finding apparent from Figure 3 is that mortality in both
absolute and relative terms declined more for males at the top of the education distribution.
Between 1984–89 and 2002–06, mortality rates among those with more than four years of
college decreased by 1.8 percentage points from a base of 5.3. Furthermore, they decreased
by 1.6 percentage points among those with exactly four years of college. By contrast, over
the same time period the mortality rates among those with the lowest and second lowest
level of educational attainment declined by only 1.1 and 1.2 percentage points respectively.



                                             16
            Figure 4: Observed mortality rates by SES for females (1984–2006)

    Figure 4 mirrors Figure 3 but for females. As for males, we find that there are large
disparities in mortality by education in all three periods. However, there are several striking
differences between females and males. First, while average female mortality by educational
attainment is substantially lower than for males, female mortality has declined less between
the 1980s and 2000s. Second, the declines in female mortality were much more concentrated
among women at the top of the education distribution. Indeed, mortality rates among the
least educated women seem to have increased between 1984–89 and 2002–06. By contrast,
among males mortality rates declined at all levels of educational attainment. We cannot be
sure, of course, whether the increase in the mortality rates among the least educated women
simply reflects the shift down in SES associated with these education groups. This is the
question we address next with the results from our testing procedure.




                                              17
            Figure 5: Demeaned mortality rates by SES for males (1984–2006)

4    Main Results
In Figures 5 and 6 we show male and female mortality functions for 1984–89 and 2002–06
with 95% confidence intervals. The mortality functions in both periods have been demeaned
and therefore average to zero within each period. These figures show the mortality functions
we use to implement our testing procedures.
    We can compare the mortality functions between the two time periods in each figure
to see which segments of the education partition violate the null. Such a violation occurs
if a segment that shifts downwards (to the left) in the education distribution has lower
mortality in 2002–06 than in 1984–89. For males none of the education groups violates the
prediction under the null; instead all segments show higher (demeaned) mortality in 2002–
06. Thus we find no evidence for an increase in the SES-mortality gradient among males


                                            18
           Figure 6: Demeaned mortality rates by SES for females (1984–2006)

using our first testing procedure. Correspondingly, Table 3 reports that the test statistic for
males between 1984–89 and 2002–06 is 0. Comparing the 1990s with the 2000s does yield
a violation of the null, but the test statistic for this comparison is much smaller than the
critical value. For females, we observe in Figure 6 that mortality declined among the top
two education groups from 1984–89 to 2002–06 despite these segments shifting downward
in the education distribution. This decline in relative mortality was fairly substantial for
females with exactly four years of education. Nevertheless, the test statistic for the basic
test applied to this time span is marginally below its critical value. On the other hand, the
statistic from the test comparing 1992–96 to 2002–06 is marginally above its critical value,
thereby formally rejecting the hypothesis of no change in the gradient for females over that
time span. The top panel in Table 3 thus reveals weak evidence that the gradient increased
among women and no evidence that it increased among men.


                                              19
                              Table 3: One-sided statistical test results

                                     Female                                               Male
                 1980s–1990s      1990s–2000s      1980s–2000s       1980s–1990s      1990s–2000s      1980s–2000s
    Basic test using only decreasing education segments
     Statistic       2.23           8.50           8.00                    0*             3.06               0*
     {5% c.v}       {8.28}         {8.24}        {8.21}                 {6.34}           {8.21}            {8.19}
     [p-value]      [0.513]        [0.045]       [0.055]                [0.976]          [0.383]          [>0.999]

    Augmented test using a combination of increasing and decreasing segments
     Statistic      3.76         1.67          39.16           0*           3.06                            1.56
     {5% c.v}      {4.28}       {4.27}         {4.27}        {4.28}        {4.27}                          {4.27}
     [p-value]    [0.066]       [0.208]       [<0.001]       [0.718]       [0.096]                         [0.221]
 Notes: c.v. is the critical value. The precise start and end dates of each time period are given in Table 2.
*
  There were no violations of the null hypothesis in these comparisons, hence the value of the test statistic is zero by
definition. However, the p-values are less than one because there is positive mass at zero in the distribution of the
test statistic under the null.


    Figure 6 illustrates why our first test could be underpowered in detecting changes in the
mortality gradient. The mortality rates in the two lowest groups, grade 10 and under and
grade 11, are much higher relative to the population average in 2002–06 than the mortality
rate in the lowest group, grade 8 and under, in 1984–89. However, since these segments
shifted to the left, this substantial increase in relative mortality among the least educated
can be explained as resulting either from a change in the SES gradient or from a change in
selectivity associated with education. Therefore it does not contribute to the test statistic
and will not be detected by our first test. Since the first test exclusively relies on segments
that shift left and for whom relative mortality declined, it is not well designed to detect
changes in the gradient that manifest themselves as relative increases in mortality at the
bottom of the distribution. It is this lack of power that the augmented test described in
Section 2.3 is designed to address. The augmented test combines segments at the bottom of
the partition to obtain additional testable implications from upward shifts in the education
distribution. Using the augmented test, we strongly reject the absence of a widening of the
SES-mortality gradient among females from 1984-89 to 2002-06 (see Table 3). Among males
we still fail to reject the null of no change in the gradient, both for the full time span and each
shorter time span. Thus our results provide strong evidence that the SES-mortality gradient


                                                     20
widened among females over the last thirty years, even once changes in the distribution of
educational attainment are accounted for. By contrast, among males any evidence that the
SES-mortality gradient increased over this time is marginal at best.
    Our tests do not identify where in the SES distribution the change in the gradient among
females is occurring, but the results above provide clear though informal evidence toward
this point. The augmented test derives additional power from exploiting the changes in
mortality at the lower end of the distribution of educational attainment. The fact that the
strongest evidence that the SES-mortality gradient widened comes from this test, rather than
the basic test, thereby suggests that the increase in the gradient among females is driven
more by changes at the bottom of the SES distribution than at the top. Visual inspection
of Figures 4 and 6 strongly suggests this as well. Thus it appears that the widening of the
SES-mortality gradient among females was driven primarily by the smaller gains in mortality
among the less educated.


5     Conclusion
The evolution of inequality increasingly holds a central place in societal discourse. In recent
years this fact was demonstrated by the rise of the “Occupy” movement, which dominated
headlines in late 2011, and by the tremendous success of Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the
Twenty-First Century (Piketty, 2014), which reached number one on the New York Times
bestseller list. Within this context, the finding that the mortality difference between the
least and the most educated has increased substantially since the 1980s has seemed to strike
a nerve. It has generated substantial interest both in academic circles and in the popular
press (e.g., Tavernise, 2012). Finding an increasing mortality-education gradient reinforces
the perception of an increasingly polarized, unequal society. If mortality inequalities in the
population widened substantially, then the possibility arises that not only did the less well-off
not benefit from the increase in material wealth over the last few decades, but they might
also have failed to benefit from the tremendous progress made over the last half-century in
reducing mortality. The question of whether mortality inequality increased in the population
is thus of primary importance for understanding broader social trends.
    In this paper, we ask whether evidence that the mortality-education gradient has in-
creased can be taken as evidence that mortality inequality associated with underlying so-
cioeconomic status has widened as well. Our contribution is to ask critically whether the
evidence based on the mortality-education gradient is informative about the relation between


                                               21
mortality and SES once one takes into consideration that the education distribution itself
has shifted tremendously over the last few decades.
    Our approach to this problem is to impose only a minimal set of assumptions on the
relationship between mortality and SES. The sole restriction we impose on the mortality
function is that it decreases weakly in SES. Since we rely on a minimal set of assumptions,
we can interpret any evidence we find for an increase in the SES-mortality gradient in a
strong way. Using our minimal set of assumptions, we derive two testing procedures of the
null hypothesis that the SES-gradient in mortality has remained constant over time. We
implement these tests using data from 1984–89, 1992–96, and 2002–06.
    Our results are mixed. It is difficult to establish firm evidence that the SES-gradient in
mortality has increased among males. A simple visual inspection of Figure 3 shows why this
is the case: for males, mortality decreased among all education groups in a fairly stable and
regular manner. Thus we find little evidence that mortality inequalities indeed increased
among males between 1984 and 2006. On the contrary, we find strong evidence that the
SES-mortality gradient increased among females using one of our two tests. This evidence
stems largely from the lack of progress in reducing mortality rates at the bottom of the
SES-distribution, evident in Figure 4. Since 1984, mortality rates among the least educated
women increased and this increase is large enough and cuts across enough of the education
distribution that it is difficult to explain as simply the result of increased negative selectivity
at the bottom of the education distribution.
    Substantively, we believe that this paper should help focus future research effort toward
the question of why women at the bottom of the education distribution have failed to benefit
from the decrease in mortality that took place between 1984 and 2006 among more educated
women, and among the male population irrespective of education. In addition our findings
suggest that inequality in mortality has not increased entirely in tandem with inequality in
income. At least among males, the evidence points to a steady decline in mortality rates
across the entire SES distribution.




                                                22
References
Black, D., S. Sanders, and L. Taylor (2003). Measurement of Higher Education in the Census
  and Current Population Survey. Journal of the American Statistical Association 98, 545–
  554.

Cutler, D. M., F. Lange, E. Meara, S. Richards-Shubik, and C. J. Ruhm (2011). Rising
 educational gradients in mortality: The role of behavioral risk factors. Journal of Health
 Economics 30, 1174–1187.

Dowd, J. B. and A. Hamoudi (2014). Is life expectancy really falling for groups of low socio-
  economic status? Lagged selection bias and artefactual trends in mortality. International
  Journal of Epidemiology 43 (4), 983–988.

Gouriéroux, C., A. Holly, and A. Monfort (1982). Likelihood Ratio Test, Wald Test, and
 Kuhn-Tucker Test in Linear Models with Inequality Constraints on the Regression Param-
 eters. Econometrica 50 (1), 63–80.

Hummer, R. A. and J. T. Lariscy (2011). Educational Attainment and Adult Mortality. In
 R. G. Rogers and E. M. Crimmins (Eds.), International Handbook of Adult Mortality, pp.
 241–261. Springer.

Kenkel, D. S. (1991). Health Behavior, Health Knowledge and Schooling. Journal of Political
  Economy 99 (2), 287–305.

Kitagawa, E. M. and P. M. Hauser (1973). Differential Mortality in the United States: A
  Study in Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Harvard University Press.

Kodde, D. A. and F. C. Palm (1986). Wald Criteria for Jointly Testing Equality and In-
 equality Restrictions. Econometrica 54 (5), 1243–1248.

Kudo, A. (1963). A Multivariate Analogue of the One-Sided Test. Biometrika 50 (3/4),
 403–418.

Lange, F. (2011). The role of education in complex health decisions: evidence from cancer
  screening. Journal of Health Economics 30 (1), 43–54.

Meara, E. R., S. Richards, and D. M. Cutler (2008). The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in
 Mortality And Life Expectancy, By Education, 1981–2000. Health Affairs 27 (2), 350–360.


                                             23
Montez, J. K. and L. F. Berkman (2014). Trends in the Educational Gradient of Mortality
 Among US Adults Aged 45 to 84 Years: Bringing Regional Context Into the Explanation.
 American Journal of Public Health 104 (1), e82–e90.

National Center for Health Statistics (May 2009). The National Health Interview Survey
  (1986–2004) Linked Mortality Files, mortality follow-up through 2006: Matching Method-
  ology. National Center for Health Statistics, Office of Analysis and Epidemiology. Hy-
  attsville, MD.

Oakes, J. M. and P. H. Rossi (2003). The measurement of SES in health research: current
 practice and steps toward a new approach. Social Science & Medicine 56 (4), 769–784.

Olshansky, S. J. (2013). Life expectancy and education: The author replies. Health Af-
  fairs 32 (4), 822.

Olshansky, S. J., T. Antonucci, L. Berkman, R. H. Binstock, A. Boersch-Supan, J. T. Ca-
  cioppo, B. A. Carnes, L. L. Carstensen, L. P. Fried, D. P. Goldman, et al. (2012). Differ-
  ences In Life Expectancy Due To Race And Educational Differences Are Widening, And
  Many May Not Catch Up. Health Affairs 31 (8), 1803–1813.

Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press.

Preston, S. H. and P. Taubman (1994). Socioeconomic Differences in Adult Mortality and
  Health Status. In L. G. Martin and S. H. Preston (Eds.), Demography of Aging, pp.
  279–318. National Academy Press.

Sorlie, P. D. and N. J. Johnson (1996). Validity of educational information on the death
  certificate. Epidemiology 7, 437–439.

Tavernise, S. (September 20, 2012). Life Spans Shrink for Least-Educated Whites in the
  U.S. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com.

Wolak, F. A. (1989). Testing Inequality Constraints in Linear Econometric Models. Journal
 of Econometrics 41 (2), 205–235.




                                            24
Appendix
Here we provide further detail on how our test statistic is obtained and how we determine
the critical values and p-values reported in Table 3. For the main test using only downward
shifts in the education partition, we start with the full vector of differences in the demeaned
mortality rates:
                                  [(β̂t10 − β̂t1 ), . . . , (β̂tK0 − β̂tK )]

where t and t0 are the first and second time periods, the superscripts indicate the partition
elements, and K = 6 for the six education groups used in each period. Because all partition
elements shift downward over time (except for males in the comparison from 1984-89 to
1992-96), the null hypothesis is (β̂tk0 − β̂tk ) ≥ 0 for k = 1 . . . K. The test statistic is like a
typical Wald statistic, which multiplies elements of this vector of differences by the inverse
of their variance matrix, but using only those elements that are negative and hence violate
the null.
      It is straightforward to construct the test statistic using the realized value of the vector
[(β̂t0 − β̂t1 ), . . . , (β̂tK0 − β̂tK )] and its estimated variance-covariance matrix. It is more difficult to
     1

obtain the null distribution of this statistic. Following Kodde and Palm (1986) and Wolak
(1989), the null distribution of the test statistic is a mixture of chi-squares with zero to
K degrees of freedom, which correspond to the number of possible violations of the null
hypothesis in a K-dimensional vector. To understand this intuitively, note that under the
null, it is possible to observe 0, 1, 2 or up to K segments for which (β̂tk0 − β̂tk ) < 0 even
though the null holds. Thus, under the null, the test statistic is a mixture of K chi-squared
random variables with degrees of freedom varying from 0 to K. The mixture weight on
the χ2 with exactly n degrees of freedom is given by the probability of observing exactly
n violations if the true differences(β̂tk0 − β̂tk ) are all exactly zero (i.e., on the boundary of
the space for the null hypothesis). These probabilities of observing exactly k = 0, 1, . . . , K
violations are difficult to obtain in closed form and depend on the variance-covariance matrix
of the estimated coefficients. We compute these weights via simulation as suggested in Wolak
(1989). Accordingly we simulate draws from a K-dimensional multivariate normal with mean
zero and variance matrix equal to the estimated variance matrix for the vector of differences,
[(β̂t10 − β̂t1 ), . . . , (β̂tK0 − β̂tK )], and then count the number of negative elements in each draw.
The proportion of draws with exactly n negative elements is a close approximation to the
probability that the test statistic would have the same number of violations under the null,
and so these proportions serve as the weights in the mixture of chi-squares. Finally, the


                                                      25
critical value is determined as the threshold such that the weighted sum of the probability
mass above this point in a series of chi-square distributions with 0 to K degrees of freedom
equals the desired significance level. The p-values analogously give the weighted sum of the
probability mass above the observed value of the test statistic.
    For the augmented test we use the difference between the demeaned mortality rates in
the lowest education group in the first period, β̂t1 , and the lowest two groups in the second
period, β̂t1,2
            0 , along with the difference between the rates in the top education group in both

periods. Thus the vector of differences has only two elements:

                                   [(β̂t1,2
                                         0  − β̂t1 ), (β̂tK0 − β̂tK )].

The null hypothesis is (β̂t1 − β̂t1,2
                                   0 ) ≥ 0 for the first element because it shifts upward (notice

that the order of t and t0 has been reversed) and (β̂tK0 − β̂tK ) ≥ 0 as before for the second
element. We compute the mixture weights as before, but now simulating from a bivariate
normal with the appropriate variance matrix.




                                                   26
                  Table A1: Average mortality rates by educational attainment and time period

                                             1984–89                      1992–96                      2002–06
      Educational                   Population      Mortality    Population      Mortality     Population     Mortality
      Attainment                      Share          Rate          Share          Rate           Share         Rate
      Panel A: Females
       Lowest (grades vary)*           0.122           0.061         0.113          0.065         0.104          0.065
       Up to grade 11*                 0.135           0.059         0.087          0.054         0.036          0.062
       Grade 12                        0.426           0.050         0.426          0.044         0.402          0.045
       Some college                    0.136           0.046         0.193          0.042         0.238          0.040
       College 4 years                 0.123           0.045         0.108          0.041         0.136          0.032
       College >4 years                0.058           0.039         0.073          0.037         0.085          0.031




27
      Panel B: Males
       Lowest (grades vary)*           0.131           0.094         0.118          0.087         0.106          0.079
       Up to grade 11*                 0.122           0.087         0.078          0.077         0.034          0.071
       Grade 12                        0.350           0.076         0.365          0.066         0.358          0.059
       Some college                    0.138           0.072         0.189          0.060         0.222          0.054
       College 4 years                 0.153           0.060         0.136          0.051         0.160          0.042
       College >4 years                0.105           0.055         0.114          0.049         0.120          0.036
      Notes: The mortality rate is the probability of death within the 5-year time period at the top of the column. 1984–89
     is April 1, 1984 to March 31, 1989. 1992–96 is January 1, 1992 to December 31, 1996. 2002–06 is January 1, 2002 to
     December 31, 2006. All statistics are standardized by age, race, and region to the distribution in the 2000 NHIS.
     *
       The lowest education group extends to grade 8 in 1984–89, to grade 9 in 1992–96, and to grade 10 in 2002–06. The
     second-lowest education group is grades 9–11 in 1984–89, grades 10–11 in 1992–96, and grade 11 alone in 2002–06.
