NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITALIZATION OF CHARTER SCHOOLS INTO RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
VALUES
Scott A. Imberman
Michael Naretta
Margaret O’Rourke
Working Paper 20990
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20990

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
of Education, through Grant R305B090011 to Michigan State University. This grant supports MSU’s
doctoral training program in the economics of education. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education. We are grateful for
the support. We would also like to thank Robert Bifulco, Eric Brunner and seminar participants at
Michigan State University and the Association for Education Finance and Policy for helpful comments
and suggestions. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Scott A. Imberman, Michael Naretta, and Margaret O’Rourke. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capitalization of Charter Schools into Residential Property Values
Scott A. Imberman, Michael Naretta, and Margaret O’Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 20990
February 2015
JEL No. H41,I21,I22,R21
ABSTRACT
While prior research has found clear impacts of schools and school quality on property values, little
is known about whether charter schools have similar effects. Using sale price data for residential properties
in Los Angeles County from 2008 to 2011 we estimate the neighborhood level impact of charter schools
on housing prices. Using an identification strategy that relies on census block fixed-effects and variation
in charter penetration over time, we find little evidence that the availability of charter schools affect
housing prices on average. However, we do find that when restricting to charter schools located in
the same school district as the household, housing prices outside Los Angeles Unified School District
fall in response to an increase in nearby charter penetration.

Scott A. Imberman
Michigan State University
486 W. Circle Drive
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
imberman@msu.edu
Michael Naretta
Michigan State University
486 W Circle Dr
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
narettam@msu.edu

Margaret O’Rourke
Michigan State University
486 W Circle Dr.
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
orourk49@msu.edu

I.

Introduction
The charter school movement began about twenty years ago and was driven by the belief

that privately run and publicly financed schools could be superior to traditional public schools.
Proponents argue that charters can adapt more smoothly in times of financial hardship than
traditional schools (e.g. by reducing non-unionized labor force or changing administrative
policies). They also argue that charters are leaders in methodological innovations in education.
On the other hand, opponents argue that charters are able to restrict admission to make them look
better than they are and that they divert necessary resources from public schools. While existing
research has generally shown charters to be at least as effective as, and in many cases better than,
public schools (e.g. Angrist, Pathak and Walters, 2013; Angrist et al., 2012; Abdulkadiroglu et
al., 2011; Dobbie and Fryer, 2011; Imberman, 2011b; Hoxby and Murarka, 2009; Bifulco and
Ladd, 2006; Sass, 2006; Bettinger, 2005) the impacts of these schools on the wider economy is
not well known. In this paper we attempt to establish the extent to which charter schools impact
local tax bases by examining how charter penetration rates in a community are capitalized into
surrounding home prices using data in Los Angeles County (LA County), California. To our
knowledge, this is the first analysis examining whether housing markets are responsive to charter
availability, which is important given the increasing prevalence of charter schools across the
country. Indeed, California has seen significant growth in the number of charter schools since
they were authorized in 1992; the overall number of charters has increased from 299 in 2000 to
912 in 2010, with 242 of those in LA County alone. This is the highest number of charter schools
in any county in the U.S.2
While there is also a substantial literature relating housing values and school
characteristics (e.g. Imberman and Lovenheim, 2013; Gibbons, Machin and Silva, 2011; Bayer,
2

California Charter Schools Association, accessed via www.calcharters.org.

2

Ferreira and McMillan, 2007; Kane, Riegg and Staiger, 2006; Figlio and Lucas, 2004; Gibbons
and Machin, 2003; Black, 1999), only Buerger (2014) in an unpublished working paper
specifically considers home owners’ valuation of charter schools. To estimate the impact of
charters on housing prices, we use data on single-family home sales from 2008-2011, obtained
from Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office. We estimate the impacts of both the number of
charters and the share of public enrollment in charters within various distances of a property up
to two miles. To account for endogenous charter locations and changes in the geographic
distribution of sales we include census block fixed effects along with a set of housing and school
characteristics to account for the non-random location of charter schools. Month-by-year fixedeffects account for any general changes to the education and housing markets over time in LA
County.3 Thus, our identification comes from houses sold in the same census block at different
times as charters open, close, expand and shrink. As a result, we note that our study does not
identify how existing charter enrollment affects housing prices but rather how contemporaneous
changes in charter enrollment and the number of charters affect housing prices in localized areas,
specifically within census blocks.
Overall, our results suggest that neither increases in the number of charter schools nor the
expansion in charter enrollment relative to public school enrollment – our proxy for the
availability of charter school slots to local residents – are capitalized into housing prices on
average. This holds both for Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) and other parts of
Los Angeles County. It also holds for both startup charters – new schools that begin as charters –
and conversion charters – public schools that convert to charter status, though we caution that
very few schools convert during our sample period. Further, we find no evidence that
3

We acknowledge, nonetheless, that since we do not have neighborhood controls that vary over time, our model
does not account for changes in neighborhoods independent of changes in local schools that may affect charter
penetration. We discuss this issue in more detail in the empirical strategy section below.

3

capitalization varies with income level, minority population, or achievement levels of the local
public elementary school.
However, we do find that when we count charters located only within the household’s
school district’s boundaries and exclude LAUSD there is a significant negative effect of
additional nearby charter schools on housing prices. This restriction is reasonable as students
who reside within the charter’s authorizing school district (which is almost always the district
they are located in) have admissions priority, thus generating a link between these schooling
options and local district boundaries. A potential explanation for this finding is that opening a
nearby charter school reduces the value of a local community school, thus weakening the link
between the availability of local schooling as a public good and house prices.

II.

Charter Schools Background
Charter schools are public schools that are tuition-free and managed by an independent

operator. Typically they are open to any student wishing to attend, regardless of where they live,
though some schools give preference to students who reside nearby. Many schools require an
application, and those that are in high demand will often have a waitlist. Charters are typically
governed by parents, teachers, members of the local community, or a private company and are
reviewed for renewal every few years by an authorizer, usually the state or a local school district.
In California, charters are funded through a mix of block grants and a state-based funding
formula that provides funding at the same per-pupil rate to all charters of a given grade level
across the state.4 There is substantial heterogeneity across schools in the way they are managed,

4

“Charter Schools FAQ Section 3,” California Department of Education, accessed
http://www.cde.ca.gov/sp/cs/re/qandasec3mar04.asp.

4

their goals, their targeted student population, and level of autonomy from the local school
system.
An important distinction to recognize among charter schools is that they are either brand
new schools – startup charters – or were previously a traditional public school that switched to a
charter model – conversion charter. According to the California Charter Schools Association,
there are many reasons why traditional schools decide to convert to charter status, but above all
is the appeal of increased flexibility and autonomy. Conversion charters must satisfy the same
legal requirements and processes as startup charter schools. This involves submitting a charter
petition establishing features such as the school’s goals, finances, and governance plan, as well
as obtaining signatures of at least fifty percent of the permanent teachers currently employed at
the school.5 However, California law does require that conversions give priority to students in
the school’s district and many districts, including Los Angeles Unified, give priority to students
in a local catchment area. Typically startup charters do not have catchment areas, but if they are
over-subscribed they are also required to give priority to students who reside in the authorizing
school district and may choose to give priority to those in the local school zone if the
neighborhood school has high rates of economic disadvantage.
As of the 2010-2011 school year, conversion charters represented 16 percent of
California’s charter schools, enrolling about 25 percent of all charter school students.6 Charter
school facilities vary with type of charter, with some building brand new structures, renting
available spaces in churches, community centers, or commercial buildings, or occupying a

5

“School Conversion,” California Charter Schools Association, accessed via
www.calcharters.org/starting/conversion/.
6
“Conversion Charter Schools: A Closer Look,” California Charter Schools Association, accessed via
www.calcharters.org/2012/04/conversion-charter-schools-a-closer-look.html.

5

previously traditionally run public school campus.7 When a school converts to charter status, it
usually remains in the same building and retains teachers, staff, and students. In contrast, startup
charters need to recruit a student body because parents have the option to enroll their child in the
charter or in the assigned public school.
Another important distinction between types of charter schools that has drawn interest
recently is the role of larger charter management organizations (CMOs). CMOs are non-profits
that operate multiple charter schools and charters within an organization are able to pool
management and resources in order to gain economies of scale, a benefit often shared by schools
within a traditional public school district. Evidence of the impacts of these types of charters on
student outcomes suggest that effectiveness varies substantially across CMOs and students
(Furgeson, et al., 2012; Angrist, et al., 2012). Another heterogeneous distinction between charter
schools is whether a charter has a waiting list. Recent work using oversubscription lotteries has
indicated that waitlist charters perform better than local public schools but are unable to assess
the impacts of non-waitlist charters (Angrist, Pathak and Walters, 2013; Angrist et al., 2012;
Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2011; Dobbie and Fryer, 2011; Hoxby and Murarka, 2009). Unfortunately,
while it would be interesting to see whether housing prices respond differently to these two ways
charters vary, we do not have data on whether charters are operated by CMOs or have waitlists.

III.

Theory of Charter Impacts on Housing Prices
The theory behind the relationship between housing prices and local school quality

predicts that, due to the close link between residential location and the school attended via
attendance zones, higher quality schooling will generally lead to an increase in housing prices,
though the extent of this increase depends on a number of factors (Black and Machin, 2011;
7

California Charter Schools Association, accessed via www.calcharters.org.

6

Rosen, 1974). This relationship has been well established through empirical analyses (Gibbons,
Machin and Silva, 2013; Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan, 2007; Kane, Reigg and Staiger, 2006;
Figlio and Lucas, 2004; Downes and Zabel, 2002; Black, 1999). However, since charter schools
do not typically have attendance zones and typically students may attend a charter regardless of
their location of residence, the theoretical link between charter schools and housing prices is
ambiuous.
Despite a less obvious link between charter schools and housing prices, economic theory
suggests homeowners may respond to charters in a neighborhood for a few reasons. First,
charters provide an option value. Even if a child does not attend a charter school, the availability
of charters nearby may make a location more attractive for parents. Since charters rarely offer
busing, travel distance is especially important if transport costs are expensive as is the case in
Los Angeles County where there is limited public transportation, heavy traffic congestion and
high gas prices.
Second, charters may have an indirect effect on housing prices if they affect the
performance of local public schools. Evidence on how charters affect local public schools is
mixed. While Booker, Gilpatric, Gronberg and Jansen (2008), Bifulco and Ladd (2006), and Sass
(2006) find positive effects of charters on nearby public schools, Imberman (2011a) finds
negative effects. Thus it is unclear how this mechanism might influence housing prices.
Third, the public may value the direct infrastructure and community improvements
charters sometimes provide. Indeed, Cellini, Ferreira and Rothstein (2010) show that housing
prices respond to non-charter public school facility investments. While many charters rent or use
donated space, some build their own facilities or convert abandoned properties for use as
schools. Even those that rent will often fill up vacant properties in locations like strip malls

7

(Imberman, 2011a). Thus the additional economic activity generated by the charters may
influence local housing prices.
Another theory is that charter schools may serve to break the connection between local
public schools and housing prices. In so doing we might expect additional charters (and more
school choice options more broadly) to lead to increased housing prices where existing schools
are low performing as these locations would have artificially low housing values due to the poor
school quality. Alternatively, in high performing areas, additional charters may actually reduce
housing prices as the availability of nearby charters weakens a key benefit of being zoned to a
high-performing school if, through attending charters, high school quality becomes available to
households outside the attendance zone (Nechyba, 2003). Another possibility, however, is that
by severing this link, the availability of having a public school option at all, irrespective of
school quality, is less valuable. The public good of a local school provides less utility and thus,
without a commensurate reduction in property taxes, lowers the value of living near that school.
The theories outlined above indicate that it is unclear how charter schools may affect
housing prices as some economic effects may be positive and some may be negative. As such,
understanding the overall effect on local property markets is necessarily an empirical question.
We should also note that while it may be tempting to interpret housing price responses as
measures of how much people value charters, the complexity of the underlying processes makes
it difficult to do this. In fact the theories described above of how charter schools may sever the
link between local public schools and property values highlight that the effects could be showing
something entirely different than valuation. From the standpoint of education policy a
particularly important implication is that changes in property values can impact the fiscal
situation of school districts. For example, due to the movement of students to charters, many

8

districts lose revenue when charters open. However, if district revenue is closely linked to local
property taxes then charter schools can generate further revenue losses (gains) if they induce
reductions (increases) in property values. Such reasoning also applies to financing for other local
governments that rely heavily on property taxes. Hence, the response of property markets to
additional nearby charters provides important information for school districts and local
governments for preparing revenue estimates and budgeting.

IV.

Previous Literature
Most of the existing literature on charter schools focuses on the effect of charters on

student achievement. Early research that relies on panel data methods have found mixed results,
with some researchers finding insignificant or significant negative impacts of attending a charter
school on student test scores (Imberman, 2011b; Hanushek, Kain, Rivkin and Branch, 2007;
Bifulco and Ladd, 2006; Sass 2006; Zimmer and Buddin, 2006), and others finding positive
impacts (Booker, Gilpatric, Gronberg and Jansen, 2008; Hoxby and Rockoff, 2004). More recent
research employing random lotteries (Angrist, Pathak and Walters, 2013; Angrist et al., 2012;
Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2011; Dobbie and Fryer, 2011; Hoxby and Murarka, 2009) and natural
experiments (Abulkadiroglu et al., 2014) have found large positive effects. Some research has
also recognized the distinction between conversion and startup charters and suggests there is a
differential impact on performance across the two types (Sass, 2006; Buddin and Zimmer, 2005;
Zimmer and Buddin, 2009).
There are two studies in particular that are similar to ours. First, Chakrabarti and Roy
(2010) try to use the impact of charter schools on enrollment in private schools as a proxy for
how much parents prefer charters to other schooling options. They find modest declines in

9

private school enrollment when charters locate nearby. Second, in an unpublished working paper
Buerger (2014) looks at differences in housing prices across school districts in New York due to
charter penetration and finds positive effects. His identification relies on differences in charter
penetration across school districts and census-tract fixed effects.
Nonetheless, our paper is distinct from Buerger (2014) in a few key ways. First, the focus
on differences across districts, while useful in areas with many school districts, is less relevant to
areas like Los Angeles that are dominated by a large central core district. Indeed, most charter
schools tend to locate in urban core areas dominated by large urban districts. Thus, our analysis
allows for identification of charter impacts within these urbanized areas. Second, Buerger looks
at the impacts on housing prices from the entry of the first charter school into the district. In our
analysis, we look at capitalization of marginal changes in charter penetration using multiple
charter penetration measures. Third, our inclusion of census-block fixed-effects instead of the
geographically larger census-tract fixed effects allows us to account for more potential sources of
time-invariant unobserved characteristics.
A separate branch of literature focuses on the relationship between housing prices and
school characteristics. There is ample evidence from previous work that housing prices are
responsive to test score differences across schools.9 Both Black (1999) and Bayer, Ferreira and
McMillan (2007) estimate regression discontinuity models across school zone boundaries to
identify how school-average test scores are capitalized into housing prices. Figlio and Lucas
(2004) examine the effect of the release of “school report card” data in Florida on property
values. These report cards rated schools from A to F based on average performance on statewide
exams. All three studies find sizable, positive impacts of higher school test scores on home
values, suggesting that parents place significant value on this school quality measure. Gibbons,
9

For a comprehensive review see Black and Machin (2011).

10

Machin and Silva (2013) find similar results in England using boundary discontinuities using test
score gains. On the other hand, Imberman and Lovenheim (2013) find little impact of the release
of teacher and school value-added information on housing prices in Los Angeles.
Several studies have considered the effects of other school characteristics such as student
demographics, per-pupil spending, and pupil-teacher ratio, on housing prices. In the footsteps of
Oates’ (1969) seminal paper, which uses per pupil spending and pupil-teacher ratio as measures
of school quality, much of this research has found positive relationships between similar
measures and housing prices (Bradbury, Mayer and Case, 2001; Bogart and Cromwell, 1997;
Weimer and Wolkoff, 2001). Clapp, Nanda and Ross (2008), using panel data from Connecticut,
find that an increase in the percentage of Hispanic students has a negative effect on housing
prices. Using data from Chicago, Downes and Zabel (2002) find that households do not
capitalize per-pupil expenditures.
Bogart and Cromwell (2000) exploit school redistricting in Ohio and find that disruption
of neighborhood schools - in terms of student demographics, changes in transportation services,
and geographic location within the neighborhood - reduces house values by nearly 10 percent.
Reback (2005) analyzes the effect of adoption of a public school choice program in Minnesota to
estimate the capitalization effects related to changes in school district revenues, as districts’ state
revenues depend on enrollment. He finds that a one percentage point increase in outgoing
transfer rates is associated with an increase in house prices of about 1.7 percent.
Our analysis builds off the approaches of these studies, by estimating the impact of
charter schools on local housing prices while carefully accounting for selection of charters into
neighborhoods. In particular, our baseline specification includes census block fixed effects to

11

account for unobserved heterogeneity across local neighborhoods in the propensity for charters
to open or close nearby.

V.

Data
Our home price data come from the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office (LACAO).

The data contain the most recent sale price of every home in Los Angeles County as of October
2011. In addition to Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD), the second largest district in
the country, the data encompasses 75 other school districts. Since our data is based on most
recent sales, to avoid endogenous selection into the sample and small sample sizes in early years,
we restrict our data to include only residential sales that occurred between September 1, 2008
and September 30, 2011. From LACAO, we also obtained parcel-specific property maps, which
we overlay with school zone maps from 2002, which is the most recent year such data is
available for the whole county.10 The data also include home and property characteristics, such
as the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, units on the property, square footage, and
the year the structure was built.
We drop all properties with sale prices above $1.5 million in order to avoid results being
driven by home price outliers. Further, about 25 percent of the residential properties in the
dataset do not have a sale price listed. Usually, these are property transfers between relatives or
inheritances. Hence, we limit our sample to those sales that have “document reason codes” of
“A,” which denotes that it is a “good transfer” of property. We also drop all properties with more
than either eight bedrooms or eight bathrooms.

10

The 2002 LA County maps come from the Los Angeles County eGIS portal at
http://egis3.lacounty.gov/dataportal/. The maps were created using a variety of sources and thus may not match
precisely to actual school zones.

12

The charter school data is from the California Department of Education. We rely on two
measures of charter school penetration: the counts of the number of charter schools within a
specified distance from a home and the percentage of total enrollment in the public sector
attributable to charter schools within a specified distance from a home. For the former measure,
we calculate the distance between each charter and the home, and count the number of charters
falling within a specified distance. For the latter measure, we use enrollment figures for all
public schools in Los Angeles County from the Common Core of Data, managed by the Institute
of Education Sciences at the U.S. Department of Education. An explanation for why we choose
these variables and our specified distances is provided in the empirical strategy section below.
We combine these data with school-by-academic year data on Academic Performance
Index (API) scores, API rank, school average racial composition, percent on free and reduced
price lunch, percent disabled, percent gifted and talented, average parental education levels and
enrollment. The API score is California’s summary index of school test score performance.
These covariates, which are available through the California Department of Education, control
for the differences in charter school penetration that are correlated with underlying demographic
trends in each school.
Our main analytic sample consists of 158,211 house sales occurring from September,
2008 through September, 2011. Of these, 65,170 are sales of homes zoned to an elementary
school in LAUSD and 93,041 are sales of homes zoned to an elementary school in another
school district in LA County. Table 1 provides information on the types of charter and public
schools that operate in LA County over our sample period. Panel A provides schools by grade
level. Charters are more common for middle and high schools but still account for a substantial
portion of elementary schools at 9 percent. Conversion charters in particular are common for

13

elementary schools but not middle and high schools. Panel B shows that over the time period of
our study, the percent of schools that are charters grows from 7.7 percent in 2008 to 11.7 percent
in 2011. Table 2 and 3 provide sample means and standard deviations at the property level for
several of the variables we include in our regressions. In Table 2 we see that properties in Los
Angeles County have an average sale price of $383,546 and tend to be of modest size, averaging
around 3 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms and 1600 square feet. We also have a ranking of the quality of
the structures on the property which will be useful for conducting validity tests. The property is
given a rating on a scale of 1 to 12.5 by LACAO assessors, where a rating of 12.5 is the highest
assessed quality. Not surprisingly, the average quality of a property in LA County is close to the
midway point on this scale at 6.45. For charter penetration, the number of charters in each
distance ring increases as we go further out, primarily due to the larger amount of land area in
larger distance rings. When we look at charters as a percentage of total public school
enrollments, the rates are relatively constant across distance rings at 5 - 6 percent.
We note that our data covers some periods of abnormal rigidity in the Los Angeles
housing market due to the housing collapse of 2008 and the Great Recession. Figure 1 shows the
Case-Shiller House Price Index for the Greater Los Angeles area from 2008 through 2011.11
Even though housing prices in Los Angeles fell dramatically until May 2009, afterwards they
had begun to rebound, increasing by 11 percent through July 2010. The prices fell slightly
thereafter until the end of our data in September 2011. Thus, the housing market had been in
recovery for most of our sample period. Even so, we may be worried that market rigidities would
continue to limit capitalization. To address this we provide results in the online appendix that

11

Acquired from http://us.spindices.com/indices/real-estate/sp-case-shiller-ca-los-angeles-home-price-index.

14

vary by year of sale and show that our estimates are similar to baseline in later years of the
sample when the market had more fully recovered. 12
In panel A of Table 3 we provide information on the characteristics for the elementary,
middle, and high schools to which each property is zoned. Panel B provides a comparison with
charters at each grade level within 1 mile of the property. For elementary and middle schools, the
characteristics of charters are pretty similar to those of the zoned school in terms of enrollment,
API score and demographics. For high schools, however, there are some differences. Charter
high schools tend to be substantially smaller (1,140 students versus 2,002) but lower performing
as measured by API score. Zoned and charter high schools are demographically similar, though
high school charters tend to have fewer gifted students.

VI.

Empirical Strategy
Our identification strategy relies on variation across households and over time within a

census block in the number of charters within various distance radii. To achieve this, in addition
to controls for characteristics of the local elementary school and property characteristics, we
include census block fixed-effects along with month-of-sale fixed-effects. Including census
block fixed-effects allows us to compare the sale prices of properties that are geographically very
close by; the mean land area for census blocks in LA County is 108,322 square feet with a
median of 19,283 square feet. While it may be preferable to use repeated sales on the same
property, this is not possible with our data as we only have sale price information for the most
recent sale. Even if we did have repeated sales, given the short time frame, restricting to those

12

The appendix can be found at http://www.msu.edu/~imberman/appendix_imberman_naretta_orouke_2015.pdf.

15

types of households would create a selected sample as a disproportionate number of those
properties may be distressed, in fast changing neighborhoods, or houses that are often “flipped.”
We believe that multiple sales within census blocks provide a reasonably small enough
geographic area to closely mimic repeated sales for specific properties while avoiding the
potential selection issues generated by using repeated sales. For example, in our final estimation
sample the median census block in LA County has three sales during the study period with a
mean of 3.9. Figure 2 provides a histogram of the distribution of sales within census blocks,
conditional on having any sales, over the study period. While our econometric strategy identifies
the effect of charter penetration only from blocks with more than one sale, a substantial number
of census blocks provide this identification. There are 29,512 blocks with at least two sales and
of those, 14,494 blocks have at least four sales and 7,387 blocks have at least six sales. Further,
of all blocks with at least one sale, 73 percent have multiple sales, providing wide geographic
variation in blocks that contribute to identification. Finally, we conduct an ANOVA analysis of
property characteristics to assess the within and between census block variance. In our estimation
sample only 39 percent of the variance in house size and 20 percent of the variance in housing
quality is within census block, along with less than half of the variation in bedrooms and
bathrooms.13 These results suggest that different houses within a block have largely similar
characteristics.
By including census block fixed effects, our identification strategy assumes that there are
no changes in neighborhood conditions over time that are correlated both with housing prices
and charter penetration. Of course, housing prices are increasing in general in Los Angeles
during our analysis period as is the number of charter schools. Hence, to account for general
13

An ANOVA using the residuals from regressions of the characteristics on month-by-year indicators provides
similar results.

16

changes in house prices related to overall market conditions, we include year-by-month
indicators in all of our regression models.
Even with census-block fixed effect and year-by-month fixed effects, it is possible there
are factors changing locally that could bias our estimates. Of primary concern is the possibility
that charters select into neighborhoods where the local public school is under-performing and the
poor quality of the school is reflected in lower housing prices. Ideally, we would be able to at
least control for changes in neighborhood characteristics as we do for school characteristics and
housing supply. Unfortunately, the data available to us for this is very limited. To our
knowledge, only the American Communities Survey (ACS) provides neighborhood data at a
small enough geographic level (e.g. census tract) to be relevant for this analysis. However, the
ACS only provides five-year estimates at the census tract level as estimates based on smaller
periods of time are too imprecise. As a result, the ACS data does not provide temporal variation
in neighborhood characteristics over our three-year time period and any data on neighborhood
characteristics would be absorbed by the census-block fixed-effects. Thus, we assume that
selection of charter location is unrelated to time-varying neighborhood characteristics that are
themselves not captured in our housing and school characteristics controls. While we cannot test
this assumption directly, we do attempt to address it indirectly by testing whether our observable
measures of housing characteristics change when more charters move in and by testing whether
charter penetration can be explained by prior changes in house prices. If time varying
neighborhood characteristics are correlated with prior house prices and the types of houses put
on the market then we should expect to see some impact on these observables, and indeed we do
not find evidence for this. Nonetheless, while we do not have temporal variation in neighborhood
variables, we do have such variation for local elementary school characteristics. Thus in Table

17

A1 of the online appendix, we look at how charter entry relates to public school characteristics
when we condition on school fixed- Without school fixed-effects the estimates show that
charters tend to locate in the zones of elementary schools with fewer minorities, more gifted
students, more English language learners and more disabled students. When school fixed-effects
are added some characteristics are statistically significant, but importantly they are all
economically small. The largest statistically significant coefficient is on percent of black
residents in the public school zone, but this coefficient is still rather small. For a one charter
increase in the school zone, there would need to be an increase in percent black by of 84
percentage points. Given this pattern and the general shift in the coefficients towards zero as the
school fixed-effects are added, these results suggest that lower levels of geographic fixed-effects,
specifically census-block effects, should reduce these correlations further to the point where they
are negligible.
Another difficulty in this analysis is deciding how to measure charter penetration. There
are two key factors here. First, there is the question as to whether the important factor is the
existence of a charter school as a whole or the relative size of a charter school. Arguably, while
the former is the most visible aspect of the school to the wider public (people in the
neighborhood know that a school exists but may be uncertain as to how large it is), the latter is a
potentially better indicator of the supply constraints on a family that wishes to send a child to the
charter. The second issue is that it is unclear how far from the charter a household must be before
we can be confident that the household should not care about the charter’s existence. To deal
with both of these issues we follow the prior literature on the effects of charter schools on public
schools (Imberman, 2011a, Booker et al., 2008; Bifulco and Ladd, 2006; Sass, 2006). The
analyses in these studies estimate the effects of charter schools on traditional public schools

18

within concentric rings of various distances. Since it is not obvious whether what matters is
relative enrollment in charters or the number of charters they estimate the effects of both charter
counts and enrollment in the charters as a share of total enrollment.
We use measures of charter penetration equal to (a) the number of charters and (b) the
share of all public school enrollments in charters in concentric rings between 0 and 0.5 miles, 0.5
and 1 miles, 1 and 1.5 miles and 1.5 and 2 miles from a property. We focus our attention on
charters within relatively short distances of properties due to the urbanicity and size of school
zones in LA County. The mean elementary school zone in LA County has an area of 3.2 square
miles. With this area, if school zones were circular, the radius of the average zone would be 1.0
miles. The median school zone has an area of 0.8 square miles translating into a radius of 0.5
miles. Hence, given the size of school zones in LA County, these are reasonable distances within
which to measure the effect of charters. Indeed, in a large Southwestern city that is less densely
populated than Los Angeles, Imberman (2011a) shows that charters only impact enrollment of
public schools within 2 miles of the charter. Further, in an analysis of charter applicants in
Boston, Walters (2014) finds that 40 percent of applicants apply to the closest charter school
while a further 22 percent apply to the second closest. While we do not have data on who
actually applies to or attends charters, we note that in LA County the median property is 1.35
miles from the nearest charter while the second closest charter 2.18 miles away. Since these
measures include all properties, it is likely that the average distances for charter attendees are
substantially smaller. Based on these factors, we believe that 2 miles is a reasonable maximum
distance, though we also check distances between 2 and 5 miles in the online appendix.
Our baseline model estimates the impact of charter penetration on the log of the sales
price of property i in census block s at time t as

19

(1)
where Charter is a vector of charter penetration variables calculated as the number of charters or
the share of public school enrollment in charters between 0 and 0.5 miles, 0.5 and 1 mile, 1 and
1.5 miles, and 1.5 and 2 miles from the property. The

coefficients can be interpreted as jointly

identifying a house price gradient that captures the differential valuation of charter penetration
by homeowners over distance.

is a vector of school-by-year observables, where the school is

the elementary school to which the property is zoned.

is a vector of house-specific

characteristics, such as the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, age, quality and
square footage. The model also includes month-by-year fixed effects (λt) to control for common
time trends and census block fixed effects (γs) to control for time-invariant neighborhood quality
and quality of the locally zoned school.15 We cluster standard errors at the school zone level to
account for correlation between prices of properties in the same census block. An adjustment to
this model also restricts to charter schools within school-district boundaries. This is relevant
since, as previously mentioned, California requires oversubscribed charters to give admissions
priority to within-district students.
We expand the baseline model to account for heterogeneous effects on housing price by
disaggregating our charter penetration variables by type of charter: conversion or startup. In this
model, the charter penetration vector is split into two:
(2)

15

The baseline model excludes school-zone fixed effects since most census blocks do not straddle school zones.
Nonetheless, inclusion of school-zone fixed effects has a negligible impact on the results.

20

In this set-up, the

coefficients will provide a gradient for startup charters and the

coefficients will provide a gradient for conversion charters. We include the same controls as in
equation (1). As mentioned above, we would expect to find differing valuation of these two types
of charters if homeowners place different weights on the inputs of each type; conversion charters
often remain in the same building, with the same student body and staff, and adopting new
operating styles while startup charters are often in rental spaces, tend to be smaller than
conversions and traditional public schools, and need to recruit students and staff in addition to
operating under a new management style.16

VII.

Results

Effect of charter penetration on housing prices.
Table 4 provides the baseline results of our analysis using variations of equation (1) and
the sample of homes sold across all of LA County. The table includes two panels, one for each
charter measure, overall numbers of charters and percentage of total enrollment attributed to
charters. Each specification in the table includes month-by-year time dummies, housing controls
– square footage, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, and quality – and controls for the
locally zoned elementary school – enrollment, API score, school demographics, percentage
disabled, gifted, free or reduced price lunch eligible, and English language learners. All standard
errors are clustered at the school-zone level, where the school is the elementary school to which
a property was zoned in 2002.

16

The fact that conversions usually maintain the same attendance zone after converting suggests the potential for
using a difference-in-differences approach to assessing the impacts of these schools on housing prices.
Unfortunately, only five schools in LA County convert to charter status during our study period making the
estimates from this type of analysis too imprecise.

21

In columns (i) and (iv) of Table 4, we regress the log of the house price on charter counts
and the share of public school enrollment in charters within half mile diameter rings,
respectively, without geographic fixed effects. The estimates suggest that there is a positive
relationship that strengthens as the distance from the property increases. However, in columns
(ii) and (v), we include elementary school-zone fixed effects to account for characteristics of the
locally zoned school. In these models the patterns differ depending on how we measure charter
penetration. When using charter counts, the results indicate that charters negatively impact
housing prices, becoming more negative the closer charters are to the property. The coefficient
on the zero to half mile radius charter measure indicates that an additional charter is associated
with a statistically significant 3.5 log point decrease in the sale price. When using enrollment
share, however, only 1 – 1.5 miles is significant.
However, we may still be concerned that there are endogenous differences within school
zones, but across neighborhoods, that affect both housing prices and charter penetration. Thus in
columns (iii) and (vi) we provide our preferred estimates that replace school-zone fixed effects
with census-block fixed-effects. In this model, estimates are all statistically insignificant and
small. The largest estimate in column (iii) suggests, when taken at face value, that an additional
charter school increases housing prices between 1 and 1.5 miles away by 0.2 percent, with
smaller values for other distances. For the enrollment share measure, all of the values are
negative, insignificant, and economically small with a 10 percentage point (pp) increase in
charter share reducing housing prices by less than 0.2 percent at all distance levels. To provide
additional context, if we focus on charter penetration within 0.5 miles of the property, the 95%
confidence interval for the impact of an additional charter is [-2%, 1%] while for a 10 pp
increase in charter enrollment share it is [0.4%, -0.4%].

22

One potentially important issue in interpreting the estimated effect of charter penetration
is that as the distance increases, the area in which the charter could locate increases. This is not a
substantial concern when focusing on share of enrollment, but it does indicate that there may be
more variation in the number of charters in farther rings making comparing the estimated effects
of charter penetration at different distances difficult. To address this we also provide estimates
using charter penetration within the full 2 mile radius around the property in Panel B. The results
are similar to those in Panel A and show no impact of charters on housing prices when we
include census block fixed-effects. It is also interesting to note that the standard errors decrease
when we add census block (or school) fixed-effects. This is another indicator that there is
substantial identifying power within blocks and that including between-block variation adds
uninformative noise to the analysis.
Table 5 provides results for our preferred model that includes census-block fixed-effects
when we split the sample by whether the properties are within the boundaries of LAUSD, which
is the largest district in LA County, or all other school districts in the county. We may suspect
there are different property effects for the two samples because LAUSD covers the main urban
core of the county, and recent evidence suggests that urban charters are more effective than
suburban charters (Angrist, Pathak and Walters, 2011). Our results, however, provide little
evidence that house price effects vary via this location difference. Only one estimate – for charter
counts in LAUSD from 1 – 1.5 miles – is statistically significant.
Table 6 provides the results for equation (2), splitting the charter penetration variable by
charter type – conversion and startup – for homes in all of LA County. As in our regression split
by school district, we focus on our preferred model with census block fixed-effects, zoned
elementary school controls, and housing controls. As in the pooled model, none of the

23

coefficients are statistically significant and the magnitudes and signs of the estimates do not
reveal a consistent relationship between charter counts or charter enrollment rates and sale price
for either charter type.
In Table 7 we provide estimates that look at how charters affect house prices when we
restrict the charters included in the count and enrollment share variables to those that are located
in the same school district as the household. In California, within-district students get priority for
charter enrollment and so there may be a stronger link with housing prices for these charters than
those outside the district. We focus on districts outside of LAUSD as that district is especially
large providing little differential variation from the estimates in Table 5 and as such when we
estimate this model for LAUSD the estimates are little changed from baseline. The estimates in
Table 7 are the only ones in this paper that provide a consistent indicator of a charter impact on
housing prices. Intriguingly, this estimated effect is negative. An additional charter school within
2 miles reduces house prices by 1.9 percent while a 10 percentage point increase in charter share
of enrollment within 0.5 miles reduces prices by 1.2 percent. This analysis provides some
evidence that charters weaken the link between public schools and housing prices.
We build on this analysis further by testing whether we see larger effects in areas with
higher quality schools. To test this, we provide results in Table A2 in the online appendix that
estimate whether the marginal impacts of charters differ by census tract and home school
characteristics. The estimates provide little evidence that the housing price reductions are larger
in higher income or higher achieving zoned elementary schools (as measured by API scores) – if
anything they are slightly larger in low income areas. An alternative explanation, as we noted, is
that the break in this link reduces the value of any local public schooling good and thus could
reduce housing prices regardless of the local school quality. Second, it is unclear to what extent

24

this restriction to within district charters should matter. While district students get priority, this is
only relevant if charters are over-subscribed. Hence, given the null results when we do not make
this restriction we think it is best to consider these estimates to be a bound on the potential
negative effect of charters.

Testing for endogenous charter location
A consistent estimate of the relationship between charter penetration and housing prices
rests on the assumption that the variation in charter penetration is exogenous conditional on the
included controls and, most important, the census block fixed-effects. As a test of this, we
regress our limited set of housing characteristics on charter penetration variables and census
block fixed effects. Ideally we would like to test the relationship between charter penetration and
local neighborhood characteristics. However, including census block fixed-effects precludes
such an analysis as we do not have access to time-varying neighborhood characteristics. Thus,
we must rely on characteristics of the specific households that can be acquired from the property
sales data.
Table 8 presents results that estimate whether charter penetration is related to square
footage, the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, and the quality of the structures on
the property as measured by the county assessor. We find no statistically significant relationship
between the numbers of charters in any radius ring and square footage, the number of bedrooms,
or the number of bathrooms. For quality, only the estimate for charters between 1.5 and 2 miles
is statistically significant and only at the 10% level. For charter seats as a percentage of all public
education seats, no estimate is statistically significant.

25

In a second analysis, we regress the log of house price on charter penetration within a
half mile of the home in twelve month lag and lead intervals up to three years before the home
was sold and three years after the home was sold. For example, the 12 month lag measure
corresponds to charters within a half mile of the property that were in operation 12 months prior
to the home’s sale. The purpose of this analysis is to test for pre-existing trends and to see if
there are any anticipatory or delayed impacts of charter openings. Thus, a clear pattern of higher
prices from charters in operation after the house sale would be evidence of either anticipatory
effects or preexisting trends in housing prices, the latter of which would invalidate the
identification strategy. A pattern of higher prices from charters in operation prior to the home
sale would indicate that housing prices are affected by charters but with a delay, potentially due
to short-term price stickiness.
Table 9 provides the impacts of lags and leads, which show little evidence of responses to
charter penetration. Of the two significant coefficients, one is for the 12 month lead in charter
enrollment percentage that suggests an increase in enrollment rates of 10 percentage points
within a half-mile of the property 12 months following the sale of the home increases the sale
price by 0.3%. While this could be indicative of a pre-existing trend, the other estimates indicate
this is not likely to be the case. First, estimates for charter penetration 24 and 36 months after the
sale show no impact. Second, there is no similar impact when measuring penetration using the
number of charters. The other significant coefficient is for the 36 month lead in number of
charters, suggesting an additional charter school within a half-mile of the property 36 months
following the sale of the home increases the sale price by 1.9 percent. However, if this were
indicative of an anticipatory response or pre-existing trend, we would expect to find significant
impacts from charter penetration 24 months and 12 months after the sale, as well. Thus, while

26

there are a couple estimates that indicate anticipatory responses or pre-trends, the bulk of the
evidence in Table 7 argues against such a pattern. Further, we note that the results in the table
also provide little indication of a delayed response since there is no significant impact from the
number of charters open or the charter enrollment rates 12, 24 or 36 months prior to the sale.
Finally, in Table 10, we test the concern that the addition (or closure) of charter schools
may generate sample selection by inducing some people to enter or stay out of the housing
market. To do this we regress the number of annual sales in a census block on charter penetration
near the block centroid. Further, even though we only have price data for the most recent sale of
a property, we can see the dates for the three most recent sales. Thus in the second column we
repeat the analysis using the three most recent sales of properties in the sales counts. The results
show little impact of charter share of enrollment on housing sales. There is also no significant
relationship between charter counts and sale counts within 1 mile of the centroid. Nonetheless,
there is a statistically significant but economically small relationship between sales counts and
the number of charters one to two miles from the centroid. The estimates suggest that, after
conditioning on census block fixed-effects, a new charter opening one to two miles from the
block centroid is related to an increase of 0.1 to 0.2 sales in a year. To put this in perspective it
would take 5 to 10 new charter openings in a year to generate an additional sale. Given that the
average number of charters in that distance range from properties is 1.9, we believe this impact is
too small to substantially affect our estimates.

Effect of charter penetration on housing prices: heterogeneity and specification checks.
In the online appendix we provide a series of analyses to look at impacts of charters when
we allow the characteristics of the charters, local neighborhoods, and local public schools to

27

vary. First, in Table A3 we provide different estimates by the grade level of the charter. Thus we
split charter penetration measures into four categories – elementary, middle, high and multi-level
schools. We see little evidence of differential impacts on housing prices by the level of the
charter school at any distance up to two miles from the property. Only one estimate out of 32 is
statistically significant at the 5% level. Three more are significant at the 10% level, but show no
clear pattern and differ in sign.
In Table A4 we interact the charter penetration measures with the year of the property
sale. Since the housing market in Los Angeles had undergone substantial declines just prior to
our study, we may be concerned that the lack of capitalization is due to abnormal rigidities in the
market, though we note that the significant effects when we restrict to within-district charters
suggests this is not the case. Nonetheless, to address this, we focus on the estimates for 2010 and
2011, well after the market had started its recovery. As with our main results, we find no
statistically significant impacts of charter penetration at any distance within 2 miles of a property
in 2010 or 2011. In fact only one estimate out of the 32 shown is statistically significant - 1 to 1.5
miles in 2008.
In Table A5 we provide evidence on whether the mean charter impacts may be hiding
heterogeneous effects between neighborhoods with high performing and low performing schools
by interacting the charter penetration variables with both the distance from the property and
quartiles of household income (across all properties in the data) in the Census tract, the zoned
elementary school’s API score, percent minority enrollment in the zoned elementary school, and
minority enrollment in the census tract. Only five estimates out of 128 are statistically significant
at the 10% level (1 estimate at the 1% level) and do not show a clear pattern. Thus we see little
indication our pooled estimates hiding heterogeneous impacts along these characteristics.

28

Finally, in Table A6 we provide estimates under different specifications and sample
restrictions. Through all of these specification and sample checks, no estimates are statistically
significant. These checks include using sale price levels rather than log sale prices, splitting the
sample by the number of bedrooms, keeping properties with more than 8 bedrooms in the
regression, dropping large (5000 square feet or larger) properties, dropping multi-unit properties,
and limiting to the summer months of June, July and August as families with children are more
likely to move during this period between school-years. Further we show that adding a fifth
distance ring of 2 to 5 miles does not change the estimates, nor is the estimate on the added ring
significant and adding in school fixed-effects (in addition to census block fixed effects) has little
impact on the baseline estimates.

VIII.

Conclusion
Enrollment in charter schools has been increasing across the country over the past twenty

years. Although conclusions on the effect of charters on student performance are mixed, it is
likely charters will become an increasingly common education option for students. Thus, it is
important to understand how local property markets react to these schools as changes in this
market impact school district financing. If charters increase local property values this could help
negate some of the negative fiscal impacts of charters on local public schools. However if they
reduce property values, in many school districts this could make the financial challenges of
dealing with charter schools worse.
To address this issue, we directly estimate how charter schools affect local property
values. Additionally, we expand our analysis to separate our measures of charter penetration by
urbanicity, charter type, and grade level of the school along with wealth of the local

29

neighborhood and the achievement levels of the local elementary school. Our approach follows
the work other researchers have done relating school characteristics to housing prices, and
carefully accounts for the correlation between neighborhood characteristics and housing prices
by including census block fixed effects. This method allows us to estimate the impacts of
charters net of any time-invariant differences between local neighborhoods and, by extension,
local public schools. Using data from Los Angeles County on property sale prices from 2008
through 2011, our estimates show that there is very little impact of charters on home prices on
average. The results are not sensitive to sample selection or model specification, nor do we find
differential impacts by whether a charter is a startup or conversion, whether the property is in the
primary urban school district in the area, Los Angeles Unified School District, by the grade level
of the charter, by the income level of the neighborhood, or by test scores in the zoned elementary
school. However, given that in California over-subscribed charters must provide priority
enrollment to students within the local school district, we also estimate a model that restricts to
charters located in the same school district as the property. In this case, which we consider a
negative lower-bound impact as it is not clear whether such a restriction is appropriate, we find
some evidence that housing prices actually fall by 2 percent for each additional charter within
two miles. Since evidence of differential impacts by school quality is weak and, at best,
negatively related to income, this suggests that perhaps charter schools weaken the capitalization
of schooling as a public good into property values rather than the capitalization of school quality
in particular.

30

References
Abdulkirolu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Peter D. Hull, and Parag A. Pathak. 2014. “Charters
Without Lotteries: Testing Takeovers in New Orleans and Boston.” NBER Working Paper
No. 20800.
---, ---, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag A. Pathak. 2011. "Accountability and Flexibility in Public
Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126
(2): 699-748.
Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
Walters. 2012. "Who Benefits from KIPP?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
32(4): 837-860.
---, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2011. "Explaining Charter School
Effectiveness." NBER Working Paper #17332.
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. 2007. "A Unified Framework for
Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods." Journal of Political Economy
115(4): 588-638.
Bettinger, Eric P. 2005. "The Effect of Charter Schools on Charter Students and Public Schools."
Economics of Education Review. 24(2): 133-147.
Bifulco, Robert, and Helen Ladd. 2006. "The impacts of charter schools on student achievement:
Evidence from North Carolina." Education Finance and Policy 1(1): 50-90.
Black, Sandra E. 1999. "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
Education." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2): 577-599.
--- and Stephen Machin. 2011. "Housing Valuations of School Performance." in Eric A.
Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann (Eds.) Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Volume 3. North-Holland: Amsterdam.
31

Bogart, William T., and Brian A. Cromwell. 1997. "How much more is a good school district
worth?" National Tax Journal 50:215-232.
--- and Brian A. Cromwell. 2000. "How much is a neighborhood school worth?." Journal of
Urban Economics 47(2): 280-305.
Booker, Kevin, Scott Gilpatric, Timothy Gronberg, and Dennis Jansen. 2008. "The effect of
charter schools on traditional public school students in Texas: Are children who stay behind
left behind?" Journal of Urban Economics 64(1): 123-145.
Bradbury, Katharine L., Christopher J. Mayer, and Karl E. Case. 2001. "Property tax limits, local
fiscal behavior, and property values: Evidence from Massachusetts under Proposition 212."
Journal of Public Economics 80(2): 287-311.
Buddin, Richard, and Ronald Zimmer. 2005. "Student achievement in charter schools: A
complex picture." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(2): 351-371.
Buerger, Christian, 2014. “The impact of charter schools on housing values.” Syracuse
University, mimeo.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Fernando Ferreira, and Jesse Rothstein. 2010. "The value of school
facility investments: Evidence from a dynamic regression discontinuity design." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1): 215-261.
Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Joydeep Roy. 2010. "Do charter schools crowd out private school
enrollment? Evidence from Michigan." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report
#472.
Downes, Thomas A., and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 2002. "The impact of school characteristics on house
prices: Chicago 1987–1991." Journal of Urban Economics 52(1): 1-25.

32

Figlio, David N. and Maurice E. Lucas. 2004. "What’s in a Grade? School Report Cards and the
Housing Market." American Economic Review 94(3): 591-604.
Furgeson, Joshua, et al. 2012. “Charter-School Management Organizations: Diverse Strategies
and Diverse Student Impacts.” The National Study of Charter Management Organization
(CMO) Effectiveness. Technical report. Mathematica Policy Research and the Center on
Reinventing Public Education.
Gibbons, Stephen, and Stephen Machin. 2003. “Valuing English Primary Schools.” Journal of
Urban Economics 53(2): 197-219.
---, --- and Olmo Silva. 2013. "Valuing School Quality Using Boundary Discontinuities."
Journal of Urban Economics 75: 15-28.
Hanushek, Eric A., John Kain, Steven Rivkin, and Gregory Branch. 2007. "Charter school
quality and parental decision making with school choice." Journal of Public Economics
91(5): 823-848.
Imberman, Scott A., 2011. "The Effect of Charter Schools on Achievement and Behavior of
Public School Students" Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8).
---, 2011. “Achievement and Behavior in Charter Schools: Drawing a More Complete Picture.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2).
--- and Lovenheim, Michael F., 2013. "Does the Market Value Value-Added? Evidence From
Housing Prices After a Public Release of School and Teacher Value-Added." NBER Working
Paper #1915.
Kane, Thomas J., Stephanie K. Riegg and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. "School Quality
Neighborhoods, and Housing Prices." American Law and Economic Review 8(2): 183-212.

33

Lubienski, Christopher. 2003. "Innovation in education markets: Theory and evidence on the
impact of competition and choice in charter schools." American Educational Research
Journal 40(2): 395-443.
Nechyba, Thomas J. 2003. “Introducing School Choice into Multidistrict Public School
Systems,” in The Economics of School Choice, Caroline M. Hoxby, ed. University of
Chicago Press.
Oates, Wallace E. 1969. "The effects of property taxes and local public spending on property
values: An empirical study of tax capitalization and the Tiebout hypothesis" Journal of
Political Economy 77:957-971.
Reback, Randall. 2005. "House prices and the provision of local public services: capitalization
under school choice programs." Journal of Urban Economics 57(2): 275-301.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets – Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82(1): 34-55.
Sass, Tim R. 2006. "Charter schools and student achievement in Florida." Education Finance
and Policy 1(1): 91-122.
Walters, Christopher R. 2014. “The Demand for Effective Charter Schools.” NBER Working
Paper No. 20640.
Weimer, David, and Michael Wolkoff. 2001. "School performance and housing values: Using
non-contiguous district and incorporation boundaries to identify school effects." National
Tax Journal 54(3): 231-253.
Zimmer, Ron, and Richard Buddin. 2006. "Charter school performance in two large urban
districts." Journal of Urban Economics 60(2), 307-326.

34

---, and Richard Buddin. 2009. "Is charter school competition in California improving the
performance of traditional public schools?" Public Administration Review 69(5), 831-845.

35

Figure 1: Case-Shiller House Price Index for Greater Los Angeles
230

220

Case-Shiller Index (January, 2000 = 100)

210

200

190

180

170

160

150

Figure 2 - Distribution of House Sales by Census Block During Sample Period
Conditional on Census Block Having Any Sales
12000

10000

Frequency

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

0

5
10
15
Number of House Sales within Census Block

20

Table 1: Schools in LA County
A. Schools by Grade Level

Non-charter public schools
Total charter schools
% Charter Schools
Conversion charters
Start-up charters

Elementary

Middle

High

Multiple
Levels

1,196
113
8.6%

243
48
16.5%

390
88
18.4%

68
35
34.0%

21
92

1
47

10
78

3
32

B. Schools by Years of Operation

2008
2009
2010
2011

Non-Charter
Public

Conversion

Start-up

1,743
1,758
1,777
1,809

19
23
24
26

127
147
181
213

% Charter
Schools
7.7%
8.8%
10.3%
11.7%

Note: Schools included in panel A are those open and active at any point September 2008
through September 2011. Data obtained from California Department of Education.

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Properties with Sale Prices
Property Characteristics
Sale price

383,546
(247,685)

# of Beds

2.98
(1.05)

# of Baths

2.11
(0.92)

Square Footage

1,573
(718)

Quality

6.45
(1.25)

Number of Charters
0 - 0.5 miles

0.16
(0.54)

0.5 - 1 mile

0.47
(1.11)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.78
(1.59)

1.5 - 2 miles

1.06
(2.04)

Charters as percentage of enrollment
0 - 0.5 miles

0.05
(0.18)

0.5 - 1 mile

0.06
(0.15)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.06
(0.13)

1.5 - 2 miles

0.06
(0.12)

Observations

158,211

Notes: Summary statistics are means for sales from September 2008 through
September 2011. Property sample excludes homes with a sale price
exceeding $1.5 million, and a bedroom or bathroom count in excess of eight.
Homes are divided into the "LAUSD" or "Rest of LA County" samples via
the location of the elementary school to which the property is zoned.
Standard deviations in parentheses.

Table 3: Summary Statistics - Schools Near Properties with Sale Prices
A: Characteristics of zoned school

B: Characteristics of charters within 1 mile of
property (enrollment weighted)

Elementary

Middle

High

Elementary

Middle

High

Enrollment

440.5
(165.6)

1,197.4
(488.0)

2,002.6
(680.6)

443.0
(138.0)

1,121.3
(435.7)

1,140.5
(814.3)

API Score

805.6
(73.6)

746.1
(90.3)

707.0
(88.2)

800.1
(64.5)

744.7
(93.0)

663.7
(112.4)

% Black

10.9
(14.4)

10.1
(11.9)

11.2
(13.3)

10.6
(13.2)

10.3
(11.6)

11.1
(12.6)

% Hispanic

58.2
(28.5)

62.9
(24.7)

60.1
(24.8)

62.0
(25.7)

63.6
(25.2)

65.2
(23.9)

% Asian

7.1
(12.6)

7.0
(12.0)

7.6
(12.3)

7.2
(12.0)

7.7
(13.2)

5.9
(11.5)

% Disabled

11.4
(4.5)

11.4
(2.8)

10.3
(3.1)

11.8
(4.1)

11.1
(2.7)

10.6
(12.2)

% Gifted

8.4
(7.3)

13.8
(9.7)

11.4
(8.8)

7.5
(5.4)

12.6
(8.6)

7.3
(7.0)

% Free or Reduced
Price Lunch

64.7
(30.0)

66.9
(25.7)

55.9
(26.9)

68.7
(26.6)

67.5
(26.6)

61.2
(24.1)

% English Language
Learner

28.1
(17.2)

19.8
(11.5)

18.0
(10.5)

30.3
(15.2)

20.2
(11.7)

20.8
(12.2)

158,211
158,211

127,558
127,174

141,212
140,866

136,546
136,536

81,204
80,686

83,079
80,979

Observations
for api score:

Notes: Summary statistics are means for sales from September 2008 through September 2011. Sample excludes homes with
a sale price exceeding $1.5 million, and a bedroom or bathroom count in excess of eight. School zones are based on 2002
zoning. See text for details on how to access school zone maps. Standard deviations in parentheses.

Table 4 - Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices for Los Angeles County
LA County
Charter seats as percentage of
enrollment

Number of charters
(i)
A. Distance gradient
0 - 0.5 miles

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

-0.0073
(0.0131)

-0.0353*** -0.0054
(0.0080) (0.0083)

0.0741*
(0.0438)

0.0065
(0.0249)

-0.0013
(0.0194)

0.0086
(0.0075)

-0.0253*** 0.0010
(0.0061) (0.0048)

0.1170**
(0.0564)

-0.0166
(0.0270)

-0.0128
(0.0195)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.0252*** -0.0149*** 0.0022
(0.0058)
(0.0039) (0.0031)

0.1400**
(0.0616)

-0.0442*
(0.0268)

-0.0123
(0.0239)

1.5 - 2 miles

0.0239***
(0.0049)

0.1200
(0.0770)

-0.0217
(0.0340)

-0.0047
(0.0255)

0.3280*** -0.0301
(0.1120) (0.0609)

-0.0075
(0.0544)

0.5 - 1 mile

B. Condensed 0-2 miles
0 - 2 miles

Observations
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

-0.0046
(0.0031)

-0.0011
(0.0028)

0.0193*** -0.0101*** 0.0001
(0.0032)
(0.0026) (0.0021)

158,211
Y
Y
N
N

158,211
Y
Y
Y
N

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
Y
Y
N
N

158,211
Y
Y
Y
N

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

Sample includes property sales from April 2009 through September, 2011. The independent variable
denotes either the number of charters in operation or the share of enrollment in operating charters as of
the sale date in various distance rings from the property. Housing chracteristics include number of
bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, and quality. School chracteristics include API levels overall,
lags and second lags of overall API scores, % of students of each race, % free lunch, % gifted, %
English language learners, % disabled, and parent education levels for elementary school zoned to the
property in 2002. All regressions include month-by-year fixed-effects. Robust standard errors clustered
by elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 5: Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices for Los Angeles County by School District
LAUSD

Rest of LA County

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

0 - 0.5 miles

0.0005
(0.0097)

0.0092
(0.0236)

-0.0143
(0.0169)

-0.0220
(0.0373)

0.5 - 1 mile

0.0059
(0.0056)

-0.0062
(0.0278)

-0.0045
(0.0087)

-0.0114
(0.0241)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.0071**
(0.0035)

-0.0061
(0.0314)

-0.0023
(0.0063)

0.000579
(0.0351)

1.5 - 2 miles

0.0023
(0.0034)

-0.0130
(0.0408)

-0.0038
(0.0047)

0.0259
(0.0206)

Observations
R-squared
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

65,170
0.83
Y
Y
N
Y

65,170
0.83
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
0.91
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
0.91
Y
Y
N
Y

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample and controls. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary
school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 6: Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices by Charter Type
LA County
Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage
of enrollment

-0.0045
(0.0095)

0.0039
(0.0226)

0.5 - 1 mile

0.0025
(0.0054)

0.0009
(0.0241)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.0034
(0.0036)

0.0027
(0.0240)

1.5 - 2 miles

-0.0011
(0.0030)

0.0273
(0.0234)

-0.0137
(0.0133)

-0.0226
(0.0362)

0.5 - 1 mile

-0.0110
(0.0103)

-0.0432
(0.0311)

1 - 1.5 miles

-0.0066
(0.0085)

-0.0397
(0.0456)

1.5 - 2 miles

-0.0023
(0.0079)

-0.0506
(0.0513)

Observations
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

Start-up charters
0 - 0.5 miles

Conversion charters
0 - 0.5 miles

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample and controls. Robust standard
errors clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 7: Effect of Charters Within the Home's School District on Log Sale Prices for
Los Angeles County Excluding LAUSD

Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage
of enrollment

0 - 0.5 miles

-0.0387
(0.0284)

-0.118***
(0.0431)

0.5 - 1 mile

-0.0123
(0.0149)

-0.0786*
(0.0409)

1 - 1.5 miles

-0.0178*
(0.0098)

-0.0758*
(0.0433)

1.5 - 2 miles

-0.0186
(0.0156)

-0.0670
(0.0541)

-0.0192**
(0.0090)

-0.0292
(0.1540)

93,041
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
Y
Y
N
Y

B. Condensed 0-2 miles
0 - 2 miles

Observations
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Sample includes property sales from April 2009 through September, 2011. The
independent variable denotes either the number of charters within the home's zoned
school district in operation or the share of enrollment in operating charters as of the sale
date in various distance rings from the property. Housing chracteristics include number of
bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, and quality. School chracteristics include API
levels overall, lags and second lags of overall API scores, % of students of each race, %
free lunch, % gifted, % English language learners, % disabled, and parent education levels
for elementary school zoned to the property in 2002. All regressions include month-byyear fixed-effects. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table 8: Impacts of Charters on Exogenous Observables
LA County
Number of charters

Square footage

# of Beds

# of Baths

Quality

0 - 0.5 miles

3.9
(14.0)

0.0147
(0.0247)

0.0186
(0.0192)

0.0124
(0.0172)

0.5 - 1 mile

-6.6
(7.4)

-0.0112
(0.0147)

-0.0183
(0.0112)

-0.0096
(0.0098)

1 - 1.5 miles

5.0
(5.0)

0.0116
(0.0098)

0.0045
(0.0074)

-0.0086
(0.0066)

1.5 - 2 miles

-2.4
(4.8)

-0.0015
(0.0097)

0.0001
(0.007)

-0.0120*
(0.0065)

Observations

158,211

158,211

158,211

158,211

# of Beds

# of Baths

Quality

Charter seats as percentage of Square footage
enrollment
0 - 0.5 miles

-22.7
(37.3)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.023
(0.040)

0.025
(0.046)

0.5 - 1 mile

25.6
(40.6)

0.011
(0.062)

0.023
(0.050)

-0.037
(0.05)

1 - 1.5 miles

28.5
(39.5)

0.011
(0.057)

-0.009
(0.051)

-0.021
(0.050)

1.5 - 2 miles

-23.4
(43.2)

-0.044
(0.052)

-0.046
(0.052)

0.000
(0.049)

158,211

158,211

158,211

158,211

0.67
N
Y

0.55
N
Y

0.59
N
Y

0.80
N
Y

Observations
R-squared
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample. Robust standard errors clustered by
elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 9: Effect of Lags and Leads of Charter Penetration
LA County

36 months prior to sale
24 months prior to sale
12 months prior to sale
Time of sale
12 months after sale
24 months after sale
36 months after sale
Observations
R-squared

Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage of
enrollment

-0.0005
(0.0100)
-0.0039
(0.0093)
-0.0055
(0.0089)
-0.0010
(0.0088)
0.0038
(0.0054)
-0.0082
(0.0080)
0.0190*
(0.0102)

-0.001
(0.027)
-0.017
(0.031)
-0.008
(0.030)
0.006
(0.031)
0.033**
(0.015)
-0.019
(0.025)
0.013
(0.037)

158,211
0.88

158,211
0.88

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample and controls. Robust standard errors
clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 10: Relationship Between Charter Penetration and the Number of Annual House
Sales in Census Block
Quantity of House Sales within Census Block
Counting Three Most Recent House
Counting Most Recent House Sale
Sales
Charter seats as
Charter seats as
Number of
percentage of
Number of
percentage of
Charters
enrollment
Charters
enrollment
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles

Observations
Census Block Fixed-Effects

0.0828
(0.168)
0.119
(0.110)
0.139*
(0.078)
0.097*
(0.055)

0.354
(0.414)
0.346
(0.533)
0.581
(0.647)
-0.010
(0.607)

0.0901
(0.174)
0.130
(0.110)
0.171**
(0.079)
0.121**
(0.055)

0.346
(0.417)
0.391
(0.537)
0.801
(0.721)
0.120
(0.659)

87,683
Y

87,683
Y

87,683
Y

87,683
Y

Sample includes property sales from September 2008 through September, 2011. The independent variable denotes
either the number of charters in operation or the share of enrollment in operating charters as of the sale date in
various distance rings from the property. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Online Appendix:
Not for Publication

Table A1: Relationship Between Charters in a School Zone and Elementary School
Characteristics
Count of Open Charters within
Local School Zone
Enrollment
API Score
Percent Black
Percent Native American
Percent Asian
Percent Filipino
Percent Hispanic
Percent Pacific Islander
Percent Gifted
Percent Free or Reduced Lunch
Percent ELL
Percent Disabled
Percent HS Graduate
Percent Bachelors Degree
Percent Graduate School

Observations
R-squared
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Count of Open Charters within
Local School Zone

-0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0010
(0.0007)
-0.0030
(0.0036)
0.0363
(0.0346)
-0.0138***
(0.0025)
-0.0204**
(0.0095)
-0.0092***
(0.0027)
-0.0340*
(0.0201)
0.0479***
(0.0082)
-0.0006
(0.0020)
0.0068***
(0.0024)
0.0060*
(0.0035)
-0.0043
(0.0027)
-0.0015
(0.0049)
-0.0034
(0.0049)

-0.0001
(0.0003)
0.0006
(0.0006)
0.0118**
(0.0053)
-0.0004
(0.0037)
0.0041
(0.0030)
-0.0093
(0.0069)
0.0019
(0.0027)
-0.0167
(0.0137)
0.0031
(0.0025)
0.0034*
(0.0018)
-0.0007
(0.0016)
0.0052**
(0.0022)
0.0001
(0.0007)
0.0022*
(0.0012)
-0.0040
(0.0034)

5,858
0.126
N
N

5,858
0.974
Y
N

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary
school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table A2: Heterogeneity by Neighborhood Income and Public School API using Charters in Home
School District (Exculding LAUSD)
Median Household Income in Census
Tract

0 - 0.5 miles x Tercile 1
0 - 0.5 miles x Tercile 2
0 - 0.5 miles x Tercile 3
0.5 - 1 mile x Tercile 1
0.5 - 1 mile x Tercile 2
0.5 - 1 mile x Tercile 3
1 - 1.5 miles x Tercile 1
1 - 1.5 miles x Tercile 2
1 - 1.5 miles x Tercile 3
1.5 - 2 miles x Tercile 1
1.5 - 2 miles x Tercile 2
1.5 - 2 miles x Tercile 3
Observations
R-squared
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

API Score of Zoned Elementary
School

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

-0.0216
(0.0297)
0.00447
(0.0366)
-0.00412
(0.0183)
-0.0221*
(0.0133)
-5.21e-05
(0.0186)
0.0119
(0.0126)
0.00495
(0.0125)
-0.0154
(0.0109)
-0.00496
(0.0108)
-0.00514
(0.00843)
-0.000721
(0.00998)
0.00205
(0.00771)

0.0788
(0.107)
-0.0713
(0.0802)
-0.0401
(0.0304)
0.0349
(0.0590)
0.0222
(0.0526)
-0.0146
(0.0379)
0.0608
(0.0941)
-0.0164
(0.0554)
0.0127
(0.0572)
0.0439
(0.0537)
0.0520
(0.0542)
0.00948
(0.0301)

-0.00899
(0.0260)
-0.0266
(0.0204)
0.0432*
(0.0236)
-0.0101
(0.0131)
-0.00150
(0.00952)
-0.00128
(0.0131)
-0.00461
(0.00937)
0.00475
(0.00823)
-0.0162
(0.00985)
-0.00279
(0.00720)
-0.00480
(0.00620)
0.00592
(0.00814)

-0.00894
(0.0608)
-0.0440
(0.0378)
0.0222
(0.0647)
0.0294
(0.0352)
0.00373
(0.0536)
-0.0299
(0.0458)
0.00164
(0.0440)
0.0273
(0.0631)
0.0267
(0.0572)
0.0284
(0.0356)
-0.00102
(0.0382)
0.0817**
(0.0362)

93,041
0.881
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
0.880
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
0.880
Y
Y
N
Y

93,041
0.880
Y
Y
N
Y

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample. API scores are from the year of sale for the school
that was zoned to the property in 2002. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A3: Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices by Charter Grade Levels
LA County

Elementary - high school
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles
Middle school
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles
High school
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles
Elementary school
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles
Observations
R-squared
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage of
enrollment

0.00454
(0.0190)
0.00448
(0.0109)
-0.00673
(0.0102)
-0.00706
(0.00984)

0.0161
(0.0229)
0.0282**
(0.0134)
0.0126
(0.0122)
-0.00861
(0.0126)

-0.00538
(0.0248)
0.0204*
(0.0118)
0.0161
(0.0101)
0.0110
(0.00744)

0.00362
(0.0264)
-0.00197
(0.0155)
0.0104
(0.0158)
-0.00336
(0.0189)

0.00184
(0.0115)
0.00515
(0.00735)
-0.00250
(0.00541)
-0.00362
(0.00489)

-0.00533
(0.0194)
-0.000962
(0.0128)
0.0130
(0.0140)
0.00529
(0.0121)

-0.0173
(0.0132)
-0.0159*
(0.00861)
0.00152
(0.00636)
-0.00457
(0.00559)

-0.0162
(0.0226)
-0.0418*
(0.0251)
-0.00958
(0.0356)
0.00664
(0.0305)

158,211
0.881
Y
Y
Y

158,211
0.881
Y
Y
Y

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample and controls. Robust standard errors clustered
by elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A4: Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices - Heterogeneity by Year
LA County

0 - 0.5 miles x 2008
0 - 0.5 miles x 2009
0 - 0.5 miles x 2010
0 - 0.5 miles x 2011
0.5 - 1 mile x 2008
0.5 - 1 mile x 2009
0.5 - 1 mile x 2010
0.5 - 1 mile x 2011
1 - 1.5 miles x 2008
1 - 1.5 miles x 2009
1 - 1.5 miles x 2010
1 - 1.5 miles x 2011
1.5 - 2 miles x 2008
1.5 - 2 miles x 2009
1.5 - 2 miles x 2010
1.5 - 2 miles x 2011
Observations
R-squared
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage of
enrollment

-0.00164
(0.0144)
-0.00305
(0.00957)
-0.000975
(0.00855)
-0.0106
(0.00955)
0.0102
(0.00809)
-0.00327
(0.00581)
0.00127
(0.00489)
0.00244
(0.00563)
0.0141***
(0.00472)
0.00109
(0.00372)
0.00116
(0.00318)
0.00346
(0.00350)
0.00166
(0.00474)
-0.00204
(0.00354)
-0.000481
(0.00322)
-0.000747
(0.00305)

-0.00106
(0.0273)
0.00532
(0.0220)
0.0132
(0.0200)
-0.0258
(0.0235)
0.00924
(0.0312)
-0.0304
(0.0213)
-0.0116
(0.0228)
-0.00873
(0.0238)
0.0135
(0.0324)
-0.0318
(0.0272)
-0.00301
(0.0307)
-0.0109
(0.0313)
0.0461
(0.0394)
-0.0137
(0.0294)
-0.0141
(0.0312)
0.000509
(0.0299)

158,211
0.881
Y
Y
Y

158,211
0.881
Y
Y
Y

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample. Robust standard errors clustered by
elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A5: Heterogeneity by Neighborhood Income, Public School API, and Percent Minority
LA County
Median Household Income in Census
Tract

0 - 0.5 miles x Quartile 1
0 - 0.5 miles x Quartile 2
0 - 0.5 miles x Quartile 3
0 - 0.5 miles x Quartile 4
0.5 - 1 mile x Quartile 1
0.5 - 1 mile x Quartile 2
0.5 - 1 mile x Quartile 3
0.5 - 1 mile x Quartile 4
1 - 1.5 miles x Quartile 1
1 - 1.5 miles x Quartile 2
1 - 1.5 miles x Quartile 3
1 - 1.5 miles x Quartile 4
1.5 - 2 miles x Quartile 1
1.5 - 2 miles x Quartile 2
1.5 - 2 miles x Quartile 3
1.5 - 2 miles x Quartile 4
Observations
R-squared
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

(i)

(ii)

0.011
(0.014)
-0.0530***
(0.017)
0.024
(0.018)
-0.026
(0.032)
-0.002
(0.008)
0.000
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.010)
0.007
(0.012)
0.005
(0.005)
0.0163**
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.015
(0.011)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.007)
0.005
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)
158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

API Score of Zoned Elementary
School

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

(iii)

(iv)

0.079
(0.053)
-0.068
(0.056)
0.004
(0.035)
-0.052
(0.042)
0.039
(0.049)
0.029
(0.048)
-0.069
(0.071)
-0.007
(0.032)
0.021
(0.073)
0.097
(0.083)
-0.049
(0.046)
-0.012
(0.038)
-0.055
(0.097)
0.006
(0.084)
0.035
(0.052)
-0.026
(0.042)

0.001
(0.012)
-0.006
(0.012)
-0.015
(0.017)
0.017
(0.026)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.008
(0.007)
0.000
(0.011)
0.005
(0.004)
0.00790*
(0.005)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.007)

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

Percent Minority in Elementary School

Percent Minority in Census Tract

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

Number of charters

Charter seats as
percentage of
enrollment

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

-0.007
(0.032)
0.003
(0.028)
-0.012
(0.039)
0.000
(0.042)
-0.006
(0.034)
-0.027
(0.036)
0.028
(0.044)
-0.017
(0.033)
-0.022
(0.037)
0.032
(0.044)
0.006
(0.035)
-0.016
(0.038)
0.021
(0.039)
-0.016
(0.044)
0.002
(0.040)
-0.030
(0.055)

-0.026
(0.040)
-0.001
(0.019)
-0.001
(0.012)
-0.002
(0.011)
0.003
(0.014)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.000
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.010)
-0.005
(0.007)
0.008
(0.006)
0.00694*
(0.004)
0.002
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.003)

-0.047
(0.042)
0.027
(0.039)
0.022
(0.031)
-0.005
(0.032)
0.001
(0.037)
-0.027
(0.027)
-0.033
(0.041)
0.034
(0.048)
-0.008
(0.031)
-0.022
(0.045)
-0.001
(0.050)
0.043
(0.056)
-0.013
(0.043)
-0.023
(0.039)
0.002
(0.056)
-0.007
(0.070)

-0.032
(0.050)
-0.020
(0.020)
-0.007
(0.016)
0.004
(0.012)
0.013
(0.024)
-0.009
(0.011)
-0.016
(0.011)
0.002
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.014)
0.003
(0.010)
0.007
(0.010)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.013)
0.003
(0.008)
-0.012
(0.008)
0.000
(0.003)

-0.065
(0.051)
-0.055
(0.036)
0.0812*
(0.049)
0.019
(0.034)
-0.020
(0.041)
0.019
(0.043)
0.026
(0.052)
-0.027
(0.059)
-0.052
(0.039)
0.034
(0.065)
0.074
(0.047)
0.008
(0.066)
-0.034
(0.057)
-0.009
(0.049)
0.013
(0.046)
0.062
(0.070)

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
0.85
Y
Y
N
Y

Notes: See Table 4 for a description of baseline sample. API scores are from the year of sale for the school that
was zoned to the property in 2002. Robust standard errors clustered by elementary school zone in 2002 in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A6: Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices - Specification Checks

0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles

Use sale
levels

Limit to 0-2
Bedrooms

Limit to 3+
Bedrooms

Include
Properties with
> 8 Bedrooms

Drop
Properties w/
> 5000 sf

Drop MultiUnit

Summer
Only

Add 2-5
mile ring

Include School
FE

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

-2181
(2422)
565
(1383)
-272
(921.8)
-5
(875.6)

-0.0043
(0.0147)
0.0008
(0.0075)
0.0065
(0.0056)
0.0063
(0.0059)

-0.0019
(0.0109)
0.0067
(0.0061)
-0.0026
(0.004)
-0.0050
(0.0036)

-0.0050
(0.0087)
0.0001
(0.0049)
0.0040
(0.0034)
-0.0021
(0.0032)

0.0133
(0.0262)
0.0074
(0.0133)
0.0021
(0.01020)
-0.0048
(0.0092)

-0.0068
(0.0084)
-0.0004
(0.0049)
0.0011
(0.0032)
-0.0018
(0.0029)
0.0009
(0.0008)

-0.0048
(0.0083)
0.0016
(0.0048)
0.0029
(0.0031)
-0.0007
(0.0028)

-0.002
(0.019)
-0.014
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.024)
-0.003
(0.026)
0.096
(0.082)
158,211
0.88

-0.002
(0.02)
-0.012
(0.020)
-0.013
(0.024)
-0.006
(0.026)

A. Number of charters
-0.0061
-0.0029
(0.0083)
(0.0087)
0.0009
-0.0016
(0.0048)
(0.0048)
0.0018
0.0026
(0.0031)
(0.0034)
-0.0013
0.0011
(0.0028)
(0.003)

2 - 5 miles
B. Charter seats as percentage of enrollment
0 - 0.5 miles
0.5 - 1 mile
1 - 1.5 miles
1.5 - 2 miles

-3049
(7929)
-2389
(9215)
-4876
(9456)
3330
(9264)

0.007
(0.037)
0.022
(0.048)
0.039
(0.049)
0.028
(0.066)

0.006
(0.025)
-0.003
(0.022)
-0.026
(0.029)
0.001
(0.027)

0.001
(0.023)
-0.009
(0.021)
-0.004
(0.025)
-0.013
(0.03)

-0.002
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.020)
-0.019
(0.022)
-0.009
(0.026)

-0.005
(0.021)
-0.019
(0.020)
-0.010
(0.024)
0.002
(0.026)

0.053
(0.06)
0.047
(0.057)
0.034
(0.058)
-0.001
(0.040)

158,211
0.90

49,432
0.89

108,779
0.91

159,906
0.87

157,783
0.88

151,797
0.89

42,962
0.93

2 - 5 miles
Observations
R-squared

158,211
0.88

Note: The data cover sales from September 2008 through September 2011. All regressions control for the following: month by year fixed effects; census block fixed
effects; housing characteristic controls - number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, and quality; school characteristics - API levels overall, lags and second
lags of overall API scores, % of students of each race, % free lunch, % gifted, % English language learners, % disabled, and parent education levels. Standard errors
clustered at the school level are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table A7 - Effect of Charters on Log Sale Prices for Los Angeles County - All Controls Shown

LA County
Number of charters

Charter seats as percentage of enrollment

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

-0.00725
(0.0131)

-0.0353***
(0.00800)

-0.00543
(0.00827)

0.0741*
(0.0438)

0.00648
(0.0249)

-0.00134
(0.0194)

0.5 - 1 mile

0.00858
(0.00748)

-0.0253***
(0.00609)

0.000950
(0.00476)

0.117**
(0.0564)

-0.0166
(0.0270)

-0.0128
(0.0195)

1 - 1.5 miles

0.0252***
(0.00578)

-0.0149***
(0.00387)

0.00223
(0.00313)

0.140**
(0.0616)

-0.0442*
(0.0268)

-0.0123
(0.0239)

1.5 - 2 miles

0.0239***
(0.00494)

-0.00460
(0.00309)

-0.00110
(0.00279)

0.120
(0.0770)

-0.0217
(0.0340)

-0.00470
(0.0255)

-0.0406***
(0.00643)

-0.0369***
(0.00381)

0.00750*
(0.00418)

-0.0413***
(0.00666)

-0.0371***
(0.00382)

Number of Bedrooms

0.00632
(0.00664)

0.0513***
(0.00327)

0.0356***
(0.00289)

0.00187
(0.00743)

0.0512***
(0.00327)

Square Feet of House

0.000358***
(1.29e-05)

A. Distance gradient
0 - 0.5 miles

Housing Characteristics
Number of Bathrooms

Quality of Housing Materials

0.00715
(0.00791)

0.000332*** 0.000220***
(7.88e-06)
(7.57e-06)

0.000369***
(1.34e-05)

Charter Penetration Variables Excluded
(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

0.00748*
(0.00418)

-0.0416***
(0.00670)

-0.0370***
(0.00383)

0.00748*
(0.00418)

0.0356***
(0.00289)

0.000854
(0.00752)

0.0511***
(0.00327)

0.0356***
(0.00289)

0.000333*** 0.000220***
(7.90e-06)
(7.58e-06)

0.000370***
(1.36e-05)

0.000333*** 0.000220***
(7.89e-06)
(7.58e-06)

0.00569
(0.00456)

0.0105***
(0.00380)

-0.00123
(0.00840)

0.00619
(0.00461)

0.0105***
(0.00380)

-0.00187
(0.00853)

0.00617
(0.00462)

0.0105***
(0.00380)

2.36e-05
(6.59e-05)

-5.56e-05
(4.76e-05)

-0.000559***
(9.48e-05)

2.73e-05
(7.24e-05)

-5.57e-05
(4.72e-05)

-0.000560***
(9.75e-05)

2.56e-05
(7.31e-05)

-5.57e-05
(4.71e-05)

0.00197***
(0.000325)

0.000575***
(0.000179)

0.000143
(0.000437)

0.00190***
(0.000327)

0.000590***
(0.000180)

0.000143
(0.000437)

0.00192***
(0.000326)

0.000588***
(0.000180)

0.000144
(0.000436)

0.00114**
(0.000452)

-0.000102
(9.78e-05)

-0.000197**
(0.000100)

0.00121***
(0.000460)

-0.000100
(9.96e-05)

-0.000196*
(0.000100)

0.00121***
(0.000452)

-9.99e-05
(9.99e-05)

-0.000196*
(0.000100)

Lag of API

3.77e-05
(0.000388)

0.000186**
(9.41e-05)

6.78e-05
(9.27e-05)

-2.88e-05
(0.000419)

0.000200**
(9.65e-05)

6.87e-05
(9.26e-05)

-6.48e-05
(0.000417)

0.000203**
(9.67e-05)

6.93e-05
(9.27e-05)

Double Lag of API

0.00173***
(0.000477)

8.95e-05
(9.40e-05)

0.000153
(9.54e-05)

0.00163***
(0.000489)

8.56e-05
(9.21e-05)

0.000155
(9.58e-05)

0.00163***
(0.000495)

8.31e-05
(9.17e-05)

0.000153
(9.56e-05)

Percent Black

0.000800
(0.00164)

-0.00340*
(0.00199)

-0.00152
(0.000934)

0.00173
(0.00165)

-0.00280
(0.00189)

-0.00155*
(0.000934)

0.00261
(0.00161)

-0.00269
(0.00190)

-0.00152
(0.000935)

Percent American Indian

-0.0493**
(0.0220)

0.000368
(0.00425)

-0.00125
(0.00393)

-0.0563**
(0.0224)

-0.00168
(0.00445)

-0.00132
(0.00393)

-0.0549**
(0.0226)

-0.00157
(0.00448)

-0.00128
(0.00393)

Percent Asian

0.00203**
(0.000892)

0.00151
(0.00199)

0.000215
(0.000884)

0.00241***
(0.000883)

0.00136
(0.00223)

0.000198
(0.000885)

0.00228**
(0.000891)

0.00141
(0.00225)

0.000207
(0.000886)

Percent Filipino

-0.00199
(0.00291)

0.00135
(0.00182)

0.00178
(0.00142)

-0.00234
(0.00291)

0.00116
(0.00180)

0.00176
(0.00142)

-0.00266
(0.00295)

0.00122
(0.00179)

0.00178
(0.00143)

Percent Hispanic

0.00663***
(0.00131)

-0.00273**
(0.00139)

-0.00121
(0.000851)

0.00648***
(0.00132)

-0.00264**
(0.00133)

-0.00122
(0.000847)

0.00633***
(0.00133)

-0.00255*
(0.00133)

-0.00120
(0.000849)

Percent Pacific Islander

0.0311**
(0.0138)

0.000137
(0.00355)

-0.000251
(0.00374)

0.0267**
(0.0136)

-0.000726
(0.00360)

-0.000257
(0.00374)

0.0221*
(0.0131)

-0.000591
(0.00361)

-0.000242
(0.00374)

Percent Gifted

0.00203
(0.00156)

0.000416
(0.000593)

4.41e-05
(0.000615)

0.00222
(0.00157)

0.000311
(0.000567)

3.74e-05
(0.000615)

0.00327**
(0.00155)

0.000291
(0.000563)

4.29e-05
(0.000615)

Percent Free/Reduced Lunch

0.000946
(0.00117)

-0.000273
(0.000373)

-0.000116
(0.000308)

0.00142
(0.00117)

-0.000372
(0.000395)

-0.000115
(0.000308)

0.00190*
(0.00115)

-0.000362
(0.000395)

-0.000114
(0.000307)

0.00334***
(0.00109)

0.000391
(0.000742)

-0.000159
(0.000594)

0.00406***
(0.00115)

0.000545
(0.000785)

-0.000164
(0.000589)

0.00428***
(0.00119)

0.000549
(0.000790)

-0.000163
(0.000590)

0.00993***
(0.00267)

-0.00195*
(0.00112)

-0.00143*
(0.000797)

0.00965***
(0.00274)

-0.00221*
(0.00119)

-0.00141*
(0.000799)

0.0105***
(0.00279)

-0.00226*
(0.00120)

-0.00143*
(0.000798)

0.00795***
(0.00149)

0.000774
(0.000606)

-7.94e-05
(0.000622)

0.00649***
(0.00153)

0.000892
(0.000633)

-8.54e-05
(0.000621)

0.00601***
(0.00155)

0.000919
(0.000638)

-7.97e-05
(0.000622)

0.0193***
(0.00237)

0.000101
(0.000729)

-0.000152
(0.000673)

0.0190***
(0.00243)

0.000264
(0.000786)

-0.000161
(0.000673)

0.0187***
(0.00246)

0.000309
(0.000795)

-0.000153
(0.000672)

0.0143***
(0.00221)

-0.000143
(0.000988)

-0.000235
(0.000723)

0.0143***
(0.00228)

-0.000170
(0.000998)

-0.000222
(0.000721)

0.0149***
(0.00231)

-0.000190
(0.00101)

-0.000230
(0.000722)

158,211
Y
Y
N
N

158,211
Y
Y
Y
N

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
Y
Y
N
N

158,211
Y
Y
Y
N

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

158,211
Y
Y
N
N

158,211
Y
Y
Y
N

158,211
Y
Y
N
Y

Local School
Characteristics
Number of Students Enrolled
in Local School
-0.000576***
(9.23e-05)
Number of Students enrolled
in Private School

Academic Performance Index
(API) Growth

Percent English Language
Learners

Percent Disabled

Percent High School
Graduates

Percent College Graduates

Percent Graduate School
Graduates

Observations
Housing Characteristics
School Characteristics
School Fixed-Effects
Census Block Fixed-Effects

Sample includes property sales from April 2009 through September, 2011. The independent variable denotes either the number of charters in operation or the share of enrollment
in operating charters as of the sale date in various distance rings from the property. Housing chracteristics include number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, and quality.
School chracteristics include API levels overall, lags and second lags of overall API scores, % of students of each race, % free lunch, % gifted, % English language learners, %
disabled, and parent education levels for elementary school zoned to the property in 2002. All regressions include month-by-year fixed-effects. Robust standard errors clustered by
elementary school zone in 2002 in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

