                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TIPS AND TELLS FROM MANAGERS:
HOW ANALYSTS AND THE MARKET READ BETWEEN THE LINES OF CONFERENCE CALLS

                                           Marina Druz
                                       Alexander F. Wagner
                                       Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                        Working Paper 20991
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20991


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




  We thank the Swiss Finance Institute and the NCCR FINRISK and the UZH Research Priority Program
  Finance and Financial Markets for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
  do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2015 by Marina Druz, Alexander F. Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short
  sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
  that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tips and Tells from Managers: How Analysts and the Market Read Between the Lines of
Conference Calls
Marina Druz, Alexander F. Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 20991
February 2015
JEL No. D82,G14,G24

                                              ABSTRACT

Stock prices react significantly to the tone (negativity of words) managers use on earnings conference
calls. This reaction reflects reasonably rational use of information. “Tone surprise” – the residual when
negativity in managerial tone is regressed on the firm’s recent economic performance and CEO fixed
effects – predicts future earnings and analyst uncertainty. Prices move more, as hypothesized, in firms
where tone surprise predicts more strongly. Experienced analysts respond appropriately in revising
their forecasts; inexperienced analysts overreact (underreact) to tone surprises in presentations (answers).
Post-call price drift, like post-earnings announcement drift, suggests less-than-full-use of information
embedded in managerial tone.


Marina Druz                                                   Richard J. Zeckhauser
Swiss Finance Institute                                       John F. Kennedy School of Government
Università della Svizzera italiana                            Harvard University
marinadruz@gmail.com                                          79 John F. Kennedy Street
                                                              Cambridge, MA 02138
Alexander F. Wagner                                           and NBER
University of Zurich - Swiss Finance Institute                richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
Department of Banking and Finance
Plattenstrasse 14
CH-8032 Zurich
Switzerland
and CEPR
alex.wagner@post.harvard.edu
1    Introduction

How effectively can analysts and investors read “between the lines” of what managers say in

earnings conference calls? This paper shows that these participants infer valuable information

about future earnings and uncertainties, and react in a manner that moves the market in the

appropriate direction. The analysis documents, in a more complete and direct manner than have

prior studies, the link between managerial tone (primarily the degree of negativity in word

choice), and company fundamentals, analyst responses, and stock price reactions.

      It is well known and hardly surprising that market participants react strongly to news on

concrete value-relevant information, such as earnings, that is contained in earnings press releases,

as well as in documents such as 10-K filings and corporate annual reports.                     Interestingly,

however, other aspects of the communication also matter. The market reacts to tone in 10-Ks

(Loughran and McDonald (2011)), and tone in earnings press releases is also informative

(Demers and Vega (2010) and Davis, Piger, and Sedor (2012)). Some studies show as well that

the short-term stock market reaction reflects how – that is, using which linguistic tone and with

which vocal cues – managers speak during the earnings conference call (Mayew and

Venkatachalam 2012; Price, Doran, Peterson and Bliss 2012).1

      Why does the market react to the tone of corporate communications? Our overarching

hypothesis is the:

RATIONAL REACTIONS HYPOTHESIS: Market participants rationally distill value-relevant

information from tone over and above observables such as earnings.

To investigate this hypothesis, we structure our analysis around the basic idea that the value of a

company is the sum of the expected future cash flows, discounted at rate r. If tone drives rational

1
  Besides tone a number of papers have considered the role of readability of corporate communications (Li 2008;
Loughran and McDonald 2013). Media news content about companies also has provided an important focus of the
literature (Ober, Zhao, Davis and Alexander 1999; Tetlock 2007; Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and Macskassy 2008;
Engelberg 2009). See Li (2011) and Loughran and McDonald (2014) for surveys of textual-analysis studies.

                                                                                                             1
market reactions, it must predict expected future cash flows and/or influence uncertainty (which

in turn would affect the discount rate).2

      We study earnings conference calls for S&P 500 companies from 2004 to 2012. We first

document a variety of factors that lead managers to be negative:                      poor recent economic

performance by the company or the economy, and recent uncertainty. In addition, managers

usually respond to analysts’ negativity in questions with negativity in answers.

      Controlling for both the determinants of negativity and CEO fixed effects, we compute

residual, “excessive” negativity, that is, the tone surprise. We posit that the managers’ choose

words based on their total information. This includes much information that has already been

disclosed or soon will be, but includes as well internal and non-quantifiable information that

cannot be revealed in concrete fashion, for example, the managers’ expectations for the future.

      Managers might wish to reveal or conceal information of this latter type.                        Whether

purposeful or inadvertent, tone surprise captures the negative elements in managers’ speech

beyond what is justified by previous recorded performance. Our prime tests are whether tone

surprise contains value-relevant information about the future, and whether the stock market

recognizes this.

      Past work suggests that the stock market has the potential to react rationally to managerial

tone, and not merely concrete information. Positivity in earnings press releases predicts higher

future returns on assets (Davis, Piger and Sedor 2012). Moreover, the harder future returns are to

assess, as in growth firms, the stronger is this effect (Demers and Vega 2010). More favorable

disclosures in 10-K and 10-Q filings are associated with less dispersion in analysts’ estimates and

lower stock volatility (Kothari, Li, and Short (2009) and Loughran and McDonald (2011)),


2
 Earlier studies had shown that stock market participants react to conference calls (Frankel, Johnson and Skinner
1999) as well as even during calls (Matsumoto, Pronk and Roelofsen 2011) and had argued that this provides
evidence that conference calls provide investors with information.

                                                                                                               2
implying less uncertainty about the firm’s future. However, past work also contains surprising

and negative findings. The frequency of negative words in 10-K filings is positively correlated

with positive future earnings surprises (Loughran and McDonald 2011). No robust association

between unexpected future earnings and current linguistic tone (or vocal cues) emerged in a

smaller sample of conference calls (Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012)).

      First, we examine whether more positive tone predicts better future performance, favorable

analyst reactions, and/or lower uncertainty (Hypothesis 1). Second, we recognize that even if

Hypothesis 1 is confirmed, the market’s reaction to tone may still deviate from rationality. This

leads to three additional tests that focus on rationality. First, we expect that for firms for whom

the stock market reacts more strongly to unusual managerial tone, tone will also more strongly

predict the determinants of company value, future earnings and uncertainty (Hypothesis 2A).

Second, to parse between rational and bubble reactions to managerial tone, we test whether stock

price levels persist over the quarter following the conference call (Hypothesis 2B). Third, we

determine whether experienced analysts distill the information from managerial tone more

accurately – i.e. produce superior forecasts -- than their less experienced peers (Hypothesis 2C).

      We find support for Hypothesis 1 and for each of Hypotheses 2A, 2B and 2C. First, tone

surprises significantly predict future earnings.      Interestingly, the effects are asymmetric:

Excessive negativity more strongly predicts lower future unexpected earnings than excessive

positivity predicts higher future unexpected earnings. These results hold controlling for other

speech characteristics, such as the use of uncertain words. Importantly, sell-side analysts revise

their forecasts downwards (upwards) for the next quarter if the manager adopts an excessively

negative (positive) tone, though they adjust more strongly to excessive positivity. We proxy

uncertainty by the standard deviation of analysts’ post-call forecasts for earnings in the next

quarter. Negative tone increases both that dispersion and the number of forecast revisions during


                                                                                                     3
the following quarter. Bid-ask spreads further indicate uncertainty; they increase from the day

before a conference call with excessive negativity to three days after. In sum, these results

support Hypothesis 1.

      We also obtain substantial evidence supporting the more targeted Hypotheses 2A, 2B, and

2C.

      A first strand of our analysis examines whether managerial tone proves more important

when objective information is less informative. Large earnings surprises suggest that a firm is

harder to read. As posited by Hypothesis 2A, tone surprises in presentations more strongly

predict future earnings for firms with a large (positive or negative) earnings surprise. Similarly,

in these “cloudy” firms excessive negativity in managers’ presentations and answers more

strongly magnifies uncertainty (as indicated by higher variability of analysts’ forecasts). Finally,

as expected, the stock market reacts more to tone surprises in such firms. By tying together the

results on earnings, uncertainty, and stock price reactions, these findings provide further evidence

of a predominantly rational basis for stock market reactions to tone.

      Second, consistent with Hypothesis 2B, stock prices tend to persist after their initial stock

price reaction, as would be required for a rational response.

      Third, experienced analysts do much better than novice analysts in reacting appropriately to

tone surprises in both presentations and managers’ answers. This confirms Hypothesis 2C.

      The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section 3

examines how quarterly performance influences a manager’s negativity. Section 4 investigates

whether a manager’s word choice provides insight into future earnings, and how analysts

incorporate this information. Section 5 studies (analyst) uncertainty. Section 6 examines the

immediate stock price reaction to managerial tone, and looks at the long-run stock returns of

portfolios of firms sorted on managerial tone.       Section 7 documents that the stock market


                                                                                                  4
responds more strongly to managerial tone precisely where we would expect stronger responses.

Section 8 provides additional results and conducts the robustness analysis. Section 9 concludes.



2      Data and methods

2.1     Tips and tells

Earnings conference calls provide an ideal laboratory for examining how managers transmit

information to investors, both purposefully and inadvertently.                   Conference calls have two

components: first prepared remarks by management, then a more spontaneous section when

managers respond to questions from analysts.3

       First principles do not tell us whether prepared or impromptu remarks should reveal more.

If managers wish to convey a message, they can be more confident to convey the intended

message in an appropriate manner in their prepared remarks. Such intended messages we label a

tip.

       However, managers may not want to reveal some information, but convey it nevertheless.

Such “revelations” we label a tell, the equivalent of a poker tell, a clue from behavior that reveals

something about the player’s assessment of his situation, i.e., poker hand or business prospects.

By analogy, a witness in a trial might inadvertently reveal information unintentionally when cross

examined, and thus put out a tell.

       There is a second more subtle class of tips, indirect tips. The manager may wish to convey

information, but not to do so in what looks like a purposeful manner, thus not in prepared


3
  Conference calls have allowed other researchers to study how the tone shifts with the time of day (Chen, Demers
and Lev 2012), how companies strategically call on certain analysts (Mayew 2008; Cohen, Lou and Malloy 2013),
the role of the communication pattern within the management team (Li, Minnis, Nagar and Rajan 2014), the extent to
which asking questions allows analysts to obtain superior information (Mayew, Sharp and Venkatachalam 2013),
whether the use of certain words suggests deception as later revealed by fraud (Larcker and Zakolyukina 2012), what
the consequences of communication are for short-selling (Blau, DeLisle and Price 2012), or whether vocal
dissonance markers help predict the likelihood of accounting restatements (Hobson, Mayew and Venkatachalam
2012).

                                                                                                                 5
remarks. To preserve seemliness or plausible deniability on intent, he might do so in response to

a question. Given that answers to likely questions are prepared by managers, managers can

prepare to provide indirect tips. Our focus is on what managers say. However, questions from

knowledgeable analysts may also be informative.


2.2      Sample

S&P 500 companies provide the basis for our analyses. Our sample includes earnings conference

calls for the period from 2004 through the end of 2012. Most panel regressions include around

450 companies, though the panel is unbalanced, as transcripts or other data for some quarters are

missing for some companies.



2.3      Textual analysis

We rely on written transcripts of conference calls. This source has its limitations, but it is a tool

available to all market participants.



2.3.1 Tone of speech

Our principal independent variable is managerial tone. To capture tone, we use the word lists

compiled by Loughran and McDonald (2011). They contain 2,329 negative, 354 positive, and

297 uncertain words.4 The robustness section tests whether a much simpler approach using a

much shorter, self-compiled word list would yield similar results.

         We correct for negation, by excluding a positive word from the count when a negation

word (no, not, none, neither, never, nobody, *n’t) occurs among the three words preceding the

positive word (except when there is a comma or a period in that range).

         Negativity provides our measure of the tone managers or analysts of company j in the

4
    We use the August 2013 version from http://www3.nd.edu/~mcdonald/Word_Lists.html.

                                                                                                    6
conference call at time t. It is defined as

                                                                                       .                   (1)

We winsorize negativity at the 1 and 99 percent levels.

      As further alternative independent variables, we also use the ratio of negative

words/positive words and the frequencies of negative and positive words separately.

      We compute our negativity indicators separately for prepared presentations, for analysts’

questions, and for managers’ answers, as these parts are fundamentally different. Presentations

are prepared and reviewed in advance, whereas answers require some degree of improvisation.



2.3.2 Other characteristics of managerial speech

Four additional patterns of speech we examine may indicate troubling times ahead.5 First, there is

inconsistency in tone, the absolute difference in negativity between presentations (prepared

speech) and answers (improvised speech). Such differences may also indicate that the manager is

particularly forthcoming with information in the answers part. Second, we code the use of

specific “uncertain," “strong modal,” and “weak modal” words or constructions, using the

Loughran and McDonald (2011) classification. Modal words express levels of confidence.

Examples of strong modal words include the words always, definitely, never, and will. Examples

of weak modal words include the words appears, could, depending, and possibly. Third, as a

measure of complexity, we calculate the number of words per sentence.

      The use of a “wrong" verb tense provides a fourth indicator. Arguably, presentations

should primarily announce and explain past results. Answers should clarify missed points,

explain the current situation, or preview the future. If too few sentences in the presentation use

5
  With the first and the fourth of these measures, we also contribute to the literature by providing some simple,
systematic measures of possibly evasive speech patterns, complementing approaches based on hand-collection (as in,
for example, Hollander, Pronk, and Roelofsen (2010)).

                                                                                                                 7
the past tense, the managers may be trying to divert attention from actual outcomes to potential

events in the future. We define atypical tense as the weighted average percentage of the

manager’s verbs not in the past tense in the presentation and the manager’s verbs not in the

present or future tense in the answers, weighted by the number of verbs in the two respective

parts of the conference call.6 We winsorize these four speech characteristics variables at the 1 and

99 percent levels.



2.4    Company and analyst variables

Price and returns data are from CRSP. The stock return in quarter t is the firm’s share-price

appreciation in the elapsed quarter, that is, the difference between the share price 5 days before

the earnings announcement for quarter t and the share price 5 days after the earnings

announcement for quarter t−1, divided by the stock price 5 days after the earnings announcement

for quarter t−1.

       Earnings per share (hereafter, earnings) and EPS forecasts data are from I/B/E/S. Let et,j be

the earnings announced for the company j at quarter t recorded in I/B/E/S and, following Livnat

and Mendenhall (2006), let êt,j be the corresponding consensus forecast (the most recent mean

analyst forecast included in the I/B/E/S detail file during the 90 days before the quarterly earnings

announcement). The earnings surprise is the difference between actual and consensus forecast

earnings, divided by the share price 5 trading days before the announcement in quarter t. Firms

6
  To automate the recognition of verb tenses we use the Natural Language Toolkit library as follows: (1) all words in
each sentence are tagged with part-of-speech tags (POS tagging); (2) each tagged sentence is chunked into name and
verb phrases; (3) for each verb phrase, its tense is deduced from the POS tag of the first word utilizing a number of
heuristics to correct the most common errors of POS tagging; (4) if a sentence contains several verb phrases, its tense
is defined as the most common tense among its phrases. If a most common tense is not identified, the sentence tense
is not defined. We also hand-code tense usage in several full conference calls and cross-check the results with the
automated approach described above. This algorithm does an excellent job in classifying both the presentation and
the questions and answers section of the conference call. After we assign the tenses to each sentence we classify
them as describing past, present, or future with the conference call day as the reference point. We classify the present
perfect tense for our use as past-oriented speech, consistent with the definition of Merriam-Webster dictionary:
“present perfect is a verb tense that expresses action or state completed at the time of speaking.”

                                                                                                                      8
performing below expectations represent a negative surprise. Firms are grouped by earnings

surprise decile, from -5 (for the largest negative surprises) through -1 (for the smallest negative

surprises), then 0 for zero surprises, and then 1 to 5 from smallest to largest positive surprise.

EPS growth is the fraction by which earnings in a quarter exceed earnings in the same quarter in

the prior year.

      Market return is the percent value-weighted market return for the period starting 5 days

after an earnings announcement for the quarter t−1 and ending 5 days prior to the earnings

announcement for the quarter t.

      Monthly volatility is the monthly stock volatility computed from monthly return data over

the previous 48 months.

      As standard control variables, we use the natural logarithm of total assets and Tobin’s Q, as

well as Fama-French 48 industry fixed effects, and/or CEO fixed effects.

      Three analyst-specific variables play a role in our analysis. Forecast change is the change

in an analyst’s forecast for earnings in quarter t+1, from the day before the conference call to

three days after the call, divided by the earnings in quarter t+1, multiplied by 100.

      Forecast error is difference between the post-conference call forecast (the forecast for

quarter t+1 outstanding 3 days after the conference call for quarter t) and the actual earnings in

quarter t+1, divided by the earnings in quarter t+1, multiplied by 100

      Analyst experience is the natural logarithm of the number of years an analyst i has appeared

in the IBES database.

      Pre-call forecast std. dev. is the standard deviation of analysts’ earnings forecasts for

quarter t that remain outstanding the day before quarter t’s earnings are announced. Pre-

announcement revision frequency is the fraction of analysts covering a firm who revise their

forecasts for quarter t in the quarter before t’s earnings are announced. Frequent revisions


                                                                                                 9
indicate that a firm’s earnings are more difficult to forecast.

       Post-call forecast std. dev. is the standard deviation of analysts’ forecasts for earnings for

quarter (t+1) tallied three days after the conference call of quarter t. Post-announcement revision

frequency is the fraction of covering analysts who revise after the conference call of quarter t up

to the earnings announcement of quarter t+1. Change in bid-ask spread is the change in the

average bid-ask spread (divided by the midpoint between the bid and the ask) from the [-3,-1] day

window prior to the conference call to the [+1,+3] window following the conference call,

multiplied by 100. We calculate daily excess stock returns following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman

and Wermers (1997) (DGTW). DGTW provide monthly portfolio returns. We apply their

methodology to daily returns to compute DGTW characteristic-adjusted stock returns.7 CAR01 is

the two-day, [0,1] DGTW-adjusted stock return on and after the conference call date.8 We also

compute the cumulative DGTW-adjusted returns for up to 60 trading days following the

conference call date.

       In this analysis, the following variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles: stock

return, earnings surprise, EPS growth, Tobin’s Q, earnings, forecast change, forecast error, and

the CARs. The following variables, which have a bottom value at 0, are winsorized at the 99th

percentile level: pre- and post-call forecast standard deviation, revision frequency, and the pre-

and post-call bid-ask spreads.




7
   From each stock return we subtract the return on a portfolio of all CRSP firms matched on quintiles of market
equity, book-to-market, and prior 1-year return (thus a total of 125 matching portfolios). Each of these 125 portfolios
is reformed each year at the end of June based on the market equity and prior year return (skipping one month) from
the end of June of the same year, and book-to-market from the fiscal period end of the preceding year. Book-value of
equity is furthermore adjusted using the 48 industry classifications available from Kenneth French’s website. The
portfolios are value-weighted.
8
   Some conference calls take place during trading hours (which makes it appropriate to include the day of the
conference call when calculating stock price reactions), others take place after trading hours. Unfortunately, we do
not have exact times for the full sample of calls.

                                                                                                                   10
2.5    Descriptive statistics

Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for the variables we use.



                                    TABLES 1 AND 2 ABOUT HERE



On average about 0.86% [0.75%] of all words used in presentations [answers] on conference calls

are coded as negative and 1.68% [1.20%] are coded as positive. Both negative and positive

words appear more frequently in presentations than in answers. The ratio of negative to positive

words is significantly higher in the improvised answers than in the presentations, 0.71 as opposed

to 0.60, producing average values for our main measure of negativity of -0.22 and -0.32,

respectively.     This disparity may reflect the tendency of CEOs to buff up assessments in

presentations, or perhaps they think they can do so more judiciously in prepared remarks.

However, a major factor is likely to be the negative cast of the analysts’ questions to which they

must respond. Analysts use 1.66 negative words per positive word. This strong downbeat tilt

suggests that analysts differentially ask about concerns, sometimes about the validity of the

remarks made in the formal presentations, and more generally about the company’s past

performance and future prospects.9

      Our analysis also examines managers’ use of the past, present and future tense. Normally,

around half of the phrases in presentations use the past tense, whereas close to two thirds of the

phrases in both questions and answers use the present tense. The use of future tense is relatively

rare; fewer than 10% of verbs used in any of presentations, answers, and questions use the future


9
  This result accords with Brockman, Li, and Price (2014), who study a sample of 2880 conference calls from the
2004-2007 time period. Their paper focuses on the stock market reaction to analyst tone over a multi-day window.
Chen, Nagar, and Schoenfeld (2014) use intra-day data to provide evidence that the market reacts to analyst tone
during the time of the conference call. Consistent with the stock market response being rational, they also document
that a specific analyst’s tone on the call predicts that analyst’s earnings forecasts and recommendations.

                                                                                                                 11
tense, though much present tense discussion is implicitly about the future.



3     Managerial tone

While different individuals speak on the conference call, the CEO usually speaks around half of

the time. (Li, Minnis, Nagar and Rajan (2014) analyze who speaks when on conference calls.)

We consider all management members’ tone jointly, and usually refer to them collectively as the

manager. However, we posit that the CEO, for whose identity we control with fixed effects,

possibly quite literally, “sets the tone.”



3.1    Determinants of managerial tone

Managers host a quarterly earnings conference call ostensibly to announce and comment on

earnings in the prior quarter.      Presumably, other factors matter to managers, analysts, and

investors as well.     We now analyze which performance characteristics most influence the

managers’ tone.

       Table 3 presents the results. The main regressions include quarterly market returns (and,

therefore, no quarter dummies) as well as industry fixed effects. We record when CEOs, the

presumed tone setters, change. Hence, we also employ CEO fixed effects, and cluster standard

errors at the CEO level.



                                        TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE



       The table shows that the earnings surprise for a quarter – the difference between actual

earnings and market expectations -- plays an important role in determining a manager’s tone.

This finding confirms the importance to managers of beating the market’s expectations, as

                                                                                             12
Degeorge, Patel and Zeckhauser (1999) report. The change in earnings compared to the same

quarter in the previous year matters mostly for tone in presentations.

      A firm’s stock return in the preceding quarter, as expected, correlates negatively with

managerial negativity, also after controlling for general market performance. Downbeat returns

in the stock market as a whole foster downbeat announcements. Past volatility in the firm’s stock

return as well as greater uncertainty among analysts regarding the earnings of the past quarter

produce more negativity.

      Industry norms also affect tone, with financial firms sober, and “less serious” industries

upbeat. Thus, managers in banking and insurance are the most cautious, while the tone of

managers in the candy and soda business, as well as those in restaurants and hotels, are among

the most positive (results not reported). Managers of growth firms (high Tobin’s Q) speak more

positively.

      The tone of prepared presentations responds more strongly than do answers to analysts’

questions to recent stock returns and earnings. And for the answers themselves, recent stock

returns receive relatively greater weight.

      Not surprisingly, the more negative news there is to report, the more negative are both

prepared remarks and the analysts’ questions. More negative questions receive more negative

answers.

      Columns (4) to (6) control for CEO fixed effects, recognizing that individual managers may

have word choice propensities (Bamber, Jiang and Wang 2010; Davis, Ge, Matsumoto and Zhang

2014). The results prove similar, with the coefficients being very close to the case with industry

fixed effects.10


10
  In unreported results, we also find that standard CEO controls, such as CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO outsider status,
or CEO/chairman duality do not systematically explain variation in managerial tone, and neither do proxies for
general abilities of the CEO, as developed in Custódio, Ferreira and Matos (2013).

                                                                                                                13
      To parse the effects on negative and positive word use, we analyze frequencies looking at

each category individually; see Table A-1 in the Supplementary Appendix. As before, negative

(positive) words become more (less) frequent when: the economy worsens, a firm’s stock price

declines, or its earnings come in below the consensus forecast. Indeed, earnings surprise appears

to play a crucial role, discussed initially by the managers and questioned subsequently by the

analysts.    In unreported analysis, the need to present poor results produces an increase in

inconsistency in tone between presentations and answers, more uncertain words, more wrong

tense use, and to some extent more complexity.11

      In sum, recent past performance predicts managerial tone.



3.2    The outcomes predicted by tone surprises: Overview of main findings

To assess the implications of managerial tone, we focus on the excessive components of

managerial tone, that is, the tone surprise. We first estimate as a benchmark the normal level of

negativity justified by the company’s past performance, after controlling for CEO fixed effects.

This benchmark model is shown for presentations in regression (4) and for answers in regression

(5) of Table 3. Tone surprise, or residual negativity is the difference between actual negativity

and the fitted value.        We denote residual negativity in presentation by RNP and residual

negativity in answers by RNA. To facilitate interpretation, all residuals measures are standardized

to have a zero mean and a standard deviation of one.

      The remainder of the paper looks at how tone surprises relate to three areas: future earnings

(and analysts’ earnings forecasts), uncertainty about future earnings, and stock returns. Our



11
   Frankel, Johnson and Skinner (1999) find that managers are less likely to provide earnings guidance during
conference calls when performance deteriorates, consistent with our findings. Matsumoto, Pronk and Roelofsen
(2011) instead find that managers are more likely to tilt to future-oriented words when performance is poor. One
difference in our methods is that we focus on the verb tense whereas they focus on specific words that arguably are
future-oriented.

                                                                                                                14
overarching hypothesis embraces two hypotheses: First, tone conveys information to market

participants about both future earnings and their uncertainty.          Second, analysts distill this

information, and convey it to investors who then invest utilizing this knowledge. Tone surprise

(residual negativity) is our independent variable of prime interest for all of these studies. If that

surprise is positive, that is, if managers use a more negative tone than seems “warranted” based

on public information, that is a bad sign and vice versa. Thus, we expect positive [negative] tone

surprise both to predict lesser [greater] future earnings and earnings forecasts, and to raise [lower]

uncertainty. These factors in turn imply that stock prices will react negatively to positive tone

surprises.

      Table 4 summarizes the main findings in the rest of the paper. Broadly speaking, in

columns (1) and (2), we would expect to find negative reactions (thus minuses in the table) for

future earnings, earnings forecasts, and immediate stock price reactions. The signs for greater

uncertainty, which is a bad factor, should go in the opposite direction. For long-term returns, an

insignificant effect would indicate that three days after the call all the information is already

impounded into the stock price. We expect the same signs as for immediate stock price reactions

if there is a post-conference-call drift (which means that the market moved in the right direction

quickly, but adjusted less than fully). Instead, if there is a reversal, that is, if tone surprises have

an opposite sign in regressions of long-term as opposed to immediate immediate stock price

returns, that would indicate a misdirected short-term response.



                                      TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE



      We also conduct an analysis examining separately abnormal negativity and abnormal

positivity. For example, we will determine the effect of abnormal positivity (negativity) in


                                                                                                     15
presentations on earnings from the coefficient on the absolute value of RNP when the signed

value of RNP is negative (positive). Where managers are abnormally negative, columns (3) and

(5), we expect earnings and stock price reactions to be negative, but uncertainty to increase.

Where managers are less negative than public information would suggest, columns (4) and (6),

earnings and stock price reactions should be positive, but uncertainty should decrease.

       A remarkable 35 of the 36 entries in the table go in the predicted direction. The remaining

one shows zero effect. None goes opposite to our predictions. The remainder of the paper

presents the empirical tests that produced these results.



4     Managerial tone, future earnings, and earnings forecasts

If managerial tone helps predict earnings, the stock market reaction to managerial tone is likely to

reflect rational information processing. This conclusion would be strengthened if analysts, the

key messengers of the financial community, also react sensibly to managerial tone. We examine

these two points in turn.



4.1    The information leakage hypothesis

When quarter t has its earnings announced, the manager already has some idea of what to expect

in the quarter t+1. He might reveal his expectations intentionally – thus a tip – for example, to

align the market’s expectations with his own. Alternatively, he might reveal them unintentionally

-- thus a tell -- possibly even without noticing, and quite possibly contrary to his wishes.

Whatever the source or the intent of the revelation, the content of the managers’ tone unexplained

by past results provides information about that company’s prospects. Thus we are talking about

information leakage: Managers reveal information about future earnings of the company by

choosing (purposefully or inadvertently) the tone. Given such leakage, tone surprises, that is,

                                                                                                 16
excess negativity, will predict earnings in the next quarter.



                                          TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE



      Table 5 strongly supports this hypothesis. Consider columns (1) to (3). We hypothesize

that tone surprises would indicate that managers expect lower earnings in the future than past

results would suggest. Indeed, excessively negative tone in both presentations and answers is

associated with smaller future earnings.12

      Columns (4) to (9) further develop these results. Columns (4) and (5) expand the earnings-

prediction model by taking into consideration the forecasts of financial analysts. Column (4)

considers the analysts’ consensus just before the earnings announcement for quarter t, whereas

column (5) computes the analysts’ consensus following that announcement.                         The following

consensus is the average of all current forecasts on the third day after the earnings announcement,

implicitly positing that analysts incorporate new information within three days. Prior research

shows that analysts’ forecast revisions cluster around earnings announcements (Zhang 2008),

with most revisions being made on the day of the earnings announcements or on the next trading

day. Our results also hold when allowing for a seven-day period. Moreover, the results do not

change if we include either lags of earnings or the previous quarter’s tone surprise.13

      Not surprisingly, analyst forecasts predict future earnings effectively. Importantly for this

tips-and-tells study, the association between excessive negativity and future earnings still holds

12
    We note that using the residual negativity yields, in these basic regressions, the same inferences as using
negativity and controlling for the same variables used to explain negativity in Table 3. However, using the tone
surprise as the explanatory variable of interest strikes us as more intuitive. Moreover, this approach allows us to
consider asymmetric effects of positive and negative residual negativity.
13
   Davis, Piger, and Sedor (2012) and Demers and Vega (2010) find that optimism predicts positive future earnings,
which is in line with our results. By contrast, Huang, Teoh, and Zhang (2014) find that abnormally positive tone in
annual earnings releases predicts lower future earnings. The difference between our findings and the latter paper’s
findings may, among other things, be due to a different domain (quarterly earnings conference calls and next
quarter’s earnings versus annual earnings press releases and earnings multiple years into the future).

                                                                                                                17
strongly, though the coefficients are smaller than in column (3). Comparing columns (4) and (5),

it appears that as analysts revise their forecasts, they take account of one third to one half of the

information conveyed by tone.14 We revisit analysts’ responses in Section 4.2.

       We expect abnormal negativity in residuals to predict earnings more strongly than

abnormal positivity. Presumably powerful constraints operate on the negative side. That is, there

are some things management should not (prefer not to) say about negative news, but which they

could say comfortably about comparably positive news. Unusually negative statements imply

overpowering some constraints and inhibiting factors. To examine this conjecture, we separate

positive and negative residuals by multiplying them by dummy variables.

       The results in columns (6) and (7) show that excess negativity in presentations and/or

answers strongly signals lower earnings in the future. Though unusually positive presentations

portend somewhat higher future earnings, the size of effect is much smaller than that for negative

presentations. Unusually positive answers continue to have predictive power even after taking

into account how analysts adjust their forecasts. Additional results, not presented, document that

the predictive power of tone for the firm’s performance extends to the medium-term horizon,

namely up to earnings in the same quarter in the following year.

       Columns (8) and (9) control for other speech characteristics. Their main result is that tone

surprises retain their predictive power. In firms where managers use more uncertain words, more

strong modal words, and where they employ more atypical tenses, lower future earnings are to be

expected. Perhaps surprisingly, weak modal words display a positive association with future




14
   For example, in column (4), which does not control for the updated earnings forecast but for the forecast on the
day before the call, the coefficient on RNP is -0.053. In column (5), which controls for the updated forecast, the
coefficient is -0.037. Thus, analysts capture, on average, (0.053-0.037)/0.053, or about a third, of the information.

                                                                                                                  18
earnings.15 Column (9) shows that differences in tone between presentations and answers, in

either direction, relate negatively to future earnings.

       In sum, the stock market and future earnings react to tone in the same and the predicted

manner. This provides the first critical component of the hypothesis that the stock market reaction

reflects the processing of value-relevant information.



4.2    Analyst reactions

The stock market requires a channel for getting informed about tone. No doubt some stock

market investors simply listen to the conference call directly, and respond. For a much broader

audience of investors, it is likely that sell-side analysts, the professionals allowed to ask questions

on these calls, serve as the conduit of information. That is, analysts read and report on the tea

leaves set forth by firm managers. Then investors respond to what analysts say. Thus, a market

reaction to managerial tone is more likely to be due to information transmission if analysts’

forecasts also respond to tone.

       The results in Table 6 show how analysts react to tone. Analysts adjust their forecasts

downward when the manager is negative, even controlling for observables (columns (1) to (3)).

(This result contrasts with the findings in Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012), who find no

association between linguistic tone and forecast revision activity.) Thus, analysts respond to tone

surprises by adjusting their forecasts in the direction those surprises imply for future earnings.16

Recall that residual negativity is standardized to have a zero mean and a standard deviation of


15
   This result also holds when not controlling for uncertain words, and is thus not due to the (moderate) correlation
between these two word frequencies. One interpretation is that weak modal words capture appropriately careful
statements of management.
16
   Analysts sometimes hold private calls with management just after the public conference calls (Soltes 2014). Thus,
analyst reports after conference calls often contain topics that were not discussed on the call (Huang, Lehavy, Zhang
and Zheng 2014). The result we document may thus arise in part from analysts following up with management to
clarify why management spoke particularly positively or negatively, thus obtaining more specific information with
which they can support their forecast changes.

                                                                                                                 19
one. The coefficient of -2.452 in column (1) means that, on average across analysts, a one

standard deviation increase in residual negativity in the presentation section of the conference call

reduces the earnings forecast for the next quarter by 2.45%, a sizable effect. Columns (4) and (5)

show that they adjust more strongly following excessive positive as opposed to excessive

negative surprises, especially in answers.



                                          TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE



      If analysts’ forecasts accurately capture the tone of managers’ speech, errors in those

forecasts should not relate to the degree of the managers’ excessive negativity. As column (6)

shows, RNP is weakly negatively related with the forecast error. By contrast, positive forecast

errors (expectations are above actual earnings) become larger and possibly more frequent when

managers are excessively negative in answers. In other words, analysts on average tend to

overreact to excessively negative presentations, but significantly underreact to excessively

negative answers.17

      These are averages, but analysts differ significantly in their ability to pick up tips and tells.

To parse these differences, we consider each analyst’s experience. Computing, from column (7),

point estimates and significance levels for the association of residual negativity in presentation

with the forecast error, we find that a novice analyst (one with one year of experience) will

under-forecast future earnings by 1.7% (= -1.735 + ln(1)*0.606), whereas the forecast of an

analyst with 7 years of experience (the median) will be statistically indistinguishable from the

earnings actually realized. In results not reported we confirm that this result arises because


17
   These results are consistent with the observation in Table 5, column (3), that even after controlling for updated
average forecasts, RNP and RNA still tells us something about future earnings. The two sets of analysis differ
somewhat, though, as in Table 6 we consider individual analysts as the units of observation.

                                                                                                                 20
novice analysts reduce their earnings forecasts more strongly in response to abnormal negativity

in presentations.

    The results show a different pattern in response to residual negativity in answers. Novice

analysts adjust their forecasts to tone surprises much less than experienced analysts. Column (7)

implies that, if residual negativity in answers increases by one standard deviation, a novice

analyst will tend to under react – pay insufficient heed -- and thus over-forecast next quarter’s

earnings by 3.5%, whereas the 7-year analyst will make a smaller, but still (marginally)

significant error of 2.4% (=3.454 + ln(7)*(-0.527)). Fortunately, greater experience further

tempers the errors. An analyst with 15 years of experience (the 90th percentile) makes no

statistically significant error. In the final column (8), we include analyst fixed effects, which

control for time-invariant differences among analysts that may be correlated with experience and

forecast accuracy. Thus, these results focus on the variation in experience for a given analyst

(rather than comparing across analysts). Interestingly, the coefficients on RNA and on the

interaction with RNA increases strongly. Presumably, learning to distill valuable information

from answers is harder than distilling what is in prepared presentations. The results reported here

also hold when we give analysts 7 days to adjust their forecasts after the conference call. Overall,

when novice analysts distill the message of tea leaves, they give too much credence to prepared

remarks, and too little to less rehearsed answers. The former are almost certainly tips, the latter

are relatively much more likely tells.

    In sum, the results on future earnings and earnings forecasts are consistent with the idea that

managerial tone conveys information regarding future earnings.



5   Managerial tone and uncertainty

Greater uncertainty about a firm’s future depresses its stock price, since it drives up the discount

                                                                                                 21
rate the market applies to those future earnings. This section investigates how the tone in a

manager’s speech impacts (analyst) uncertainty following the conference call.



                                      TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE



Table 7 documents that residual negativity predicts a greater standard deviation of forecasts

regarding next quarter. Excess negativity has a greater absolute effect than excess positivity.

      The degree of uncertainty, as reflected in the disparity in analysts’ predictions, is greater the

more tone differs between presentations and answers, and when management uses more uncertain

or more strong modal words and fewer weak modal words.

      In Table A-2 in the Supplementary Appendix, we document that the effects of tone surprises

also can be seen in a greater revision frequency after the call. Moreover, that table shows that

when management speaks excessively negatively, bid-ask spreads increase from just before to

just after the call.

      Collectively, these results imply that negative managerial tone and certain “cloaking”

patterns appear to sow uncertainty among analysts – the tea leaf readers for the financial

community.



6     Managerial tone and stock returns

6.1    Immediate stock market reactions

We now examine whether and how effectively the market, not merely analysts, reads between the

lines. Columns (1) to (6) of Table 8 consider the immediate stock market reaction. They regress

CAR01, the abnormal returns on the day of the conference call plus the immediately following

day, on managerial tone. All regressions control for the earnings surprise, several other firm-

                                                                                                    22
level controls, and industry and CEO fixed effects.



                                    TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE



      Columns (1) to (3) of Table 8 show that excessive negativity (in both presentations and

answers) relates strongly negatively to the short-term stock market reaction around the earnings

announcement. Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012) (for a year 2007 cross-section) and Price,

Doran, Peterson and Bliss (2012) (for a 2004-2007 panel) find similar effects. Working with

residual negativity allows us to separate out the effects of abnormal negativity and abnormal

positivity; see columns (4) and (5).     The market appears to take abnormal positivity more

strongly into account than abnormal negativity.

      Columns (6) and (7) of Table 8 investigate how the stock market reacts to the other speech

patterns we measure in conference calls. Inconsistency in tone is by itself negatively related to

short-term stock reactions, as is the use of uncertain words. Shareholders also respond negatively

to management using the past tense in the answers part of the earnings call and to talking in the

present or future tense in the presentation part of the earnings call. Perhaps surprisingly, but

consistent with findings for earnings, investors react favorably to the use of weak modal words

by managers.

      Interestingly, when the answers section is longer, investors seem to sense trouble ahead, as

can be seen in the, the negative coefficient on the number of words management speaks in the

Q&A part of the conference call. Finally results also hold controlling for the previous quarter’s

tone surprise.

      Overall, tone surprises prove to be a very robust determinant of stock return reactions.




                                                                                                 23
6.2   Excess returns over the next quarter

Next, we consider how stock prices behave in the quarter following a conference call. If stock

prices respond immediately to managerial tone but then revert back to their levels before the call,

this would suggest that tone does not indicate fundamental value. If initial movements are

sustained, by contrast, this would suggest that the immediate reaction was rational. Assuming no

reversal, a medium-term study can shed light on how quickly information is incorporated in stock

prices.

      Given well known results from another arena, on post-earnings announcement drift, it

would not be surprising if after part of the information from tone in conference calls was

absorbed, there would be further drift in the same direction. For example, to the extent that

earnings announcements are relied on insufficiently, we might also expect that for information

contained in tone. Moreover, under-reaction may be inherent because analysts are cautious about

acting on difficult-to-convey information, such as managerial tone. Recall from Section 4 that

within the first three days after the conference call analysts on average revise their earnings

forecasts only about a third of or half the way of what tone surprises actually predict for future

earnings. Thus, we expect to see a drift beyond the initial response time frame.

      As a baseline result, we first plot the earnings announcement drift over the quarter

following the earnings announcement within our sample. Specifically, we compute cumulative

value-weighted excess returns of portfolios formed on the earnings surprise. As described earlier,

the returns are characteristics-adjusted following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997).

      Figure 1 presents a familiar picture: Companies in the highest quintile of the earnings-

surprise experience an immediate positive stock price reaction, but there is a drift upwards over

the quarter that follows. Similarly, companies in the lowest quintile of earnings are punished by

the market immediately. They then drift downward further following the initial reaction. This is


                                                                                                24
the well-known post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD).



                                          FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE



       Our main interest is with the stock returns of portfolios sorted by tone negativity. Figure 2

shows the results in Panels A and B. They respectively show the characteristics-adjusted excess

returns of portfolios sorted on negativity in presentations and answers. Several results are

noteworthy. First, there is no reversal, but rather a post-conference call drift (PCCD) that is

partially associated with managerial tone.18 Moreover, this drift pattern is found in both graphs.

Second, it takes the market three days to incorporate high negativity. This is in contrast to the

immediate one-day jump in the case of the earnings surprise.19 That it takes three or more days

for a large part of the response in stock prices to take place is consistent with the idea that the

nuggets of information available “between the lines” of conference calls are more difficult to

digest than the quantitative information in earnings announcements.



                                          FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE



       To control in addition for the earnings surprise, Panels C and D first sort firms into 5

quintiles of the earnings surprise and then, within each earnings surprise quintile, into 5 quintiles

of negativity. Q1 of negativity then is the average excess return of those firms in the lowest

18
   Our results on characteristics-adjusted returns are consistent with and add to the findings in the 2004-2007 sample
of Price, Doran, Peterson, and Bliss (2012), who document size-adjusted excess returns to sorting on negativity in
conference calls. By contrast, Huang, Teoh, and Wang (2014) find a reversal after abnormally positive tone in annual
earnings announcements. In their setting, this is consistent with their finding that a positive abnormal tone actually
predicts lower earnings. In our case, a reversal could also have happened in particular for presentations because, as
we saw, abnormal positivity in presentations is not significantly positively associated with future earnings. We
documented above that residual tone in answers predicts future earnings and uncertainty.
19
   We also note a steep decline in the highest quintile portfolio around days 47-49. In fact, a similar decline also
occurs in the post-earnings announcement drift graph in Figure 1.

                                                                                                                  25
quintile of negativity, averaged across the five earnings surprise groups, and so on.20 The same

picture emerges as in Panels A and B. Very similar graphs appear if we sort directly on residual

negativity.

      Table 9 shows, for these double-sorted portfolios, the value-weighted average DGTW

characteristic-adjusted excess returns from the day after the conference call until day 60. As can

be seen, within each earnings surprise quintile, returns decrease with negativity.



                                          TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE



      The differences in excess returns across the portfolios are sizable. The move from the top to

the bottom quintile in negativity (which corresponds to an approximately two standard deviation

move in negativity, from 0.2 negative words per positive word to 1.3 negative words per positive

word), foreshadows a return differential of roughly 1 percentage point. The same two standard

deviation move in the earnings surprise itself (a move from Q1 to Q5 in Figure 1, from a negative

earnings surprise of -0.4% to a positive earnings surprise of +0.6%) implies a return differential

of about 2 percentage points. In other words, sorting on managerial tone adds another 50% to

return differences.

      Columns (8) to (10) of Table 8 study the statistical significance of the post-call drift in the

days 3 to 60 after the conference call when one also controls for other factors. Interestingly,

column (8) suggests that on average the drift in additional excess returns is approximately the

same size of as the one realized in the immediate time window. This is broadly consistent with

the observation in Table 5 that analysts on average respond approximately one third or half way

in their earnings forecast changes, that is, that after controlling for updated earnings forecasts,

20
  The conditional sorting procedure ensures that we have an equal number of companies in each of the resulting 25
portfolios. An independent sorting yields very similar results.

                                                                                                                26
residual negativity still holds explanatory power for future earnings.

      Columns (9) and (10) suggest that the significance of the post-call drift is stronger for

excessive negativity than for excessive positivity. Thus, the market appears to more quickly

incorporate good news than bad news, which is consistent with the fact that just after the

conference call analysts change their forecasts more strongly in response to excessive positivity

than excessive negativity (recall column (4) and especially column (5) of Table 6). Table 8 also

shows that firms where managers use atypical tenses tend to underperform significantly over the

medium term.

      Supplementary Table A-3 reports the results for CAR060 as the dependent variable. It

shows that over the whole quarter stock prices react somewhat more strongly to excessive

negativity than to excessive positivity. This is consistent with the earlier findings that excessive

negativity predicts earnings and uncertainty more strongly than excessive positivity.

      In sum, even after controlling for the earnings surprise, firms with highly negative

conference calls underperform the benchmark of firms with similar characteristics, while high-

positivity firms over-perform.    We observe a drift after the initial reaction and no general

reversal. These are important findings as a reversal would have indicated that the initial stock

price reaction merely reflected short-term sentiment. By contrast, the present results accord with

our broader finding that stock price reactions to managerial tone represent reasonably rational

responses. The drift that follows, however, indicates that the market fails to immediately price the

information fully.



7   Heterogeneity among firms and the managerial-tone-response coefficient

We have documented that negative tone in the earnings conference call is associated with (a)

lower future earnings and lower earnings forecasts, (b) greater uncertainty about earnings, and (c)

                                                                                                 27
negative stock price reactions.     This evidence is fully consistent with a causal effect of

managerial tone on stock price reactions.        However, we sought an additional test of the

hypothesis that the stock market’s reaction is due to rational processing of information. This led

to the following intuitive joint hypothesis. The market’s reaction to tone will vary across firms.

In firms where the market reacts strongly to managerial tone, we would expect managerial tone to

be particularly strongly related to future earnings and/or uncertainty.

      Specifically, we hypothesize that in firms where a large (either positive or negative)

earnings surprise has just occurred, the tone surprise should be particularly informative because

there is more news to be explained, that is, in these firms we should observe stronger reactions of

earnings, uncertainty, and stock returns. Table 10 provides evidence supporting this hypothesis:

In the firms in the highest absolute earnings surprise quartile, tone surprises very strongly predict

each of lower future earnings, higher uncertainty, and negative stock reactions. By contrast, in the

lowest earnings surprise quartile, the impact of residual negativity on these quantities is much

smaller.



                                    TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE



Table 11 tests these ideas more formally. Specifically, each quarter, we sort firms into 20

quantiles of the absolute earnings surprise. We then construct 20 portfolios, where the first

portfolio contains all firm-quarter observations across the sample that are in the bottom five

percent of the absolute earnings surprise and the 20th portfolio contains the observations in the

top five percent of the absolute earnings surprise. (The reason to sort firms in portfolios is to

reduce measurement error and to avoid results that are driven by outliers, as would potentially be

the case in by-firm regressions in quarterly data as in the present case.) Then, within each


                                                                                                  28
portfolio we run panel regressions of earnings in the quarter t+1 on residual negativity in

presentation (RNP) and residual negativity in answers (RNA), and we save the coefficients on

these variables. To help interpret the results, we define Sensitivity of future earnings to RNP (and

to RNA) as the negative of these saved coefficients. Thus, the larger the Sensitivity of future

earnings to RNP, the stronger will be the negative association of the current residual negativity in

presentation and future earnings.

        We then regress stock reactions on the two residual negativity measures and the

interactions of these residuals with the corresponding sensitivity measure. If the coefficient on

such an interaction is negative, this means that the stock market reacts more negatively to

excessive negativity of management precisely where this excessive negativity more strongly

indicate poor future earnings. We note that, in this approach, we have an errors-in-variables

problem, which biases the coefficients towards zero. This implies that any results we secure will

be understated.



                                         TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE



      Column (1) of Table 11 shows that excessive negativity in presentations is associated with

negative stock price reactions, as we had already seen earlier. Our current interest is whether this

effect is more pronounced in those companies where tone surprises are more informative. The

interaction term in column (1) shows just such complementarity. Similarly, column (2) shows a

significant interaction term for tone surprises in answers.21

      The findings in columns (3) and (4) suggest that both negativity in presentations and in

21
   We caution that even taking into account the heterogeneous responses, consistent with other studies investigating
tone, the additional explanatory power of qualitative information for stock returns is not large; although R-squared
increases from 0.11 to 0.12 when including the interactions (a 1 percentage point increase, but a roughly 10%
increase), the R-squared remains low.

                                                                                                                 29
answers gets priced into stock prices because either one increases uncertainty. The interaction

term reveals that the stock market response to tone surprises is particularly pronounced in those

companies where tone surprises strongly impact analyst uncertainty.

         Supplementary Appendix Table A-4 presents the results of an alternative approach. There,

we reverse the investigation in the following sense: We regress future earnings and uncertainty

on unusual managerial tone and the interaction of unusual tone with the sensitivity the stock

market has shown, on average, to unusual tone in the respective firm. As one would expect given

the results presented in this section, we find that where the market reacts more strongly to

unusual tone in presentations, unusual tone more strongly predicts future earnings and to some

extent analyst uncertainty (see the significant interaction terms with RNP in columns (1) and (3)).

And where the market reacts more strongly to unusual tone in answers, unusual tone predicts

future uncertainty strongly and earnings to some extent.

         Overall, these findings show that the market reacts more strongly to tone for firms where

tone has greater predictive impact on future earnings and on analyst uncertainty. This is as it

should be if stock market participants rationally process value-relevant information from the

conference call. Thus, our additional test of rational processing is passed.



8       Additional results and robustness tests

Institutional investors: In firms with more institutional investors, managers are generally

somewhat more negative in their answers. When distinguishing among institutional investors,

using the classification of institutional investors developed by Bushee (2001),22 we find that

analysts tend to be more sober in companies with a lot of “dedicated,” low investment turnover




22
     These data are available for the years up to 2010 from http://acct3.wharton.upenn.edu/faculty/bushee/IIclass.html.

                                                                                                                     30
investors, while they are less negative in companies with a large fraction of “transient”

institutional investors.

Simple word list. The extensive word list used in the main part of the paper is comprehensive,

but may differentially credit tone patterns of managers who use richer vocabularies. As a

robustness check, we therefore repeated the main analysis using a simpler, streamlined

classification list. To construct this list, we tallied the list of the most frequently used words in

conference calls, and then classified those that were 1) positive, 2) negative, and 3) those

indicating uncertainty. The complete list of chosen words in these three groups, arranged by their

frequency, is shown in Table A-5 in the Supplementary Appendix. Most of the words on our

word list also appear on the Loughran and McDonald (2011) list; there are some exceptions, such

as the word “growth.” Naturally, using our own stricter classification for words, the percentages

of negative and positive words is much lower for negative words, about 0.28%, and slightly

lower for positive words, 1.02%, of all words used in either presentations or answers. Results not

reported show that our main findings are not sensitive to the choice of word classification list.

Earnings surprise. Rather than using the earnings surprise decile, we also used the actual

earnings surprise, divided by the stock price. The results prove similar.

Distance from the earnings announcement and conference calls concerning other topics.

85% of the conference calls take place on the day of the earnings announcement; 13% take place

on the following day; and almost all other calls take place in the following two weeks.

Restricting the sample to firms whose conference calls and earnings announcements coincide

does not change the results.     Conversely, sometimes, within close vicinity of the earnings

announcement, firms hold conference calls concerning topics that do not only relate to earnings

but concern other corporate events. Including these roughly 1,000 calls generally strengthens our

results. (Results presented exclude these non-earnings calls, however.)


                                                                                                    31
Other estimation technique and two-way clustering of standard errors. Throughout the

analysis, we estimated the tone surprise including CEO fixed effects. All results hold when using

only industry effects only (thus not conditioning residual negativity on the typical tone of the

CEO and his management team). In addition to clustering standard errors on the CEO level (as in

the main analysis), we also clustered standard errors across periods. The results were sustained,

suggesting that firm (or manager) effects (Petersen 2008) are not important in this analysis.



9   Conclusion

Managers conduct conference calls to accompany earnings announcements. Stock prices respond

to the words managers employ. The overarching hypothesis tested in this paper is that these

responses are consistent with the rational use of the embedded information. That hypothesis is

confirmed.

      We first establish that the most important determinant of tone is the gap between the

analysts’ expectations and the actual earnings. Beyond that, weak EPS growth in the past year

and poor recent stock returns, as well as higher volatility, increase the frequency of negative

words used by the managers.

      We then test two broad hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 holds that deviations from expected tone

patterns, tone surprises, help predict a company’s future performance. Consistent with this

hypothesis, we document that excessive negativity not explained by past performance

foreshadows lower than hitherto expected future earnings. That is, managers leak information,

perhaps purposefully (through a tip) or inadvertently (through a tell). We also show that higher

excessive negativity magnifies analyst uncertainty, as is reflected in larger variance in forecasts,

more frequent forecast revisions, and increased bid-ask spreads.

      A second set of tested hypotheses, Hypotheses 2A, 2B and 2C, sought insight into the

                                                                                                 32
causes of this pattern.

      First, consistent with Hypothesis 2A, the market reacts more strongly to tone surprises in

those firms where surprises more strongly predict future earnings and uncertainty, as our rational

response theory would require.

      Second, consistent with Hypothesis 2B, after the initial response to the conference call,

stock prices of companies drift further in the direction the tone suggested. In other words, more

information is conveyed by tone than the market initially processes.

      Third, consistent with Hypothesis 2C, we find an intriguing pattern of analyst responses to

managerial tone. Experienced analysts appear to recognize that tone surprises predict future

earnings, and they adjust their forecasts appropriately. Inexperienced analysts, however, have a

less accurate and less nuanced response:       They overreact to abnormally negative tone in

presentations, but underract to abnormal negativity in responses to analysts’ questions.

      Overall, this coherent set of results, with 35 of 36 signs (Table 4) going in the predicted

direction, strongly supports the Rational Reactions Hypothesis: “Market participants rationally

distill value-relevant information from tone over and above observables such as earnings.” In

other words, participants read ”between the lines” to process the information contained in the tips

and tells conveyed by managers.




                                                                                                33
References

Bamber, L.S., Jiang, J.X., and Wang, I.Y., 2010. What's My Style? The Influence of Top
       Managers on Voluntary Corporate Financial Disclosure. The Accounting Review 85,
       1131-1162
Blau, B.M., DeLisle, R.J., and Price, S.M., 2012. Costly Talk in Earnings Conference Calls and
       Short Selling. Working Paper
Brockman, P., Li, X., and Price, S.M., 2014. Differences in Conference Call Tones: Managers
       versus Analysts. Working paper
Bushee, B.J., 2001. Do Institutional Investors Prefer Near-Term Earnings over Long-Run Value.
       Contemporary Accounting Research 18, 207-246
Chen, J., Demers, E., and Lev, B., 2012. Oh What a Beautiful Morning! The Effect of the Time
       of Day on the Tone and Consequences of Conference Calls. Working Paper
Chen, J.V., Nagar, V., and Schoenfeld, J., 2014. Sources of Analyst Expertise. Working paper,
       University of Michigan
Cohen, L., Lou, D., and Malloy, C., 2013. Playing Favorites: How Firms Prevent the Revelation
       of Bad News. Working paper
Custódio, C., Ferreira, M., and Matos, P., 2013. Generalists vs. Specialists: Lifetime Work
       Experience and CEO Pay. Journal of Financial Economics 108, 471-492
Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., and Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring mutual fund
       performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. The Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058
Davis, A.K., Ge, W., Matsumoto, D.A., and Zhang, J.L., 2014. The Effect of Manager-Specific
       Optimism on the Tone of Earnings Conference Calls. Working paper
Davis, A.K., Piger, J.M., and Sedor, L.M., 2012. Beyond the numbers: Measuring the
       information content of earnings press release language. Contemporary Accounting
       Research 29, 845-868
Degeorge, F., Patel, J., and Zeckhauser, R., 1999. Earnings Management to Exceed Thresholds.
       Journal of Business 72, 1-33
Demers, E., and Vega, C., 2010. Soft information in earnings announcements: News or noise? .
       Working Paper
Engelberg, J., 2009. Costly information processing: Evidence from earnings announcements.
       Working Paper
Frankel, R., Johnson, M., and Skinner, D.J., 1999. An Empirical Examination of Conference
       Calls as a Voluntary Disclosure Medium. Journal of Accounting Research 37, 133-150
Hobson, J.L., Mayew, W.J., and Venkatachalam, M., 2012. Analyzing Speech to Detect Financial
       Misreporting. Journal of Accounting Research 50, 349-392
Hollander, S., Pronk, M., and Roelofsen, E., 2010. Does Silence Speak? An Empirical Analysis
       of Disclosure Choices during Conference Calls. Journal of Acconting Research 48, 531-
       563
Huang, A., Lehavy, R., Zhang, A., and Zheng, R., 2014. Analyst Information Discovery and
       Information Interpretation Roles: A Topic Modeling Approach. Working paper, Hong
       Kong University of Science and Technology and University of Michigan
Huang, X., Teoh, S.H., and Zhang, Y., 2014. Tone Management. The Accounting Review 89,
       1083-1113
Kothari, S.P., Li, X., and Short, J.E., 2009. The Effect of Disclosures by Management, Analysts,
       and Financial Press on the Equity Cost of Capital: A Study Using Content Analysis. The
       Accounting Review 84, 1639-1670

                                                                                             34
Larcker, D.F., and Zakolyukina, A.A., 2012. Detecting Deceptive Discussions in Conference
        Calls. Journal of Accounting Research 50, 495-540
Li, F., 2008. Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence. Journal of
        Accounting and Economics 45, 221-247
Li, F., 2011. Textual analysis of corporate disclosures: A survey of the literature. Journal of
        Accounting Literature 29, 143-165
Li, F., Minnis, M., Nagar, V., and Rajan, M., 2014. Knowledge, compensation, and firm value:
        An empirical analysis of firm communication. Journal of Accounting and Economics 58,
        96-116
Livnat, J., and Mendenhall, R.R., 2006. Comparing the Post-Earnings Announcement Drift for
        Surprises Calculated from Analyst and Time Series Forecasts. Journal of Accounting
        Research 44, 177-205
Loughran, T., and McDonald, B., 2011. When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
        dictionaries, and 10-Ks. The Journal of Finance 66, 35-65
Loughran, T., and McDonald, B., 2013. Measuring Readability in Financial Disclosures. The
        Journal of Finance forthcoming
Loughran, T., and McDonald, B., 2014. Textual Analysis in Finance and Accounting: A Survey.
        Working paper
Matsumoto, D., Pronk, M., and Roelofsen, E., 2011. What Makes Conference Calls Useful? The
        Information Content of Managers' Presentations and Analysts' Discussion Sessions.
        Accounting Review 86, 1383-1414
Mayew, W.J., 2008. Evidence of Management Discrimination Among Analysts during Earnings
        Conference Calls. Journal of Acconting Research 46, 627-659
Mayew, W.J., Sharp, N.Y., and Venkatachalam, M., 2013. Using earnings conference calls to
        identify analysts with superior private information. Review of Accounting Studies 18,
        386-413
Mayew, W.J., and Venkatachalam, M., 2012. The Power of Voice: Managerial Affective States
        and Future Firm Performance. Journal of Finance 67, 1-43
Ober, S., Zhao, J.J., Davis, R., and Alexander, M.W., 1999. Telling it like it is: The use of
        certainty in public business discourse. Journal of Business Communication 36, 280-300
Petersen, M.A., 2008. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
        approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480
Price, S.M., Doran, J.S., Peterson, D.R., and Bliss, B.A., 2012. Earnings conference calls and
        stock returns: The incremental informativeness of textual tone. Journal of Banking and
        Finance 36, 992-1011
Soltes, E., 2014. Private interaction between firm management and sell-side analysts. Journal of
        Accounting Research 52, 245-272
Tetlock, P., 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
        Journal of Finance 62, 1139-1168
Tetlock, P.C., Saar-Tsechansky, M., and Macskassy, S., 2008. More than words: Quantifying
        language to measure firms’ fundamentals. The Journal of Finance 63, 1437–1467
Zhang, Y., 2008. Analyst responsiveness and the post-earnings-announcement drift. Journal of
        Accounting and Economics 46, 201–215




                                                                                             35
                                             Figure 1: Post-earnings announcement drift
This figure shows excess returns of five portfolios of stocks. Quintile portfolios were formed on the mean earnings surprise. The graph
shows, at each event time t (in trading days), the cumulative value-weighted excess return of each portfolio from the time it was
formed until time t. Excess returns are computed as characteristics-adjusted returns, using the methodology of Daniel, Grinblatt,
Titman and Wermers (1997), adapted to the case of daily returns.




                                                                                                                                    36
                                                     Figure 2: Post-conference call drift
Each panel in this figure shows excess returns of five portfolios of stocks. Quintile portfolios were formed based on the variables noted
in the caption of each figure. The graph shows, at each event time t (trading days), the cumulative value-weighted excess return of each
portfolio from the time it was formed until t. Excess returns are computed as characteristics-adjusted returns, using the methodology of
Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997), adapted to the case of daily returns. In Panels C and D, to control for the earnings
surprise, firms are first sorted into 5 quintiles of the earnings surprise and then, within each earnings surprise quintile, into 5 quintiles
of negativity. Q1 of negativity then is the average excess return of those firms in the lowest quintile of negativity, averaged across the
five earnings surprise groups, and so on.




                                                                                                                                          37
38
                                                     Table 1: Variable Descriptions

Variable Name                  Definition                                                                                 Source
Stock return                   The firm’s capital gain in the elapsed quarter, that is, the difference of the share       CRSP
                               price 5 days before an earnings announcement for quarter t minus the share price 5
                               days after the earnings announcement for quarter t−1, divided by the stock price 5
                               days after the earnings announcement for quarter t−1
Earnings surprise              The difference between actual and consensus forecast earnings (the mean of the              IBES
                               most recent analyst forecasts recorded in I/B/E/S during the 90 days before the
                               quarterly earnings announcement), divided by the share price 5 days before the
                               earnings announcement
EPS growth since same          Earnings in quarter t, minus the earnings in the same quarter in the previous year,       Compustat
quarter last year              divided by the earnings in the same quarter in the previous year
Market return                  The percent value-weighted market return for the period starting 5 days after an           CRSP
                               earnings announcement for the quarter t−1 and ending 5 days prior to the earnings
                               announcement for the quarter t.
Monthly volatility             The monthly stock volatility computed from monthly return data over the past 48            CRSP
                               months
Ln (assets)                    The natural logarithm of total assets                                                     Compustat
Tobin’s Q                      The ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets                       Compustat
Earnings in quarter t+1        Earnings per share in the next quarter                                                      IBES
Forecast change                The change in the analyst’s forecast for earnings in quarter t+1, from the day before       IBES
                               the conference call to three days after the call, divided by the earnings in quarter
                               t+1, multiplied by 100
Forecast error                 The difference between the post-conference call forecast (the forecast for quarter          IBES
                               t+1 outstanding 3 days after the conference call for quarter t) and the actual earnings
                               in quarter t+1, divided by the earnings in quarter t+1, multiplied by 100
Analyst experience             The natural logarithm of the number of years an analyst has been in the IBES                IBES
                               database
Pre-call forecast std. dev.    The standard deviation of analysts’ earnings forecasts for quarter t that are               IBES
                               outstanding the day before quarter t’s earnings are announced.
Post-call forecast std. dev.   The standard deviation of analysts’ forecasts for earnings in the next quarter (t+1)        IBES
                               outstanding three days after the conference call
Revision frequency             The number of revisions after the conference call for quarter t until the earnings          IBES
                               announcement of quarter t+1, divided by the number of analysts
[continued on next page]


                                                                                                                                     39
                                          Table 1: Variable Descriptions [continued]

Variable Name              Definition                                                                                 Source
Change in bid-ask spread   The change in the average bid-ask spread (divided by the midpoint between the bid          CRSP
                           and the ask) from the [-3,-1] window prior to the conference call to the [+1,+3]
                           window following the conference call, multiplied by 100
CAR01                      The two-day, [0,1] cumulative Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997)             CRSP, WRDS,
                           (DGTW) characteristic-adjusted stock return on or after the conference call date, in   own calculation
                           percent. DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw daily returns
                           minus the returns on a portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, market-book,
                           and 1-year momentum quintiles
CAR360                     The 58 trading days [3,60] cumulative DGTW characteristic-adjusted stock return in     CRSP, WRDS,
                           percent from 3 days after the conference call date through 60 days.                    own calculation
Inconsistency in tone      The absolute difference in negativity between presentations (prepared speech) and      Own calculation
                           answers (improvised speech)
Complexity                 The words per sentence, calculated as a weighted average of presentation and           Own calculation
                           answers
Atypical tense             We code tense use as described in Section 2.2.2. Atypical tense is the weighted        Own calculation
                           average percentage of the manager’s verbs not in the past tense in the presentation
                           and the manager’s verbs not in the present or future tense in the answers, weighted
                           by the number of verbs in the two respective conference call parts
Residual Negativity (RN)   Residual negativity in presentation (RNP) is the residual of regression (4) in Table   Own calculation
                           3. Residual negativity in answers is the residual of regression (5) in Table 3. All
                           residuals are standardized to have 0 mean and a standard deviation of 1




                                                                                                                                40
                                                      Table 2: Descriptive statistics

                           Panel A: Descriptive statistics for company characteristics and analyst behavior

This table provides descriptive statistics. All variables are defined in Table 1. We winsorize stock return, earnings surprise, EPS
growth, Tobin’s Q, earnings, forecast change, forecast error, and CAR01 at the 1 and the 99 percent levels. We winsorize pre- and
post-call forecast standard deviation, revision frequency, and the pre- and post-call bid-ask spread – quantities that cannot go below 0 -
- at the 99 percent level. We winsorize negativity as well as the percent uncertain words, the percent strong modal words, ther percent
weak modal words, complexity, and the percent atypical tense at the 1 and 99 percent levels.

       Company characteristics and analyst behavior                   Obs         Mean       Std. Dev.       Min          Max
       Stock return                                                 14213          0.02         0.13        -0.41        0.41
       Earnings surprise                                            14270          0.00         0.01        -0.03        0.02
       EPS growth since same quarter last year                      14223          0.07         0.92        -4.03        5.00
       Market return                                                14288          0.02         0.09        -0.33        0.29
       Monthly volatility                                           14288          0.09         0.05         0.01        0.47
       Ln (assets)                                                  14288          9.62         1.35         6.11        14.68
       Tobin's Q                                                    13750          1.85         1.03         0.83        6.38
       Earnings next quarter                                        14274          0.73         0.63        -0.75        3.31
       Forecast change                                              137874        -1.87        20.82      -115.38        84.62
       Forecast error                                               160766        -4.60        46.59      -224.32       233.33
       Analyst experience                                           171178         1.89         0.73         0.00         3.43
       Pre-call forecast std. dev.                                   13995         0.05         0.07         0.00        0.51
       Post-call forecast std. dev.                                  13839         0.06         0.08         0.00        0.46
       Revision frequency                                            14225         0.56         0.82         0.00        5.88
       Change in bid-ask spread                                      14263         0.00         0.11        -1.16         1.10
       CAR01 (Cumulative abnormal return [0; 1])                     13387         0.08         5.18       -16.29        15.39
       CAR360 (Cumulative abnormal return [3; 60])                   13020         0.34        11.09       -33.82        33.36

[continued on next page]




                                                                                                                                       41
            Table 2, Panel B: Descriptive statistics for managerial tone and other speech characteristics [continued]


      Tone                                                       Obs        Mean       Std. Dev.     Min         Max
      Negative words in presentation                            14288       33.63        23.89        0          446
      Negative words in answers                                 14288       31.54        17.21        0          446
      Negative words in analysts' questions                     14288       20.72        11.34        0          363
      Positive words in presentation                            14288       66.19        35.66        0          349
      Positive words in answers                                 14288       50.80        24.58        0          256
      Positive words in analysts' questions                     14288       15.04         8.43        0          118
      % Negative words in presentations                         14288        0.86         0.44        0          3.81
      % Negative words in answers                               14279        0.75         0.29        0          4.00
      % Positive words in presentations                         14288        1.68         0.58        0          5.45
      % Positive words in answers                               14279        1.20         0.40        0          3.52
      Negative/positive words in presentation                   14284        0.60         0.43        0          2.57
      Negative/positive words in answers                        14263        0.71         0.42        0          2.60
      Negative/positive words in analysts' questions            13991        1.66         1.09        0          7.00
      Negativity ((n-p)/(n+p+1)) in presentation                14288       -0.32         0.27      -0.95        0.44
      Negativity ((n-p)/(n+p+1)) in answers                     14288       -0.22         0.24      -0.92        0.45
      Negativity ((n-p)/(n+p+1)) in analysts' questions         14288        0.15         0.25      -0.90        0.74
      Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)                 13861        0.00         1.00      -2.07        2.45
      Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                      13861        0.00         1.00      -1.76        2.58

[continued on next page]




                                                                                                                        42
      Table 2, Panel B: Descriptive statistics for managerial tone and other speech characteristics [continued]

Other speech patterns                                            Obs     Mean     Std. Dev.    Min          Max
Difference in negativity of presentation and answers            14260     -0.12     0.43      -2.35         2.47
Absolute difference in negativity of presentation and answers   14260      0.32     0.32       0.00         2.47
% Uncertain words                                               14288      0.70     0.21       0.15         1.92
% Strong modal words                                            14288      0.58     0.18       0.23         1.19
% Weak modal words                                              14288      0.22     0.09       0.05         0.50
Complexity (words per sentence)                                 14288    22.65      2.54      15.59        32.32
% Past tense verbs in presentation                              14288    47.06      8.60      10.91        85.14
% Present tense verbs in presentation                           14288    43.76      7.99      10.64        81.82
% Future tense verbs in presentation                            14288      9.18     3.51       0.00       37.50
% Past tense verbs in answers                                   14279    28.28      4.80       0.00       100.00
% Present tense verbs in answers                                14279    62.26      5.42       0.00       100.00
% Future tense verbs in answers                                 14279      9.46     3.32       0.00       60.00
% Past tense verbs in analysts' questions                       14052    32.46      5.87       0.00       100.00
% Present tense verbs in analysts' questions                    14052    61.74      6.04       0.00       100.00
% Future tense verbs in analysts' questions                     14052      5.80     2.67       0.00       80.77
% Atypical tense                                                14279    40.23      5.86      19.50        75.39
Words Presentations                                             14288   3904.80   1580.55       80        26453
Words Answers                                                   14288   4217.35   1529.47        0        19380
Phrases Presentations                                           14288    167.73     67.94        5         1141
Phrases Answers                                                 14288    195.67     73.24        1          910




                                                                                                                   43
                                          Table 3: Negativity in the tone of conference calls
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is the negativity of the tone in presentations (columns 1 and 4), in
answers (column 2 and 5), and in analysts’ questions (columns 3 and 6). Negativity is (Negative words – Positive words) / (Negative
words + Positive words + 1). The explanatory variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. Columns (4) to (6) include CEO fixed
effects. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are clustered on the CEO level and robust to
heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
Dependent variable: Negativity in         Presentations     Answers        Questions     Presentations    Answers      Questions
Stock return in quarter t                  -0.153***       -0.068***      -0.169***       -0.107***      -0.073***    -0.142***
                                              (-8.84)        (-4.94)        (-10.71)        (-7.06)        (-5.64)       (-8.84)
EPS growth since same quarter last year    -0.025***         -0.000        -0.004**       -0.021***        -0.002      -0.005**
                                              (-8.84)        (-0.02)         (-2.02)        (-8.33)        (-1.10)       (-2.19)
Earnings surprise decile                   -0.014***         -0.001       -0.007***       -0.013***      -0.003***    -0.007***
                                             (-15.15)        (-1.36)         (-9.52)       (-17.77)        (-3.80)      (-10.36)
Monthly volatility quarter t                  0.224*        0.228***          0.096        0.205**       0.232***      -0.223**
                                               (1.96)         (3.04)          (1.45)         (1.97)         (2.63)       (-2.51)
Pre-call forecast std. dev.                 0.454***          0.061        0.136***        0.486***       0.116***      0.097**
                                               (6.60)         (1.47)          (3.66)         (9.48)         (3.35)        (2.48)
Negativity in presentation                                  0.195***       0.114***                       0.153***     0.112***
                                                             (16.90)         (16.72)                       (19.07)       (16.20)
Negativity in analysts' questions                           0.052***                                      0.044***
                                                             (25.00)                                       (23.03)
Ln(words in the presentation)              -0.054***                                       -0.013
                                             (-3.47)                                       (-0.93)
Ln(words in the answers)                                   -0.018***                                     -0.015**
                                                             (-2.80)                                      (-2.45)
Ln(words in the analysts' questions)                                       0.020***                                   0.024***
                                                                            (12.95)                                    (15.61)
Market return in quarter t                 -0.264***       -0.082***      -0.125***       -0.246***      -0.108***    -0.106***
                                            (-11.94)         (-3.98)        (-5.45)        (-12.20)        (-5.48)      (-4.52)

[continued on next page]




                                                                                                                                   44
                                    Table 3: Negativity in the tone of conference calls [continued]


                                                (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)         (6)
Dependent variable: Negativity in         Presentations     Answers        Questions     Presentations    Answers     Questions
Ln(assets)                                   -0.008          -0.001         -0.000        -0.049***      -0.031***   -0.043***
                                             (-1.42)         (-0.16)        (-0.14)         (-3.13)        (-2.86)     (-3.87)
Tobin's Q                                  -0.047***        -0.012**        -0.004        -0.091***      -0.018***   -0.025***
                                             (-6.60)         (-2.09)        (-0.93)         (-8.89)        (-3.15)     (-5.13)
Constant                                    0.277**        -0.266***        -0.047         0.350**          0.152     0.512***
                                              (2.10)         (-4.31)        (-1.37)          (1.99)         (1.33)      (4.84)
Industry fixed effects                         Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes
CEO fixed effects                              No              No             No              Yes            Yes         Yes
Observations                                 13,318          13,034         13,313          13,318         13,034      13,313
Adjusted R2                                   0.22           0.34            0.16            0.54          0.53        0.32




                                                                                                                                  45
               Table 4: Overview of results: The outcomes predicted by positive tone surprises (residual negativity)

This table presents an overview of our main results on residual negativity in presentation (RNP) and in answers (RNA). RNP>0 and
RNA>0 refer to RNP and RNA being positive, respectively, indicating excessive negativity. RNP<0 and RNA<0 refer to RNP and
RNA being negative, respectively, indicating excessive positivity. |RNP| and |RNA| indicate their absolute values. As explanatory
variables, they indicate whether greater magnitudes imply greater effects. In the cells of the table, a single + or – indicates an effect
significant at the 10% level. A double ++ or -- indicates an effect significant at either the 5% or 1% level. A 0 indicates no significant
effect on conventional significance levels.

                                                                   (1)          (2)      (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                    Overall effects       Distinguishing sign of residual negativity
                                                                                        RNP>0       RNP<0        RNA>0        RNA<0
    Explanatory variable:                                         RNP         RNA       |RNP|       |RNP|         |RNA|        |RNA|
    Dependent variable
    Earnings in quarter t+1                                        --          --          --          0          --          ++
    Change in analyst forecasts for earnings in quarter t+1        --          --           -         ++          --          ++
    Uncertainty (Post-call forecast std. dev.)                     ++          ++          ++         --          ++          --
    Uncertainty (Revision frequency)                               ++          ++          ++         --          ++          --
    Stock price: [0;1] days abnormal return                        --          --          --         ++          --          ++
    Stock price: [3;60] days abnormal return                       --          --          --         ++          --           +




                                                                                                                                       46
                                            Table 5: Predicting earnings with textual analysis
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is earnings per share in the quarter t+1. 1{RN>0} is an indicator variable
which is equal to one if the corresponding residual negativity is positive; it is zero if the residual negativity is negative. The
explanatory variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are
clustered on the CEO level and robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)             (5)            (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
Dependent variable:                                                                  Earnings in quarter t+1
Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)      -0.099***           -0.092*** -0.053*** -0.037***                             -0.035*** -0.035***
                                                 (-8.99)             (-8.60)   (-7.66)      (-5.32)                            (-5.27)   (-5.30)
Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                     -0.072*** -0.029*** -0.028*** -0.020***                             -0.018***   -0.006
                                                           (-5.70)   (-2.60)   (-4.18)      (-2.97)                            (-2.65)   (-0.83)
Mean earnings forecast, 1 day before call in t                                0.706***
                                                                                (7.91)
Mean earnings forecast, 3 days after call in t                                             0.756*** 0.755*** 0.761*** 0.755*** 0.754***
                                                                                             (8.72)         (8.71)    (8.79)    (8.71)    (8.68)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                                                                  -0.061***
                                                                                                           (-4.90)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                                                                     0.015
                                                                                                            (1.42)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                                                                            -0.041***
                                                                                                                     (-3.44)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                                                                             0.031***
                                                                                                                      (2.89)
Inconsistency in tone                                                                                                                  -0.035***
                                                                                                                                         (-2.96)
% Uncertain words                                                                                                            -0.066*** -0.065***
                                                                                                                               (-2.63)   (-2.63)
% Strong modal words                                                                                                          -0.032*    -0.028
                                                                                                                               (-1.78)   (-1.64)
% Weak modal words                                                                                                            0.098**   0.100**
                                                                                                                                (2.06)    (2.09)
Complexity (words per sentence)                                                                                                -0.001    -0.001
                                                                                                                               (-1.15)   (-1.04)
% Atypical tense                                                                                                               -0.001    -0.001
                                                                                                                               (-1.62)   (-1.41)
[continued on next page]

                                                                                                                                              47
                                Table 5: Predicting earnings with textual analysis [continued]

                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)
Dependent variable:                                                       Earnings in quarter t+1
Ln(Words in the presentation)      -0.104*** -0.106*** -0.103***   -0.040**      -0.026*        -0.028*     -0.026*     -0.013      -0.021
                                     (-4.11)   (-4.16)   (-4.07)    (-2.41)       (-1.65)        (-1.76)     (-1.69)    (-0.75)     (-1.22)
Ln(Words in the answers)              0.011     0.010     0.011     -0.002         0.001          0.000       0.000     -0.010     -0.018*
                                      (0.79)    (0.74)    (0.81)    (-0.20)        (0.11)         (0.04)      (0.05)    (-0.88)     (-1.83)
Market return in quarter t          0.206*** 0.207*** 0.206***     0.271*** 0.204*** 0.203***              0.204***    0.195***   0.187***
                                      (5.21)    (5.11)    (5.21)     (6.77)        (6.25)         (6.15)      (6.16)     (6.22)      (5.87)
Ln(Assets)                          0.290*** 0.291*** 0.290***      -0.008        -0.010         -0.009      -0.012     -0.011      -0.009
                                      (6.22)    (6.22)    (6.23)    (-0.31)       (-0.49)        (-0.45)     (-0.57)    (-0.52)     (-0.42)
Tobin's Q                           0.148*** 0.149*** 0.148***       0.041         0.031          0.031       0.031      0.030       0.030
                                      (7.75)    (7.59)    (7.76)     (1.39)        (1.03)         (1.02)      (1.02)     (1.00)      (1.00)
Constant                           -1.811*** -1.799*** -1.817***   1.222***        0.225       1.047***    1.043***      0.337      0.431*
                                     (-3.01)   (-2.98)   (-3.02)     (3.91)        (1.05)         (4.44)      (4.38)     (1.43)      (1.89)
Industry fixed effects                 Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
CEO fixed effects                      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                         14,139    14,139    14,139     13,656        13,775        13,775      13,775      13,766      13,748
Adjusted R2                           0.62      0.62      0.62        0.8          0.83         0.83         0.83        0.83       0.83




                                                                                                                                           48
                                  Table 6: Forecast changes, forecast errors, and managerial tone
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable in columns (1) to (5) is the forecast change in percent of earnings in
quarter t+1. In columns (6) to (8), the dependent variable is the forecast error in percent of earnings in quarter t+1. The explanatory
variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are clustered on
the CEO level and are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                               (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)              (7)           (8)
Dependent variable:                                                 Forecast change                                         Forecast error
Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)   -2.452***                 -2.133***                                  -1.205        -1.735*         -1.542
                                              (-7.33)                   (-6.31)                                 (-1.27)         (-1.66)        (-1.61)
Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                    -2.380***     -1.391***                                 2.789**       3.454***        4.177***
                                                          (-5.91)       (-3.52)                                  (2.30)          (2.67)         (3.12)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                                               -2.350***
                                                                                        (-4.75)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                                                2.588***
                                                                                         (4.59)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                                                           -1.522***
                                                                                                    (-3.05)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                                                            3.226***
                                                                                                     (4.59)
Analyst experience * RNP                                                                                                       0.606**            0.589
                                                                                                                                 (2.29)           (1.56)
Analyst experience * RNA                                                                                                      -0.527**        -1.419***
                                                                                                                                (-2.08)         (-3.15)
Analyst experience                                                                                                              -0.285            0.938
                                                                                                                                (-1.61)           (1.30)
Ln(Assets)                                    -0.867      -0.944        -0.924          -0.871      -0.979*     6.046***      6.163***            0.647
                                              (-1.44)     (-1.58)       (-1.54)         (-1.45)      (-1.65)       (3.76)        (3.82)           (1.56)
Tobin's Q                                    1.603***    1.526***      1.605***        1.609***    1.496***     3.539***      3.607***         1.581***
                                               (4.41)      (4.16)        (4.43)          (4.42)       (4.07)       (4.04)        (4.12)           (3.11)
Market return in quarter t                  12.075***   11.963***     12.078***       12.079***   11.961***    -16.761***    -16.407***       -13.259**
                                               (4.90)      (4.88)        (4.92)          (4.90)       (4.89)      (-3.11)       (-3.07)          (-2.53)
Pre-announcement revision frequency                                                                               -0.931        -0.890            0.300
                                                                                                                 (-0.82)       (-0.79)            (0.30)
Constant                                      2.397       3.576         2.920           2.309       3.232      -97.519***    -98.468***      -17.349***
                                              (0.42)      (0.62)        (0.51)          (0.40)      (0.56)        (-6.27)       (-6.30)          (-3.43)
Industry fixed effects                         Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes
CEO fixed effects                              Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes
Analyst fixed effects                          No          No             No             No          No             No            No               Yes
Observations                                 134,882     134,882       134,882         134,882     134,882       157,286       146,775          146,775
             2
Adjusted R                                    0.07        0.07           0.08           0.07        0.07          0.08          0.08            0.03


                                                                                                                                                         49
                                          Table 7: Analyst uncertainty and managerial tone
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is the post-call forecast standard deviation of analysts’ forecasts
outstanding three days after the conference call. (Results for revision frequency and the change in the bid-ask spread are in the
Supplementary Appendix). The explanatory variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The
underlying standard errors are clustered on the CEO level and are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                              (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)       (6)         (7)
Dependent variable:                                                        Post-call forecast std. dev.
Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)   0.011***                0.010***                        0.009***
                                              (8.26)                  (7.61)                          (7.22)
Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                   0.010***     0.006***                        0.005***
                                                         (6.42)       (3.98)                          (2.98)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                                                                         0.013***
                                                                                                                  (5.97)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                                                                        -0.007***
                                                                                                                 (-4.84)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                                                                                     0.011***
                                                                                                                              (4.17)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                                                                                    -0.007***
                                                                                                                             (-3.74)
Inconsistency in tone                                                             0.007***         0.001        0.004*        0.001
                                                                                    (3.13)         (0.47)        (1.75)       (0.22)
% Uncertain words                                                                 0.021***        0.011*        0.012*     0.017***
                                                                                    (3.25)         (1.65)        (1.91)       (2.63)
% Strong modal words                                                              0.009***       0.009***      0.008***     0.010***
                                                                                    (3.17)         (2.90)        (2.86)       (3.22)
% Weak modal words                                                                 -0.010         -0.006        -0.006       -0.009
                                                                                   (-0.93)        (-0.58)       (-0.60)      (-0.85)
Complexity (words per sentence)                                                     0.000          0.000         0.000        0.000
                                                                                    (1.32)         (1.11)        (0.94)       (1.51)
% Atypical tense                                                                   -0.000         -0.000        -0.000       -0.000
                                                                                   (-0.75)        (-0.30)       (-0.13)      (-0.86)
[continued on next page]

                                                                                                                                    50
                                   Table 7: Analyst uncertainty and managerial tone [continued]

                                             (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)       (6)         (7)
Dependent variable:                                                       Post-call forecast std. dev.
Ln(Words in the presentation)              0.012***    0.012***    0.012***       0.015***         0.012***    0.013***    0.014***
                                             (4.19)      (4.39)      (4.13)           (4.72)         (4.03)      (4.11)      (4.49)
Ln(Words in the answers)                     0.001       0.000       0.001            0.002          0.002       0.003       0.001
                                             (0.35)      (0.27)      (0.32)           (1.09)         (0.98)      (1.25)      (0.71)
Monthly volatility in quarter t             0.078*      0.075*      0.078*            0.070         0.075*      0.074*       0.072
                                             (1.75)      (1.66)      (1.75)           (1.54)         (1.68)      (1.65)      (1.58)
Ln(Assets)                                 0.024***    0.024***    0.024***       0.024***         0.025***    0.024***    0.024***
                                             (4.27)      (4.23)      (4.29)           (4.22)         (4.29)      (4.27)      (4.25)
Tobin's Q                                   -0.000      -0.000      -0.000           -0.000         -0.000      -0.000      -0.000
                                            (-0.20)     (-0.25)     (-0.19)          (-0.14)        (-0.13)     (-0.09)     (-0.21)
Stock return in quarter t                 -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.019*** -0.016*** -0.018***               -0.017***   -0.017***
                                            (-3.75)     (-3.69)     (-3.75)          (-3.18)        (-3.44)     (-3.37)     (-3.32)
EPS growth since same quarter last year     -0.001      -0.001      -0.001           -0.001         -0.001      -0.001      -0.001
                                            (-1.38)     (-1.39)     (-1.38)          (-1.27)        (-1.34)     (-1.29)     (-1.33)
Earnings surprise decile                  -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***               -0.001***   -0.001***
                                            (-4.22)     (-4.18)     (-4.23)          (-3.85)        (-4.02)     (-3.97)     (-3.97)
Market return in quarter t                -0.048***   -0.048***   -0.048*** -0.044*** -0.047***               -0.046***   -0.046***
                                            (-7.98)     (-7.80)     (-7.99)          (-7.22)        (-7.68)     (-7.59)     (-7.47)
Constant                                  -0.325***   -0.324***   -0.324*** -0.378*** -0.361***               -0.373***   -0.359***
                                            (-5.48)     (-5.45)     (-5.47)          (-5.95)        (-5.83)     (-6.01)     (-5.66)
Industry fixed effects                        Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
CEO fixed effects                             Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                                13,275      13,275      13,275           13,251         13,275      13,251      13,251
             2
Adjusted R                                  0.62        0.62         0.62           0.62           0.62         0.62        0.62




                                                                                                                                   51
                    Table 8: Stock price reactions around the conference call and medium-term excess returns
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable in columns (1) to (7) is CAR01, the two-day, [0,1] cumulative DGTW
characteristic-adjusted stock return on and after the conference call date, in percent. The dependent variable in columns (8) to (10) is
CAR360, the 58 trading days [3,60] cumulative DGTW characteristic-adjusted stock return in percent from 3 days after the conference
call date through 60 days. The explanatory variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The
underlying standard errors are clustered on the CEO level and robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                  (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)       (9)        (10)
Dependent variable:                            CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR360     CAR360      CAR360
Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)     -0.615***               -0.471***                                       -0.479***   -0.480***
                                                (-8.45)                 (-6.24)                                         (-6.23)     (-2.77)
Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                      -0.948***   -0.685***                                       -0.677***    -0.577**
                                                            (-7.41)     (-5.13)                                         (-4.39)     (-2.10)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                                           -0.522***                                                   -0.650**
                                                                                    (-4.60)                                                    (-2.29)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                                            0.733***                                                   0.685***
                                                                                     (5.49)                                                     (2.64)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                                                       -0.730***                                                   -1.183***
                                                                                                (-4.02)                                                     (-2.78)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                                                        1.175***                                                     0.811*
                                                                                                 (6.16)                                                      (1.88)
Absolute diff. in neg. of pres. and answers                                                               -0.545***     -0.036       0.203      -0.068       0.286
                                                                                                            (-3.52)     (-0.20)      (0.45)     (-0.18)      (0.63)
% Uncertain words                                                                                         -1.041***     -0.402       0.332       0.193      -0.063
                                                                                                            (-2.96)     (-1.13)      (0.39)      (0.22)     (-0.07)
% Strong modal words                                                                                         0.080       0.098     1.286**     1.310**      1.220*
                                                                                                             (0.29)      (0.36)      (2.04)      (2.08)      (1.95)
% Weak modal words                                                                                         2.202***   2.036***       2.424       2.409       2.597
                                                                                                             (3.00)      (2.79)      (1.44)      (1.43)      (1.54)
Complexity (words per sentence)                                                                             -0.026      -0.028       0.005       0.009      -0.001
                                                                                                            (-1.28)     (-1.38)      (0.10)      (0.18)     (-0.02)
% Atypical tense                                                                                            -0.019     -0.023*    -0.107***   -0.110***   -0.099***
                                                                                                            (-1.51)     (-1.85)     (-3.80)     (-3.89)     (-3.54)
Ln(Words in the presentation)                   0.239       0.232      0.257*       0.246       0.223      0.361**    0.502***       0.240       0.210       0.156
                                                (1.57)      (1.54)      (1.69)      (1.62)      (1.48)       (2.11)      (2.92)      (0.63)      (0.56)      (0.41)
Ln(Words in the answers)                      -0.254**    -0.254**    -0.252**    -0.253**    -0.247**    -0.416***   -0.371***    -0.703**    -0.754**    -0.661*
                                               (-2.51)     (-2.52)     (-2.49)     (-2.50)     (-2.44)      (-2.91)     (-2.61)     (-1.97)     (-2.13)     (-1.85)
[continued on next page]



                                                                                                                                                                 52
                  Table 8: Stock price reactions around the conference call and medium-term excess returns [continued]

                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)         (10)
Dependent variable:                         CAR01       CAR01       CAR01      CAR01       CAR01       CAR01       CAR01     CAR360    CAR360      CAR360
Ln(Assets)                                -0.707***   -0.717***   -0.727***   -0.710***   -0.728***   -0.708***   -0.728*** -4.359*** -4.352***   -4.347***
                                            (-4.27)     (-4.41)     (-4.40)     (-4.28)     (-4.46)     (-4.34)     (-4.39)  (-10.75)  (-10.70)     (-10.78)
Tobin's Q                                 -0.501***   -0.504***   -0.493***   -0.496***   -0.512***   -0.539***   -0.504*** -2.716*** -2.734***   -2.727***
                                            (-5.00)     (-5.00)     (-4.85)     (-4.96)     (-5.06)     (-5.42)     (-4.94)  (-10.86)  (-10.91)     (-11.07)
Market return in quarter t                  -0.852      -0.827      -0.845      -0.849      -0.847      -0.998      -0.845  9.318*** 9.241***      9.288***
                                            (-1.41)     (-1.37)     (-1.40)     (-1.41)     (-1.40)     (-1.63)     (-1.39)    (6.51)    (6.48)       (6.50)
Earnings surprise decile                   0.576***    0.577***    0.576***   0.576***    0.577***    0.573***    0.575***    -0.006    -0.008       -0.004
                                            (27.18)     (27.15)     (27.18)     (27.22)     (27.16)     (27.07)     (27.26)   (-0.14)   (-0.19)      (-0.10)
EPS growth since same quarter last year     -0.015      -0.012      -0.017      -0.014      -0.011      -0.018      -0.019   0.325**   0.322**      0.329**
                                            (-0.25)     (-0.20)     (-0.28)     (-0.24)     (-0.19)     (-0.29)     (-0.31)    (2.19)    (2.16)       (2.21)
Stock return in quarter t                   -0.757      -0.773      -0.779      -0.744      -0.765     -0.830*      -0.783    -1.572    -1.606       -1.596
                                            (-1.59)     (-1.62)     (-1.63)     (-1.56)     (-1.60)     (-1.74)     (-1.64)   (-1.47)   (-1.49)      (-1.49)
Monthly volatility in quarter t              0.145       0.045       0.143       0.151       0.061      -0.005      -0.064  14.230*** 14.288***   14.165***
                                             (0.09)      (0.03)      (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.04)     (-0.00)     (-0.04)    (3.50)    (3.50)       (3.48)
Industry fixed effects                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes
CEO fixed effects                             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes
Constant                                   7.166***    7.305***    7.154***   7.014***    7.196***    9.345***    7.531*** 51.466*** 52.437***    51.939***
                                             (3.67)      (3.79)      (3.67)      (3.59)      (3.74)      (4.40)      (3.53)    (9.22)    (9.44)       (9.32)
Observations                                13,291      13,291      13,291      13,291      13,291      13,264      13,264    12,620    12,620       12,620
Adjusted R2                                 0.11        0.11        0.11        0.11        0.11         0.1        0.11      0.04      0.04        0.04




                                                                                                                                                           53
                                         Table 9: Excess returns of double-sorted portfolios
This table presents excess returns of portfolios sorted on the earnings surprise and negativity. Firms are first sorted into 5 quintiles of
the earnings surprise and then, within each earnings surprise quintile, into 5 quintiles of negativity. Panel A uses negativity in
presentation; Panel B uses negativity in answers. Within each portfolio, we then compute the value-weighted average DGTW
characteristic-adjusted stock return from the day after the conference call to day 60.


                                                             Panel A: Negativity in presentation
                                               Q1 (least                                                Q5 (most
                       Earnings surprise       negative)         Q2            Q3             Q4        negative)
                       Q1 (lowest)              -0.30%        -0.79%        -0.80%         -1.03%        -1.90%
                       Q2                       -0.39%        -0.48%        -1.02%         -0.81%        -0.96%
                       Q3                        0.40%        -0.43%         0.34%         -1.05%        -1.07%
                       Q4                        1.01%         0.32%         0.88%          0.63%         0.49%
                       Q5 (highest)              2.41%         0.91%         0.31%          1.00%         0.72%

                                                                Panel B: Negativity in answers
                                               Q1 (least                                                Q5 (most
                       Earnings surprise       negative)         Q2            Q3             Q4        negative)
                       Q1 (lowest)              -0.52%        -1.24%        -0.27%         -0.65%        -1.84%
                       Q2                       -0.76%         0.16%        -0.73%         -1.25%        -0.99%
                       Q3                        0.39%         0.10%        -0.03%         -0.62%        -1.33%
                       Q4                        0.88%         0.50%         1.07%          1.09%        -0.39%
                       Q5 (highest)              2.55%         1.12%         1.20%          0.86%         0.05%




                                                                                                                                        54
                                       Table 10: Heterogeneous consequences of tone surprises
This table presents summary results of panel regressions. The sample is split in four quartiles of absolute earnings surprise. Within
each quartile, we run regressions of earnings in quarter t+1, post-call forecast std. dev., and CAR01 on residual negativity in
presentation (RNP) and residual negativity in answers (RNA), respectively, as well as control variables. Thus, we run regressions
equivalent to those in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5, columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, and columns (1) and (2) of Table 8, respectively.
The coefficients on the control variables are not shown. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are
clustered on the CEO level and robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


                                                                         Quartiles of absolute earnings surprise
             Dependent var.              Explanatory var.      Q1 (lowest)        Q2               Q3          Q4 (highest)
             Earnings in quarter t+1     RNP                     -0.021      -0.038***         -0.096***         -0.199***
                                                                 (-1.63)        (-3.16)          (-6.32)           (-8.43)
                                         RNA                     -0.024      -0.043***           -0.018          -0.163***
                                                                 (-1.54)        (-2.73)          (-0.94)           (-5.11)
             Post-call forecast std. dev. RNP                   0.005***      0.007***          0.010***          0.017***
                                                                  (3.77)         (5.13)           (7.29)            (5.04)
                                         RNA                    0.004***         0.002          0.007***          0.024***
                                                                  (3.92)         (1.35)           (2.96)            (5.52)
             CAR01                       RNP                   -0.723***     -0.636***         -0.748***         -0.905***
                                                                 (-5.08)        (-4.01)          (-4.63)           (-3.42)
                                         RNA                   -0.760***     -0.897***         -0.981***         -1.234***
                                                                 (-3.65)        (-4.37)          (-4.30)           (-4.44)




                                                                                                                                     55
                                           Table 11: Managerial-tone-response-coefficients
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is CAR01, the two-day, [0,1] cumulative DGTW characteristic-adjusted
stock return on and after the conference call date, in percent. To calculate Tone-Sensitivity of future earnings, we begin by sorting
firms into 20 portfolios by the absolute earnings surprise. Then, within each portfolio we run panel regressions of earnings in quarter
t+1 on residual negativity in presentation (RNP) and residual negativity in answers (RNA), respectively, in quarter t, and we save the
coefficient on this variable. To help interpret the results, we define Sensitivity of future earnings to RNP/RNA as minus this saved
coefficient. That is, the larger the Sensitivity of future earnings, the stronger the negative association of current residual negativity and
future earnings. Sensitivity of post-call forecast std. dev. to RNP/RNA is calculated in a similar way, regressing, within each portfolio,
post-call forecast std. dev. on the respective residual negativity measure. The regressions include the same control variables as the
regressions in Table 8, but the coefficients are not shown to conserve space. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying
standard errors are clustered on the level of the portfolios used to calculate Sensitivity of future earnings and Sensitivity of post-call
forecast std. dev. and are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
               Dependent variable:                                                             CAR01
               Residual negativity (RN) measure:                          RNP            RNA           RNP            RNA
               Residual negativity (RN)                               -0.458***      -0.717***      -0.443***      -0.701***
                                                                        (-4.95)        (-6.72)        (-4.42)        (-6.57)
               Sensitivity of future earnings to RN                      1.328          1.037
                                                                         (1.00)         (1.03)
               RN * Sensitivity of future earnings to RN              -2.501***      -2.433***
                                                                        (-3.06)        (-2.91)
               Sensitivity of post-call forecast std. dev. to RN                                      -3.886         -9.038
                                                                                                      (-0.32)        (-0.95)
               RN * Sensitivity of post-call forecast std. dev. to RN                              -28.088*** -19.778***
                                                                                                      (-2.89)        (-3.04)
               Firm-level controls                                        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
               Industry fixed effects                                     Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
               CEO fixed effects                                          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
               Observations                                             13,291         13,291         13,291         13,291
              Adjusted R2                                              0.12            0.12           0.12           0.12




                                                                                                                                          56
                                                 SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX

Please note: This supplementary appendix is not meant for publication in print. It can be made available on a Journal website and the
                            authors' websites upon publication. It is included for the benefit of referees.


Table A-1: Frequencies of negative and positive words in conference calls


Table A-2: Uncertainty and managerial tone


Table A-3: Medium-term excess returns


Table A-4: Future earnings, analyst uncertainty, and managerial-tone-response-coefficients


Table A-5: Alternative word classification by groups




                                                                                                                                  S-1
                     Supplementary Table A-1: Frequencies of negative and positive words in conference calls
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is the frequency of negative and positive words, respectively, in
presentations (columns 1-2), in answers (columns 3-4), and in analysts’ questions (columns 5-6). The explanatory variables are defined
in Table. T-statistics are shown in parentheses for the main variables of interests. The underlying standard errors are clustered on the
CEO level and robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                 Presentation Presentation     Answers       Answers     Questions    Questions
                                                    negative     positive      negative       positive     negative     positive
     Dependent variable:                           frequency    frequency     frequency     frequency     frequency    frequency
     Stock return in the quarter                  -0.076***     0.216***     -0.119***      0.153***     -0.165***     0.185***
                                                     (-3.07)       (7.88)       (-6.84)        (6.95)       (-6.16)       (8.43)
     EPS growth since same quarter last year      -0.041***     0.015***     -0.015***       0.006**     -0.018***        0.005
                                                     (-9.40)       (3.27)       (-4.60)        (2.08)       (-5.26)       (1.48)
     Earnings surprise decile                     -0.016***     0.018***     -0.007***      0.010***     -0.008***     0.013***
                                                    (-13.10)      (14.28)       (-7.48)       (10.07)       (-6.01)      (12.07)
     Monthly volatility in the quarter             0.707***      0.434**      0.274***        -0.108      -0.336**        0.064
                                                      (3.71)       (2.00)        (2.71)       (-0.65)       (-2.19)       (0.52)
     Pre-call forecast dispersion                  0.882***    -0.478***      0.422***     -0.275***      0.325***    -0.168***
                                                      (9.43)      (-5.17)        (5.76)       (-4.97)        (4.07)      (-3.17)
     Market return in previous quarter            -0.435***     0.250***     -0.213***      0.199***     -0.289***     0.109***
                                                    (-11.98)       (6.37)       (-7.89)        (6.19)       (-6.85)       (3.19)
     Ln(Words in the respective call part)           0.039*        0.038     -0.036***        -0.022        -0.110      -0.027*
     Ln(assets)                                   -0.093***        0.016     -0.031***      0.086***     -0.066***      0.033**
     Tobin's Q                                    -0.171***        0.017     -0.065***         0.014     -0.070***      0.018**
     Constant                                      1.661***     1.342***      1.460***         0.330      2.808***     0.470***
     Industry fixed effects                            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
     Manager fixed effects                             Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
     Observations                                    13,861       13,861        13,852        13,852        13,632       13,632
                 2
     Adjusted R                                      0.52          0.61         0.37          0.45          0.24         0.22



                                                                                                                                    S-2
                                     Supplementary Table A-2: Uncertainty and managerial tone
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable in columns (1) to (5) is revision frequency, which is the number of
revisions after the conference call for quarter t up to the earnings announcement of quarter t+1, divided by the number of analysts. In
columns (6) and (10), it is the change in the average bid-ask spread (divided by the midpoint between the bid and the ask) in the [-3,-1]
day window prior to the conference call to the [+1,+3] window following the conference call, multiplied by 100. The explanatory
variables are defined in Table 1 and in the text. The regressions include the same control variables as the regressions in Table 7, but the
coefficients are not shown to conserve space. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are clustered on the
CEO level and are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                              (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)     (10)
Dependent variable:                                             Revision frequency                                       Change in bid-ask spread
Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)   0.053***                0.048***                             0.004***              0.004***
                                              (7.80)                  (6.93)                               (3.41)                 (2.79)
Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                   0.052*** 0.031***                                            0.006**      0.004*
                                                         (4.98)       (3.01)                                         (2.38)       (1.66)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                                           0.060***                                                     0.004**
                                                                                    (5.44)                                                       (2.03)
Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                                          -0.045***                                                    -0.005**
                                                                                   (-3.97)                                                      (-2.12)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                                                       0.043***                                                    0.010**
                                                                                                (2.58)                                                     (2.56)
Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                                                      -0.059***                                                     -0.002
                                                                                               (-4.17)                                                    (-0.67)
Other speech patterns                         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Firm-level controls                           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects                        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
CEO fixed effects                             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                                 13,207     13,207      13,207       13,207        13,207     12,775    12,775       12,775       12,775       12,775
           2
Adjusted R                                    0.37       0.36         0.37        0.37         0.36        0.03      0.03          0.03         0.03       0.03




                                                                                                                                                                  S-3
                                      Supplementary Table A-3: Medium-term excess returns
This table presents panel regressions. The dependent variable is CAR060, the 61 trading days [0,60] cumulative DGTW characteristic-
adjusted stock return in percent from the conference call date through 60 days. The explanatory variables are defined in Table 1 and in
the text. The regressions include the same control variables as the regressions in Table 8, but the coefficients are not shown to
conserve space. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. The underlying standard errors are clustered on the CEO level and robust to
heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                                           (1)        (2)          (3)
                           Dependent variable:                          CAR060      CAR060       CAR060
                           Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)    -0.533**
                                                                         (-2.54)
                           Residual negativity in answers (RNA)        -0.879***
                                                                         (-2.93)
                           Absolute RNP * 1{RNP>0}                                  -0.739**
                                                                                      (-2.35)
                           Absolute RNP * 1{RNP<0}                                   0.653**
                                                                                       (2.12)
                           Absolute RNA * 1{RNA>0}                                              -1.248***
                                                                                                  (-2.91)
                           Absolute RNA * 1{RNA<0}                                               1.041***
                                                                                                   (2.67)
                           Other speech patterns                          Yes         Yes           Yes
                           Firm-level controls                            Yes         Yes           Yes
                           Industry fixed effects                         Yes         Yes           Yes
                           CEO fixed effects                              Yes         Yes           Yes
                           Observations                                  12,620      12,620       12,620
                                      2
                           Adjusted R                                     0.05         0.05        0.05




                                                                                                                                   S-4
           Supplementary Table A-4: Future earnings, analyst uncertainty, and managerial-tone-response-coefficients
This table presents a variant of the analysis in Table 11 in the paper. It presents panel regressions. The dependent variable in columns
(1) to (3) is earnings in the quarter t+1. The dependent variable in columns (3) to (6) is post-call forecast standard deviation, To
calculate sensitivity of CAR01 to residual negativity (in either presentation or answers), we begin by sorting firms into 20 portfolios by
the absolute earnings surprise. Then, within each portfolio we run panel regressions of CAR01 on the respective residual negativity in
quarter t, and we save the coefficient on this variable. To help interpret the results, we define sensitivity of CAR01 to residual
negativity as minus this saved coefficient. That is, the larger the sensitivity of CAR01 to residual negativity, the stronger the negative
association of current Residual negativity and the immediate stock market reaction. The coefficient of interest in these regressions is
the coefficient on the interaction term of residual negativity and sensitivity of CAR. The regressions include the same control variables
as the regressions in Tables 5 and 7, respectively, but the coefficients are not shown to conserve space. T-statistics are shown in
parentheses. The underlying standard errors are clustered on the level of the portfolios used to calculate the sensitivities and are robust
to heteroskedasticity. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                                               (1)                (2)            (3)                (4)
      Dependent variable:                                                     Earnings in quarter t+1    Post-call forecast standard deviation
      Residual negativity in presentation (RNP)                           -0.046***                         0.006***
                                                                            (-5.85)                            (6.35)
      Sensitivity of CAR01 to residual negativity in presentation (RNP)      0.014                            -0.002
                                                                             (0.91)                           (-1.16)
      Residual negativity in presentation * Sensitivity of CAR01 to RNP   -0.096***                          0.004**
                                                                            (-6.68)                            (2.36)
      Residual negativity in answers (RNA)                                                   -0.052***                          0.004***
                                                                                               (-5.40)                            (3.62)
      Sensitivity of CAR01 to residual negativity in answers (RNA)                              0.013                             0.001
                                                                                                (0.73)                            (0.35)
      Residual negativity in answers * Sensitivity of CAR01 to RNA                            -0.040**                          0.011***
                                                                                               (-2.16)                            (4.45)
      Firm-level controls                                                     Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes
      Industry fixed effects                                                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes
      CEO fixed effects                                                       Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes
      Observations                                                          13,291             13,291         13,291             13,291
      R2                                                                    0.65              0.64             0.65               0.65


                                                                                                                                                 S-5
                               Supplementary Table A-5: Alternative word classification by group

Our main analysis uses the Loughran and McDonald (2011) word list. We also use our own simplified classification, shown here, as
an alternative. To compile this classification, we compute the frequencies of all words appearing in managers’ and analysts’ speeches
during conference calls (initial earnings announcements and answers to analysts’ questions). Then, from among the most frequent
words we choose the words belonging to these three groups: (1) positive words, (2) negative words, (3) words indicating uncertainty.
The words in the table are ordered in the frequency of their use, within their categories.

          Positive                                  Negative                                Uncertain
          growth          improvements              decline         volatility              think           reasonable
          good            confident                 risks           weakness                may             plans
          strong          successful                risk            problem                 expect          efforts
          opportunities   stronger                  loss            lost                    anticipate      prelimiary
          opportunity     comfortable               negative        challenge               believe         possible
          improvement     excellent                 uncertainties   slowdown                maybe           planning
          positive        nice                      difficult       difficulty              compared        expecting
          grow            confidence                losses          problems                guess           estimates
          growing         profitable                below           declining               knowledge       predict
          improved        attractive                declines        negatively              expected        forecasting
          improve         optimistic                pressure        worse                   expectations    forecasts
          grew            benefited                 reduce          uncertainty             assumptions     pretty
          ability         exciting                  incorrect                               assume          approximately
          strength        wins                      decrease                                assuming        might
          gain            safe                      inaccuracies                            projections     wondering
          success         successfully              decreased                               forecast        enough
          favorable       grown                     tough                                   fairly          hope
          advantage       strength                  challenging                             generally       potential
          outstanding     encouraging               challenges                              perhaps         comparison
          improving       perfect                   declines                                roughly         assumption



                                                                                                                                 S-6
