NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK AVERSION ON WAGES IN GENERAL
EQUILIBRIUM
Ying Feng
James E. Rauch
Working Paper 20992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20992

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

Our thanks to Alexis Akira Toda and Richard Kihlstrom for helpful comments. We are responsible
for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ying Feng and James E. Rauch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Entrepreneurial Risk Aversion on Wages in General Equilibrium
Ying Feng and James E. Rauch
NBER Working Paper No. 20992
March 2015
JEL No. L26
ABSTRACT
One of the leading theories of entrepreneurship is that less risk averse individuals become entrepreneurs
and more risk averse individuals become their employees. Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) formalized
this insight in an elegant and widely taught general equilibrium model. However, their model has not
been further developed. A reason may be that their main comparative static result, that an economy-wide
increase in risk aversion lowers the equilibrium wage, appeared to require the assumption that all agents
had identical risk aversion index, throwing out their motivating insight and indicating that the model
is intractable. In this note we prove this comparative static result on risk aversion and wages in general
equilibrium, retaining agent heterogeneity in risk aversion and the endogenous division of agents into
less risk averse entrepreneurs and more risk averse workers, without adding any assumptions not already
in the original paper. Besides the intrinsic value of the result, we hope to increase the usefulness of
the Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) model for other researchers and to facilitate improvement in its exposition
for the many graduate courses in which it is taught.

Ying Feng
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
yif014@ucsd.edu
James E. Rauch
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jrauch@ucsd.edu

1

Introduction

Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) (hereafter KL) and Lucas (1978) developed the two most popular
theories of entrepreneurship (Parker 2009, chapter 2). According to KL, entrepreneurship is determined by risk aversion, with the less risk averse agents employing the more risk averse agents.
According to Lucas (1978), entrepreneurship is determined by managerial talent, with the more
talented agents employing the less talented agents. Written at the same time, KL and Lucas (1978)
have now accumulated 1,553 and 2,627 Google Scholar citations, respectively (accessed March 17,
2015). However, the otherwise parallel paths of these papers have diverged in one important respect: whereas both papers have inspired vast amounts of empirical work, only Lucas (1978) has
been extended theoretically.1 To take a couple of widely cited examples, Evans and Jovanovic
(1989) extended Lucas’s model to the case of finance constraints, and Maksimovic and Phillips
(2002) extended it to two sectors across which managerial talent differs.
There could, of course, be many reasons why subsequent authors have found Lucas (1978) more
amenable to theoretical development than KL. Here we focus on one possible reason: readers were
discouraged by the apparent intractability of the KL model for comparative static analysis. Their
only comparative static result is that an increase in risk aversion lowers the equilibrium wage.2 This
result is intuitive: greater risk aversion causes agents to prefer wage work over entrepreneurship,
and also causes entrepreneurs to hire fewer workers. Nevertheless, in order to prove this result KL
set aside the motivating insight of their model that less risk averse agents employ more risk averse
agents. Instead, they in effect assumed that all agents had identical risk aversion index.
In this note we will prove the comparative static result on risk aversion and wages in general
equilibrium, retaining agent heterogeneity in risk aversion and the endogenous division of agents
into less risk averse entrepreneurs and more risk averse workers, without adding any assumptions
not already in KL. Besides the intrinsic value of the result, we hope to increase the usefulness of KL
for other researchers and to facilitate improvement in its exposition for the many graduate courses
1

Our assertion that KL has not been extended theoretically is based on our review of papers that cite it that
themselves have at least 25 Google Scholar citations. This is not to say that all such papers are purely empirical,
just that those with theoretical models invoke KL rather than build on their model.
2
They also include in their section on comparative statics the result that firm employment decreases with the risk
aversion of the entrepreneur (theorem 3), but they attribute this result to Baron (1970).

2

in which it is taught.
In the next section we will present the KL model briefly. In section 3 we will prove our result,
which is a revised version of KL theorem 4. In the following section we will show by example that
an interior solution to the KL model exists. Section 5 concludes.

2

KL Model Setup

KL identify the set of agents with the interval [0,1]. Individual α ∈ [0, 1] has the von Neumann
Morgenstern utility function u(I, α) where I ∈ [0, ∞) represents income. Agents are characterized
(I,α)
by the Arrow-Pratt absolute risk aversion measure r(I, α) = − uuIII (I,α)
, where r(I, α) is a strictly

increasing function of α for each I.3
Each agent can become an entrepreneur and use without cost a technology defined by a continuous
production function y = g(L, x) where y ≥ 0 is output, L ≥ 0 is the labor input and x is the
value taken by a nondegenerate random parameter x̃ with support [0, x̄], 0 < x̄ < +∞. The
objective stochastic distribution of x̃ is assumed to be the same for all firms. KL also assume
the marginal product gL is continuous and positive, and the second derivative gLL is continuous
and nonpositive, on [0, +∞) × [0, x̄]. Thus g exhibits nonincreasing returns to scale for each x.
In addition, g(0, x) = g(L, 0) = 0 for all x ∈ [0, x̄] and L ∈ [0, +∞), while g(L, x) > 0 on
(0, +∞) × (0, x̄].
The price of output is 1 and labor is hired at a competitive wage w. Agents can become entrepreneurs and receive an uncertain income of g(L, x̃) − wL, or they can become workers and
receive the market wage w. To avoid the problem of bankruptcy, KL assume that all individuals
begin with A units of income and that entrepreneurs are unable to hire workers who cannot be
paid if x̃ = 0. Thus L ≤

A
w

must hold.

The equilibrium in KL is then pinned down by three key steps. First, an individual who becomes
3

KL add the assumption that r is strictly increasing rather than non-decreasing in α in a Lemma (p. 725) that
precedes their proof of existence of equilibrium (theorem 1).

3

an entrepreneur chooses employment L(w, α) ∈ [0, A/ω] which solves4

Max Eu(A + g(L, x̃) − wL, α).
L

(1)

The assumptions on u and g guarantee that L(w, α) exists. If either uII < 0 or gLL < 0, then
L(w, α) will be unique.5
Second, the certainty equivalent wage w(α) of agent α is defined by6

Eu[A + g(L(w(α), α), x̃) − w(α)L(w(α), α), α] = u(A + w(α), α).

(2)

Thus, under market wage w(α), agent α is indifferent between work and entrepreneurship. Moreover, w(α) is continuous and monotonically decreasing:7 the more risk averse is the agent, the lower
is the wage that makes him indifferent between entrepreneurship and wage work.
Finally, a general equilibrium where the labor market clears is characterized by a marginal entrepreneur α̂ such that8
Zα̂
L(w(α̂), α) dα = 1 − α̂,

(3)

0

where agents with α ∈ [0, α̂] are entrepreneurs and agents with α ∈ (α̂, 1] are workers.
Thus, knowing α̂, we know the equilibrium wage w(α̂), and knowing w(α̂), we know L(w(α̂), α) for
every entrepreneur α ∈ [0, α̂]. KL go on to demonstrate the uniqueness of this equilibrium in their
theorem 2.
4

This is equation (3) on page 724 of KL.
The existence of L(w, α) is guaranteed by the continuity of the expectation operation, u, and g, plus the fact
that L is bounded in [0, A
]. If either uII < 0 or gLL < 0, the objective function is strictly concave, so L(w, α) will
w
be unique. This last assumption is made in both theorem 1 and theorem 2 of KL.
6
This is equation (7) on page 724 of KL.
7
Prior to theorem 1 proving existence of equilibrium, KL add the assumption that u(I, α) is everywhere a continuous function of α, from which the continuity of w(α) follows.
8
This is equation (14) on page 728 of KL. They use notation α̂∗ but we simplify it to α̂ for further use in our
proof.
5

4

3

Risk Aversion and the Equilibrium Wage

KL state their comparative static result as theorem 4, which we reproduce exactly here, noting
that α̂ is defined by KL as the marginal entrepreneur:
Theorem 4: If (i) in equilibrium, all entrepreneurs are identical, (ii) either gLL < 0 or
uII < 0, (iii) g(L, x) and gL (L, x) are both monotonically increasing (or decreasing)
functions of x, and (iv) L(w, α̂) is an interior solution and a decreasing function of w,
then an increase in the Arrow-Pratt absolute risk aversion measure r(I, α̂) for all I,
lowers the equilibrium wage.
Unlike assumptions ii - iv, assumption i does not appear earlier in KL. To appreciate the importance
of assumption i, recall that the division of agents between entrepreneurs and workers is endogenous.
The only way, then, to guarantee that all entrepreneurs are identical in equilibrium is to assume that
all agents are identical. In this case, equilibrium is only possible when all agents are indifferent
between becoming entrepreneurs or becoming workers: otherwise there is either no demand for
labor or no supply of labor. With the wage determining the labor demand of every identical firm,
indifferent agents must divide between entrepreneurs and workers so as to provide enough firms to
exactly employ all the agents who do not operate firms. That is, in equilibrium the wage adjusts so
as to allow the division of indifferent agents between entrepreneurs and workers to clear the labor
market.
As theorem 4 is written, it is clear that equation (3) no longer applies because α̂ no longer divides
agents between entrepreneurs in [0, α̂] and workers in (α̂, 1]. In other words, it is no longer the case
that in equilibrium the less risk averse agents employ the more risk averse agents. Accordingly, KL
do not use equation (3) in their proof of theorem 4. Moreover, their statement of theorem 4 is at
odds with their remark 2 that immediately follows their statement of the theorem:
Remark 2: The intuitive basis for the result is as follows. Since, in equilibrium, workers
are the most risk averse individuals, an economy-wide increase in risk aversion increases
the supply of workers and this tends to lower the wage. This tendency is reinforced
by demand changes implied by theorem 3 which applies because of assumption iii.
5

Specifically, theorem 3 implies that an increase in the entrepreneurs’ aversion to risk
reduces the demand for labor.
Given assumption i, it is not meaningful to state that “in equilibrium, workers are the most risk
averse individuals,” and the economy-wide increase in risk aversion increases the supply of workers
only in the sense that each (identical) firm employs fewer workers at a given wage. Our main goal
in this note is thus to restate and prove theorem 4 so as to maintain the applicability of equation
(3) and fulfill the original intent of KL as embodied in their remark 2 quoted above.
Let the assumptions in KL theorem 1 (existence), KL theorem 2 (uniqueness), and KL theorem
3 (L(w, α) decreasing in entrepreneurial risk aversion) hold9 , as well as the assumption in their
Lemma (risk aversion increasing in α, not merely non-decreasing). We do not make assumption i
above. We can then state and prove the following revised version of KL theorem 410 :
THEOREM 4 (REVISED). An increase in the Arrow-Pratt absolute risk aversion measure r(I, α)
for all α ∈ [0, 1] and for all I lowers the equilibrium wage.
PROOF: Recall that the certainty equivalent wage w(α) is a continuous and monotonically decreasing function of α. We can therefore invert this function to obtain the continuous and monotonically
decreasing function α(w), which gives the risk aversion index of the agent who is indifferent between
wage work and entrepreneurship at wage w. We can then rewrite equation (3):
α(
Z ŵ)

L(ŵ, α) dα = 1 − α(ŵ),

(4)

0

where ŵ is the equilibrium wage. Now consider an economy-wide increase in risk aversion to
r0 (I, α) > r(I, α), α ∈ [0, 1]. This implies α0 (ŵ) < α(ŵ), because when risk aversion increases,
holding w constant, the risk aversion index of the marginal agent must decrease, since otherwise the
marginal agent prefers wage work. r0 (I, α) > r(I, α), α ∈ [0, 1] also implies L0 (w, α) < L(w, α),11
9

Theorem 3 uses the assumption that L(w, α) < A
, but we actually do not need this assumption for our proof
w
below.
10
We interpret α as a pure index in our proof. An alternative proof, in which we interpret α as a parameter of
the utility function, is available at http://acsweb.ucsd.edu/~yif014/proof2-note-kl1979.pdf. In the alternative
proof we do not need assumption iii stated in KL theorem 4 above.
11
If, for some α, L(w, α) is not interior, then L0 (w, α) = L(w, α).

6

holding w constant, since L(w, α) is decreasing in risk aversion by KL theorem 3. Now rewrite
equation (4) as equation (5):
0 (ŵ 0 )
αZ

L0 (ŵ0 , α) dα = 1 − α0 (ŵ0 ),

(5)

0

where ŵ0 is the new equilibrium wage. Comparing the two equations, it is clear that at the
equilibrium wage such that equation (4) holds (ŵ0 = ŵ), the left-hand side of equation (5) is
smaller than the right-hand side: there is an excess supply of labor. Because α0 (w) is decreasing
and L0 (w, α) is decreasing in w, a fall in ŵ0 (ŵ0 < ŵ) will restore labor market clearing. Q.E.D.
The seemingly innocuous assumption that L(w, α) is decreasing in w conceals some subtlety. As
KL explain in their remark 4 (p. 731), this holds if either (a) r(I, α) is a constant function of I, (b)
g(L, x) and gL (L, x) are both monotonically increasing (or decreasing) functions of x and r(I, α) is
(A+I,α)
a non-increasing function of I, or (c) g(L, x) satisfies g(L, x) = xh(L) and − IuuIII(A+I,α)
≤ 1 for all I.

Those interested can read the proof of remark 4 in KL. Here, in order to build intuition, we simply
note that these conditions are needed because changing w also changes entrepreneurial income,
which (in general) affects their risk aversion and therefore their labor demand. For example,
consider assumption (b). If w increases, entrepreneurial income decreases, hence risk aversion
increases (or remains unchanged), reinforcing the negative effect on labor demand.

4

An Example with an Interior Solution

As mentioned above, in theorem 3 KL demonstrate that L(w, α) is decreasing in entrepreneurial
risk aversion, as indexed by α. Naturally this result requires that L(w, α) is interior. Although KL
are able to prove that L(w, α) > 0 in equilibrium, they have to assume L(w, α) <

A
w.

To prove

that the comparative static result in theorem 3 is not vacuous, we will now provide an example in
which we prove that L(w, α) is interior in equilibrium. We hope this example will also be useful
for pedagogy.
Let u(I, α) = I 1−α where I ∈ [0, ∞) and α ∈ (0, 1). This functional form satisfies the assumptions

7

(I,α)
made on u and risk attitudes: if α > β, then r(I, α) = − uuIII (I,α)
= αI > βI = r(I, β). Let the


 0 with probability 1 − λ
production function be y = xL where x =
and λ ∈ (0, 1). We will

 x̄ with probability λ

then show there exists a unique equilibrium wage w > 0 and L(w, α) ∈ (0, A
w ) for all α.
For each agent α, labor demand L(w, α) solves

Max Eu = (1 − λ)(A − wL)1−α + λ(A + (x̄ − w)L)1−α .

L∈[0, A
]
w

(6)

For this concave objective function, the first order condition is sufficient to find L that maximizes
Eu.

FOC: [

(1 − λ)w 1
] α (A + (x̄ − w)L) = A − wL
λ(x̄ − w)

(7)

1

L(w, α) =

where k ≡

(1−λ)w
λ(x̄−w) .

(1 − k α )A
1

1

k α x̄ + (1 − k α )w

,

(8)

If k ∈ (0, 1), then L(w, α) > 0. Note k ∈ (0, 1) is equivalent to w ∈ (0, λx̄),

which implies x̄ > w thus making L(w, α) <

A
w.

So L(w, α) ∈ (0, A
w ) is indeed guaranteed by

w ∈ (0, λx̄).
The certainty equivalent wage is defined by

(A + w)1−α = (1 − λ)[A − wL(w, α)]1−α + λ[A + (x̄ − wL(w, α))]1−α .

(9)

Substituting L(w, α) from (8) yields
1

1

1

(A + w)1−α [k α x̄ + (1 − k α )w]1−α = (1 − λ)(Ak α x̄)1−α + λ(Ax̄)1−α

If w = 0, then k = 0 and LHS −RHS = −λ(Ax̄)1−α < 0; if w = λx̄, then k = 1 and LHS −RHS =
(Ax̄ + λx̄2 )1−α − (Ax̄)1−α > 0 . Therefore, by continuity, there must exist a w ∈ (0, λx̄) defined by
(9), which guarantees that L(w, α) is an interior solution.

8

5

Conclusion

We have proved that in the model of KL an economy-wide increase in risk aversion lowers the
wage that clears the labor market, while retaining agent heterogeneity in risk aversion and the
endogenous division of agents into less risk averse entrepreneurs and more risk averse workers.
This result is of interest in its own right and also appears to fulfill the original vision of KL. By
showing that comparative statics are possible in their model without setting aside its fundamental
insight, we hope to encourage other researchers to extend their theory, rather than only invoke it
as has occurred in the literature to date. We also provided a simple example that establishes the
existence of an interior solution to their model and should be useful in the many graduate courses
in which KL is taught.

References
[1] Baron, David P. “Price uncertainty, utility, and industry equilibrium in pure competition.”
International Economic Review 11 (1970): 463-480.
[2] Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. “An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (1989): 808-827.
[3] Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Jean-Jacques Laffont.“A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of firm formation based on risk aversion.”Journal of Political Economy 87 (1979): 719-748.
[4] Lucas, Robert E. “On the size distribution of business firms.” Bell Journal of Economics 9
(1978): 508-523.
[5] Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips. “Do conglomerate firms allocate resources inefficiently across industries? Theory and evidence.” Journal of Finance 57 (2002): 721-767.
[6] Parker, Simon C. The economics of entrepreneurship. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

9

