NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACCESS TO FOUR-YEAR PUBLIC COLLEGES AND DEGREE COMPLETION
Joshua Goodman
Michael Hurwitz
Jonathan Smith
Working Paper 20996
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20996

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

Previously circulated as "College Access, Initial College Choice and Degree Completion." This
research reflects the views of the authors and not their corresponding institutions. For helpful
comments, we thank Kehinde Ajayi, Chris Avery, Raj Chetty, Damon Clark, Gordon Dahl, David
Deming, Yingying Dong, Maria Fitzpatrick, Jessica Howell, Joshua Hyman, Larry Katz and
Martin West, as well as conference and seminar participants at Harvard, UC-San Diego, UCIrvine, NBER, SOLE, SREE, AEFP, SEA and the College Board. Shelby Lin and Carlos Paez
provided excellent research assistance. Joshua Goodman gratefully acknowledges support from
the Taubman Center for State and Local Government. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20996.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Access to Four-Year Public Colleges and Degree Completion
Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 20996
February 2015, Revised June 2016
JEL No. I2,I23,J24
ABSTRACT
Does access to four-year colleges affect degree completion for students who would otherwise
attend two-year colleges? Admission to Georgia’s four-year public sector requires minimum SAT
scores. Regression discontinuity estimates show that access to this sector increases four-year
college enrollment and college quality, largely by diverting students from two-year colleges.
Access substantially increases bachelor’s degree completion rates for these relatively low-skilled
students. SAT retaking behavior suggests students value access to four-year public colleges,
though perhaps less than they should. Our results imply that absolute college quality matters more
than match quality and suggest potential unintended consequences of free community college
proposals.
Joshua Goodman
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joshua_goodman@hks.harvard.edu
Michael Hurwitz
College Board
1919 M Street NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
mhurwitz@collegeboard.org

Jonathan Smith
College Board
1919 M Street NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
jsmith@collegeboard.org

1

Introduction

A 2014 White House summit on college access reported that:
Too few low-income students apply to and attend colleges and universities that are
the best fit for them, resulting in a high level of academic undermatch... Students
who attend selective institutions, which tend to have more resources available for student support, have better education outcomes, even after controlling for student ability
(White House, 2014).
We have clear evidence that students, particularly low-income ones, do not attend the highest quality colleges available to them (Bowen et al., 2009; Dillon and Smith, 2013; Smith et al., 2013;
Hoxby and Avery, 2013) and that initial college choices can be altered by relatively low-cost interventions (Pallais, 2015; Bettinger et al., 2012; Hoxby and Turner, 2013; Carrell and Sacerdote,
2013; Castleman et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2015). Less clear is the extent to which changing such
college choices affects students’ longer-run outcomes such as degree completion and labor market
earnings.
Whether the type and quality of college chosen affects such outcomes bears directly on a number of economic and policy questions. These include: the extent to which postsecondary institutional factors explain dropping college completion rates among U.S. college enrollers (Belley
and Lochner, 2007; Bound et al., 2010; Bailey and Dynarski, 2011); the relative importance of
“match” quality versus absolute quality (Dillon and Smith, 2013) and how that, in turn, informs
debates about affirmative action (Arcidiacono and Lovenheim, 2016); the extent to which informational interventions like the College Scorecard website can improve student outcomes by changing
college choices (Hurwitz and Smith, 2016); and, finally, what impact recent proposals to make
community college free will have on students choosing between that sector and other options.
Identifying the impact of college choice on longer-run outcomes requires separating studentlevel factors, such as academic skill and financial resources, from college-level factors, such as
funding levels or operational efficiency. The non-random selection of students into colleges of
different types and qualities generally confounds attempts to do so. The major empirical challenge
is thus to find an exogenous source of variation in college choice. We do so by exploiting minimum
test score thresholds used during the college admissions process. Such thresholds are used by
one in five U.S. colleges (Briggs, 2009) and by many states’ public college systems, including
California, Florida and Texas, though often in combination with high school GPA.
We focus on Georgia’s state university system (GSUS), which publicly announces minimum
SAT scores that are required for first-year admission, irrespective of high school GPA. Such thresh1

olds play an important role in access to the state’s public four-year college sector. Regression
discontinuity estimates around these minimum thresholds show that access to the four-year public sector increases both the probability of enrollment in any four-year college and the quality of
college chosen, largely by diverting students from two-year colleges. Most importantly, access
substantially increases bachelor’s degree completion rates for these relatively low-skilled students.
Missing these thresholds increases SAT retaking rates, suggesting that students value access to the
four-year public sector, though perhaps less than the completion benefits suggest they should.
Our works contributes in three ways to existing literature on the impacts of college choice.
First, this is the only research in the U.S. context to document the impact of test score-based access
to an entire college sector. Our results are driven by one state’s set of four-year public colleges,
not the potentially idiosyncratic effect of a single college. In this sense, our work resembles recent
research exploiting Colombian and Chilean national systems of college admissions thresholds to
estimate the impact of college quality and sector on a variety of labor market and other outcomes
(Saavedra, 2008; Kaufmann et al., 2013; Hastings et al., 2013).
Our second contribution is to cleanly identify college choice impacts for relatively low-skilled
students choosing largely between two- and four-year colleges. Much of the literature estimating
the impact of college choice on graduation rates and earnings focuses on higher-skilled students
exposed to quality differences within the four-year sector, including the Latin American studies
cited earlier, and U.S. studies based on selection on observables models (Black et al., 2005; Black
and Smith, 2004, 2006; Long, 2008; Dale and Krueger, 2014), twin fixed effects models (Smith,
2013) and regression discontinuity designs (Hoekstra, 2009; Cohodes and Goodman, 2014). Our
focus on low-skilled students supplements evidence that college quality matters for high-skilled
students.
Our results are also consistent with previous evidence of a graduation rate penalty associated
with choosing a two-year instead of a four-year college (Rouse, 1995, 1998; Leigh and Gill, 2003;
Long and Kurlaender, 2009; Reynolds, 2012; Smith and Stange, 2015). Such a penalty may stem
from the substantial differences across these two sectors along multiple dimensions, including peer
quality, faculty quantity and quality, and funding levels more generally, which affect the quantity
and quality of academic resources available to students. Our work is closest in spirit to Zimmerman
(2014), in which relatively low-skilled students who would otherwise attend community colleges
see substantial labor market returns to access to the least selective four-year public college in
Florida. Our demonstration that college quality affects degree completion for such students may

2

explain part of the labor market return observed in that and other contexts.1
Our third contribution is to connect test retaking behavior to demand for access to a particular
set of colleges, in this case the public four-year sector. Prior research on SAT-taking behavior
has shown increased retaking to achieve round-numbered scores (Pope and Simonsohn, 2011) or
to increase maximum scores (Vigdor and Clotfelter, 2003), which are an important factor in an
increasingly competitive admissions process (Bound et al., 2009). Jepsen et al. (2016) also find
substantial retaking of certification exams in order to earn a GED. We document increased rates of
test retaking in response to failing to meet publicly known college admissions thresholds. These
thresholds have no significance outside of the GSUS admissions process. Increased retaking rates
thus indicate that students value access to the four-year public sector, perhaps in part because they
perceive the degree completion benefits such access brings. This is the first paper we are aware of
to document SAT retaking as evidence of demand for a particular college sector.
The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the data, the
context studied here, and our regression discontinuity methodology. Section 3 presents summary
statistics and evidence on the strength of our first stage and the validity of our empirical design.
Section 4 describes our enrollment and completion results. Section 5 discusses the broader implications of our results.

2

Data, Context and Empirical Strategy

2.1

Data

We use student-level data for the graduating high school classes of 2004-08, collected from two
sources. The first data set, collected and maintained by the College Board (CB), contains information on the nearly 1.5 million students in each high school graduation cohort who take the SAT at
least once, a test many four-year colleges require for admission. The SAT contains a math and critical reading section, each of which is scored in increments of 10 on a scale between 200 and 800.2
Students may retake the SAT as often as the testing schedule permits, with each test administration
costing roughly $40 during the time period studied here. Fee waivers are available to low-income
students taking the exam for the first or second time.
The CB data contain all scores students ever receive across multiple test takes, as well as the
dates of those takes, allowing us to identify both first and maximum SAT scores. College admis1

Canaan and Mouganie (2015) also find labor market returns attributable to college quality for relatively low-skilled
French students.
2
A third section on writing does not play a role in the thresholds studied here.

3

sions offices frequently rely on students’ maximum scores, defined as the sum of their maximum
math and critical reading scores regardless of whether they were earned on the same test date.
Though we use this maximum score for some analyses, we focus largely on students’ first SAT
scores to avoid potentially endogenous retaking behavior. The CB data identifies colleges to which
students send their SAT scores, which serve as good proxies for actual college applications (Card
and Krueger, 2005; Pallais, 2015). The data also contain self-reported information on student race,
gender, parental income and education, as well as high school attended. Self-reported year of high
school graduation is used to assign students to graduating classes.
These data are then merged with data from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which
collects information on the vast majority of students enrolled in U.S. postsecondary institutions.
In the years studied here, the NSC captured somewhere between 90 and 95 percent of all Georgia
students enrolled in Title IV institutions, according to Dynarski et al. (2015).3 Data from the NSC
allow us to track a student’s postsecondary trajectory including initial enrollment and ultimate
degree completion. We focus on the 2004-08 high school graduation classes for whom we can
observe six-year college graduation rates.
Measuring college quality across the two- and four-year sectors is difficult because traditional
data sources such as the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) lack comparable measures between the two sectors. IPEDS contains average SAT scores of incoming students at
four-year colleges but does not have any similar measure for two-year colleges, which generally do
not require students to have taken the SAT. IPEDS is also limited by the fact that degree completion
rates reported by colleges do not account for the outcomes of transfer students, a particularly acute
problem for the two-year sector, which is designed in part to facilitate transfers to the four-year
sector.
We therefore use the merged CB and NSC data to construct measures of college quality that
are comparable across these sectors. To measure student quality, we follow Smith and Stange
(2015) and assign each college the average score of that college’s first-time students on the PSAT, a
College Board test taken by high school sophomores and juniors, including many who do not later
take the SAT. We standardize PSAT scores by cohort to have mean zero and standard deviation
one. We thus assign each student a standardized measure of the quality of peers to whom he is
exposed at his initial college. For students who do not initially enroll in college within one year
of graduating high school, we assign a value of -0.54 standard deviations, which represents the
average standardized PSAT score for all such students.
3

See Table 2, where the enrollment coverage rate for Georgia ranges from 89.9% in 2005 to 94.8% in 2011. Other
mid-Atlantic and Southeast states look similar. Some of those not captured by NSC may be enrolling in for-profit
institutions.

4

To measure institutional degree completion rates, we identify all SAT-takers who enroll in that
college and then compute the fraction of such students who complete a bachelor’s degree from any
institution within six years. This measure has the advantage of being computable for both the twoand four-year sectors, as well as including transfer students among those degree recipients. For
students who do not initially enroll in college within one year of graduating high school, we assign
a value of 6.7 percent, which represents the average six-year bachelor’s degree completion rate for
all such students.

2.2

Georgia Context

The main analytic sample consists of all students residing in the state of Georgia at the time of
taking the SAT. Georgia’s Board of Regents requires that SAT-takers score at least 430 in critical
reading and at least 400 in math in order to be admitted to universities within the Georgia state
university system. The set of 18 four-year universities governed by this requirement consist of
three research universities, two regional universities, and 13 state universities.4 Five of the 18
universities impose higher minimum thresholds than required by the Board of Regents, though
only two impose substantially higher thresholds. Georgia’s state and technical colleges, all of
which are primarily two-year institutions, impose much lower minimum thresholds.
The Georgia context is interesting for three reasons. First, these thresholds apply to all students considering four-year public institutions in Georgia. As we show later, over 60% of Georgia
students near these thresholds who enroll in four-year colleges do so in these GSUS institutions.
These thresholds thus affect the majority of college options for students in this market. Second, the
GSUS minimum admissions thresholds correspond to roughly the 25th percentile of the distribution of scores among Georgia SAT-takers in the years in question. The marginal student here has
relatively low academic skills and is often choosing between two- and four-year colleges. Third,
the public nature of these requirements means that students can, in theory, take the thresholds into
account when planning their college application process. We explore whether students do, in fact,
plan around these thresholds.

2.3

Empirical Strategy

To eliminate selection bias driven by different types of students making different college choices,
we exploit the thresholds previously described. We use a regression discontinuity design to compare a variety of outcomes between students just above and below these thresholds. We generate
4

See Table A.1.

5

first stage estimates through local linear regressions of the form:
GSU Sic = α0 + α1 Accessic + α2 Distanceic + α3 Accessic ∗ Distanceic + γc + µic

(1)

Here, GSUS indicates the initial enrollment of student i in high school class c in a Georgia fouryear public college, within one year of high school graduation. Access is an indicator for meeting or
exceeding the relevant test score threshold and Distance measures the number of SAT points each
student’s score is from the threshold. We control flexibly for time-varying shocks by including
high school class fixed effects (γc ). Because the two sets of students on either side of the threshold
are nearly identical in terms of academic skill and other characteristics, the coefficient of interest,
α1 , estimates the causal effect of satisfying the SAT admissions requirements on enrollment in
Georgia’s four-year public sector.
We estimate the impact of access on outcomes through reduced form regressions of the form:
Yic = ρ0 + ρ1 Accessic + ρ2 Distanceic + ρ3 Accessic ∗ Distanceic + σc + νic

(2)

We consider three different sets of outcomes Y . The first are measures of enrollment in other
college sectors, in order to estimate which types of colleges students are forgoing when enrolling in
the four-year public sector. The second are the measures of college quality mentioned previously,
namely student quality and institutional completion rates, in order to estimate how enrollment
in the four-year public sector changes the quality of one’s initial college. The third are various
measures of students’ degree completion, in order to estimate the impact of initial college choice
on completion rates.
We also generate instrumental variable estimates of the form:
Yic = β0 + β1 GSU Sic + β2 Distanceic + β3 Accessic ∗ Distanceic + δc + ic

(3)

where GSU S is instrumented by access according to equation 1. The coefficient of interest, β1 ,
estimates the impact of enrollment in the four-year public sector on the outcomes mentioned above.
Using GSUS as the endogenous regressor allows us to capture the full set of marginal students
whose enrollment decisions were altered by the thresholds.5 This implies that we are estimating
the impact of enrollment in the four-year public sector relative to the full set of forgone alternatives,
including enrollment in two-year colleges, in non-GSUS four-year colleges, and in no college at
5

Using four-year college enrollment as the endogenous variable, for example, would yield estimates that failed to
account for the empirically important fact that the thresholds shift some students between private and public four-year
colleges.

6

all.
In Georgia, a student must score at least 430 in reading and at least 400 in math. We therefore
define distance from the threshold as:
Distance = min(SATR − 430, SATM − 400)

(4)

This minimum function collapses the two-dimensional threshold into a single dimension, where
negative values imply a student has missed at least one threshold and zero or positive values imply
a student has met or exceeded both thresholds. This method of collapsing a multi-dimensional
boundary into a single dimension is discussed in Reardon and Robinson (2012) and has previously
been used in papers such as Goodman (2008) and Papay et al. (2014). We show that our estimates
are quite similar if we instead define the running variable as distance to just the math threshold or
just the verbal threshold.
Because Georgia’s admissions thresholds are publicly known, we define each student’s distance
from the threshold using that student’s first SAT scores. This is similar to the approach used by
Jepsen et al. (2016), who evaluate the labor market return to earning a GED. First scores do not
suffer from potential endogeneity driven by any retaking of the SAT in reaction to scoring below
the thresholds. We will provide evidence that, though there is endogenous retaking of SAT in
reaction to the thresholds, the magnitude of that endogeneity is quite small. Using maximum
scores to define the running variable yields estimates generally similar in magnitude but more
precise than those generated by first scores. This increased precision comes from the stronger firststage relationship between maximum scores and enrollment because maximum scores are the ones
considered during the admissions process.
We run the local linear regressions above using bandwidths of 60 SAT points, which corresponds closely to the optimal bandwidths suggested by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) to
balance precision against minimization of bias due to nonlinearities far from the threshold. Such
optimal bandwidths vary by outcome, so fixing the bandwidth across regressions has the advantage
of defining a single sample clearly. We show that our estimates are not sensitive to this bandwidth
choice. We cluster standard errors by discrete distance to the threshold, as suggested by Lee and
Card (2008). Clustering instead by high school yields very similar standard errors.

7

3

Summary Statistics and Validity of the Research Design

3.1

Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for Georgia residents from the high school classes of 2004-08.
As seen in column 1, this sample is 60 percent white and 26 percent black. Nearly one-third of
students are low income, defined here as reporting annual family income of less than $60,000.6
The average student in this sample has a first SAT score of 967 and two-thirds have first SAT
scores sufficiently high to satisfy the GSUS minimum thresholds. The marginal student studied
here is thus at the 34th percentile of the skill distribution of Georgia SAT takers. Most students
retake the SAT at least once, so that 73 percent ultimately meet the GSUS thresholds. 37 percent
first enroll in a GSUS college within one year of graduating high school, while 61 percent enroll
in any four-year college. This implies that three-fifths of students who enroll in a four-year college
do so in the in-state public sector. Another 20 percent first enroll in a two-year college. Only 45
percent complete a bachelor’s degree within six years of graduating high school.
Our main regression discontinuity sample, shown in column 2, includes those students whose
first SAT scores fell within 60 points of the GSUS eligibility threshold. Compared to the overall
Georgia sample, these students are slightly more likely to be black and from low income families,
score 60 points lower on the SAT, and are less likely to complete a bachelor’s degree. We also
focus on subgroups of students whose initial college choices are particularly likely to be affected
by differences in SAT-based access to the four-year public sector. Such students may lack the
resources or information to make application and test retaking decisions that would otherwise
limit the extent to which such thresholds constrain their college options.
We use income and SAT-taking dates as two ways to identify subgroups who are likely “disadvantaged” along these dimensions. Low income students, who report family income less than
$60,000 and who comprise one third of the RD sample, are likely constrained financially and along
other dimensions.7 Late SAT takers, who first take the SAT no more than 12 months prior to high
school graduation and who comprise one half of the RD sample, are likely less knowledgeable
about the college application process generally and about the value of having time to retake the
SAT. Given the particular challenges faced by African-Americans in the Georgia context, we also
use the intersection of race, income and SAT timing to identify two subgroups of students whom
we refer to as “very disadvantaged.” One such group are black students from families earning less
6

The remaining two thirds of students are roughly evenly split between those reporting income over $60,000 and
those not reporting income.
7
Because one third of the sample does not report income, this threshold identifies the bottom half of the incomereporting distribution. None of our results are sensitive to choosing a lower income threshold to define “low income.”

8

than $30,000 annually. The other are black students who first take the SAT no more than 6 months
prior to high school graduation. We focus on such disadvantaged students both because they are
inherently of interest and because they show particularly strong first-stage impacts of the GSUS
thresholds on college enrollment. None of our central findings is sensitive to the precise choices
that define these groups.

3.2

Validity of the Research Design

We perform two checks that our regression discontinuity design satisfies the key assumption that
students on either side of the threshold are similar in terms of observed and unobserved characteristics. First, following McCrary (2008), we check for smoothness in the density of observations,
violation of which could suggest that students can at least partially control which side of the threshold they fall on.8 In the Georgia sample, the density of observations is nearly identical just below
and just at the threshold. This suggests students can not manipulate their first SAT scores, an
unsurprising result given that SATs are centrally scored and students do not know precisely how
scaled scores are generated.
Second, we test for balance in observed covariates across the threshold, for the entire sample
as well as for our disadvantaged and very disadvantaged subsamples.9 Consistent with students’
inability to precisely manipulate which side of the threshold they initially fall on, we see little indication of imbalance in observed covariates such as income, parental education, race and gender.
The few observed differences are small in magnitude and the number is consistent with the rate
of false positives expected given the number of tests being performed. We perform joint tests of
imbalance by generating predicted four-year college enrollment and bachelor’s degree completion
rates, based on students’ gender, race, income and parental education. What little evidence we
observe of imbalance in predicted outcomes is very small in magnitude and opposite in sign to
our subsequent results, again suggesting that our main findings are not generated by imbalance
in student types across the threshold. Graphical versions of these balance tests for income and
predicted degree completion show no visually apparent discontinuities.10 We show in later robustness checks that controlling for all observed covariates does not meaningfully change our point
8

See Figure A.1, which graphs the density of SAT takers as a function of distance of first SAT scores from the
admissions threshold. The closed circles represent our Georgia sample and the open circles represent SAT takers from
all other states during this time period. The density of observations has a local peak 10 points above the threshold due
to the fact that certain scaled scores were more common translations of raw scores during this time period. That this
peak appears off the threshold and appears in the non-Georgia sample as well suggests it is unrelated to the GSUS
eligibility criteria and thus poses no threat to validity here.
9
See Table A.2.
10
See Figure A.2.

9

estimates, providing further evidence that students on either side of the threshold are practically
identical.

4
4.1

College Enrollment and Completion Effects
First Stage

We now show that the GSUS minimum admissions thresholds generate exogenous variation in the
probability that a student enrolls in a GSUS college. Figure 1 shows graphically the relationship
between distance to the threshold and the probability of enrolling in one of Georgia’s four-year
public colleges. Panel A, which defines distance using maximum SAT scores, shows a clear and
large discontinuity, with students just above the threshold substantially more likely to enroll in
the four-year public sector than those just below it. GSUS enrollment below the threshold is nonzero for two reasons. First, students can also gain admission through the ACT exam, the SAT’s
primary alternative, taken by roughly 30% of Georgia’s high school classes of 2004-08. Second,
each institution may exempt individual students from these minimum thresholds if such students
otherwise demonstrate potential for success through interviews, portfolios or life experiences.
Because the maximum SAT score is potentially endogenous, we present this graphical evidence
only to show that GSUS colleges clearly use the SAT thresholds as part of the admissions process.
Our first stage will be generated instead by variations on panel B, which defines distance using
first SAT scores. This graph also shows a discontinuity, albeit one much smaller than in panel A
because GSUS colleges use maximum, and not first, SAT scores in the admissions process. Panel
A of Table 2 confirms the existence of a small but clear discontinuity, showing regression estimates
of the first stage impact of SAT-based access on enrollment in Georgia’s four-year public colleges.
For the sample of all students, meeting the GSUS thresholds increases the probability of GSUS
enrollment by two to three percentage points. These estimates are relatively stable over a variety
of bandwidths and are always highly statistically significant, so that access easily passes traditional
tests for being a strong instrument.
Panel B of Table 2 shows little evidence that SAT thresholds affect college enrollment choices
of “advantaged” students, those whose families earn over $60,000 or those who take their first
SAT more than 12 months prior to high school graduation. Admissions thresholds instead affect
disadvantaged students, for whom initial eligibility increases enrollment in GSUS colleges by
about four percentage points, from a base enrollment rate of about 35-40 percentage points. Initial
eligibility increases GSUS enrollment by an even larger seven to eight percentage points for very

10

disadvantaged students, from a base of 26 percentage points. All of these first stage estimates are
highly statistically significant and eligibility easily qualifies as a strong instrument in each of these
disadvantaged subsamples. Figure 2 shows graphical versions of these disadvantaged subsamples’
first stages. All four panels show visually obvious discontinuities in GSUS enrollment rates at the
threshold and nowhere else.
SAT-based eligibility for admission to in-state four-year public colleges substantially and clearly
affects the initial college enrollment choices of disadvantaged students and even moreso for students who are more disadvantaged. Students from relatively high income families and who are
knowledgeable enough about the admissions process to take the SAT prior to senior year are unaffected by the GSUS thresholds in part, as we show later, because they are more likely to gain
eligibility through subsequent retakes of the SAT. We therefore focus our analysis on the Georgia
sample as a whole and the disadvantaged subsamples for whom eligibility most changes initial
college enrollment.

4.2

College Enrollment Effects

To understand why GSUS enrollment might affect degree completion, we first estimate which alternative college options the marginal student forgoes in order to enroll in the four-year public
sector. Table 3 shows estimated impacts on the type and quality of the college chosen. Column
1 shows reduced form estimates of the impact of eligibility on the probability of enrolling in any
four-year college. For the sample as a whole, eligibility increases four-year college enrollment
by 1.7 percentage points. Consistent with effects on GSUS enrollment, eligibility impacts on
four-year college enrollment are higher for disadvantaged students, around two to three percentage points, and even higher for very disadvantaged students, around five to six percentage points.
These reduced form impacts can be seen graphically in Figure 3, where each disadvantaged subsample shows visually clear discontinuities in four-year college enrollment at the GSUS eligibility
threshold.
The remaining columns in Table 3 present instrumental variables estimates of the impact of
GSUS enrollment on the type and quality of college chosen. These estimates represent local average treatment effects for compliers, those students induced to enroll in GSUS because of their
first SAT score-based eligibility. Column 2 suggests that, for the sample as a whole, enrolling in
GSUS colleges increased by 81 percentage points the fraction enrolling in any four-year college.
In other words, 81 percent of compliers would not have enrolled in a four-year college if not for
enrollment in the in-state four-year public sector. Instead, 67 percent would have enrolled in a
two-year college, another 15 percent would not have enrolled in any college, and the remaining 19
11

percent would have enrolled in either an in-state private or out-of-state four-year college.
Estimates for the disadvantaged subgroups tell a similar story. Two-thirds to three-fourths of
disadvantaged or very disadvantaged compliers would not otherwise have enrolled in a four-year
college, with roughly half instead choosing two-year colleges and a smaller fraction not enrolling
anywhere. Eligibility for admission to the four-year public sector thus raises the rate of enrollment
in four-year colleges largely by attracting students who would otherwise have enrolled in two-year
colleges.
For the marginal student, enrollment in the four-year public sector changes not only the sector
of college chosen but also the quality of college chosen, as measured by peer quality and institutional graduation rates. Relative to the foregone alternatives that largely consist of two-year
colleges, enrollment in four-year public colleges increases the quality of a student’s peers by one
standard deviation, or by 0.6-0.9 standard deviations for the disadvantaged subsamples. Control
complier means, computed as suggested by Abadie et al. (2002) and Abadie (2003), imply that
GSUS enrollment raises peer quality from well below average to slightly above average. GSUS
enrollment increases by 51 percentage points the average bachelor’s degree completion rate of
compliers’ initial colleges, or by 28-39 percentage points for the disadvantaged subsamples. The
control complier means imply this effect represents more than a doubling of the graduation rate
of the institution chosen. As a whole, these results make clear that four-year public colleges in
Georgia have substantially higher skilled students and higher degree completion rates than the alternatives the marginal student would otherwise have chosen. Access to the four-year public sector
thus increases both the overall rate of four-year college enrollment and the quality of the college
chosen.11

4.3

College Completion Effects

Our ultimate outcome of interest is the completion of a bachelor’s degree from any institution
within six years of high school graduation. The first two columns of Table 4 respectively show reduced form estimates of the impact of eligibility and instrumental variables estimates of the impact
of GSUS enrollment on such completion rates. All such estimated impacts are large and at least
marginally statistically significant. Discontinuities in degree completion are also visually apparent
in most of the panels of Figure 4. For the sample as a whole, GSUS eligibility raises bachelor’s
degree completions rates by 0.9 percentage points. Scaled by the first stage, this implies that
11

Though not shown here, access to the four-year public sector does not change the distance between a student’s
home and initial college. This suggests that proximity to college, or the probability of living at home while enrolled,
does not explain the completion effects we document.

12

eligibility-induced enrollment into four-year public colleges raises the probability of completing a
bachelor’s degree by 41 percentage points. Estimated impacts on compliers in the disadvantaged
subsamples are quite similar, ranging in magnitude from 29-43 percentage points. Low control
complier means imply that, for the entire sample and all disadvantaged subsamples, enrollment in
the four-year public sector at least triples bachelor’s degree completion rates.
Three other facts are worth noting. First, the increase in bachelor’s degree completion driven
in part by a shift away from two-year colleges does not decrease associate’s degree completion
rates in any statistically significant way. This implies that few of the marginal students would
have instead completed their associate’s degrees if denied access to the four-year sector. Second,
across most of the coefficients shown here, IV and OLS analyses yield estimates that are fairly
close in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable. This suggests that our controls for academic
skill, namely SAT scores, are rich enough to soak up much of the omitted variable bias one might
otherwise worry about in non-quasi-experimental estimates. Third, comparing the estimates in
column 2 to column 6 of the previous table suggests that differences in the institutional bachelor’s
degree completion rates of students’ initial colleges explain quite well their own probabilities of
bachelor’s degree completion. In other words, institution-level completion rates predict individual
completion rates of compliers fairly accurately, at least conditional on students’ own academic
skills.
All of the four-year college enrollment and bachelor’s degree completion rate estimates are
qualitatively robust to using alternative bandwidths and to the inclusion of demographic controls.12
A number of placebo tests confirm that these results are not driven by spurious characteristics of the
data or functional form assumptions of our specifications.13 Shifting the thresholds in either direction diminishes the magnitude and statistical significance of the GSUS enrollment and bachelor’s
degree completion estimates, implying that the clearest discontinuities are at the correct thresholds themselves. The advantaged subsamples of students whose GSUS enrollment is unaffected
by the thresholds also show no discontinuity in degree completion rates.14 GSUS thresholds have
no impact on the degree completion rates of low income students outside of Georgia for whom the
GSUS admissions process is largely irrelevant. In summary, our observed effects appear only for
disadvantaged students in Georgia and only at the precise values of the GSUS thresholds.
Our results also do not depend on our choice to use the minimum distance to the two thresholds
as the running variable. We can replace that collapsed two dimensional measure with alternative
one dimensional measures of distance to either the math or the verbal threshold, eliminating the
12

See Table A.3.
See Table A.4.
14
Figure A.3 confirms this visually.
13

13

second dimension by conditioning the sample on satisfying the other subject’s threshold. These
alternatives lead to point estimates that are generally at least as large as those from the minimum
distance measure and statistically significant for all disadvantaged subsamples.15 Our estimates are
thus robust to alternate definitions of the running variable.

4.4

SAT Retaking Behavior

Access to the in-state four-year public sector has large benefits to the marginal student studied
here. We now provide evidence that the marginal student perceives at least some of the value of
this option. Because the Georgia thresholds are publicly known, students who fail to meet those
thresholds on their first attempt may retake the SAT in order to gain access to the in-state four-year
public sector. Figure 5 shows the graphical version of this relationship between retake probability
and distance from the GSUS threshold. Retake rates rise with SAT score in this part of the score
distribution and near the threshold roughly 60 percent of students retake the exam. The figure
shows a small but clear discontinuity, with those just below the threshold more likely to retake
than those just above.
Table 5 presents formal estimates of this discontinuity, running reduced form equation 2 with
SAT retaking measures as outcomes. We also replace the Access variable with 1 − Access, so that
the coefficients can be interpreted as the impact of missing the thresholds, rather than achieving
them, on one’s first take. Panel A shows that, for the full sample, just missing the threshold
increases the probability of retaking by three percentage points. This is clear evidence of demand
for access to the four-year public sector, given that there is no other reason why this threshold
should trigger differential retake rates. Given the degree completion benefits of access to this
sector, however, this documented demand is arguably lower than it should be. Retaking the SAT
is relatively inexpensive but would yield substantial gains in college access and completion for
students near these thresholds.
We also document in panel B that, though retaking in reaction to the threshold does not vary
much by income, overall levels of retaking do. At the threshold, 51 percent of low income students
retake the SAT, with the mean student taking the exam 1.7 times. For non-low income students
near the threshold, 66 percent retake for a mean number of takes of 2.0. Retaking rates are thus
substantially higher for higher income students, even conditional on first SAT score. The result
is that first SAT scores are a much stronger determinant of eventual access to GSUS for low in15

See Table A.5. Figure A.4 shows the reduced form versions of these alternate measures for the subsample of late
SAT takers, with clearly visible discontinuities in GSUS enrollment and bachelor’s degree completion at both the math
and verbal thresholds.

14

come students than for higher income students. As shown in column 3, retaking more frequently
means that only 41 percent of non-low income students whose first SAT is just below the threshold
ultimately fail to score high enough to qualify for access, compared to 60 percent of low income
students. This at least partly explains why our first SAT score-based instrument is much stronger
for low income students than their higher income counterparts.
These disparities are even more striking when comparing early to late SAT takers, as panel C
does. Only thirty percent of early SAT takers who miss the threshold on their first take do not
eventually score high enough to access the four-year public sector. Early SAT takers take the test
an average of 2.3 times, with 80 percent retaking it at least once. Late SAT takers, who have less
time to schedule retakes and may be less aware of the potential benefits of retaking, take the test
an average of 1.47 times, with only 40 percent retaking it at least once. As a result, 70 percent of
late SAT takers who fail to meet the thresholds on the first take ultimately fail to gain access to the
four-year public sector.
Finally, though we provide clear evidence of endogenous retaking due to demand for access
to the four-year public sector, the amount of such retaking is particularly small relative to overall
retaking rates. Of the 60 percent of students just below the threshold who retake the SAT, roughly
three percent, or one in twenty, are retaking specifically to gain access to GSUS. The remaining
57 percent are likely retaking to improve their college options generally and would have retaken
in the absence of the minimum GSUS thresholds. Because overall retake rates are so high near
the threshold, maximum SAT scores show small and often statistically insignificant discontinuities
there, as seen in column 4.
The result is that, though we use first SAT scores throughout this paper, using maximum SAT
scores to generate variation in college access is unlikely to introduce much endogeneity. Indeed,
when we re-run our analyses using maximum SAT scores to generate the running variable, the
magnitudes of our central estimates are still extremely large, statistically significant and more
precisely estimated due to a much larger first stage.16 These results also imply that access to
the four-year public sector greatly increases bachelor’s degree completion rates, with estimated
impacts from instrumental variables models of similar magnitude to corresponding OLS estimates.

5

Discussion and Conclusion

For relatively low-skilled students in Georgia, access to the four-year public sector substantially
increases bachelor’s degree completion rates. It does so by increasing both the probability of
16

See Table A.6, which replicates Table 4 using maximum SAT scores instead of first SAT scores.

15

enrollment in any four-year college and the quality of college chosen, largely by diverting students
from two-year colleges. That students retake the SAT in order to gain access to the four-year public
sector suggests they perceive at least some, though perhaps not all, of this benefit. We draw three
broad lessons from these findings.
First, that small differences in test scores generate large differences in college choice suggests
students are not applying to a continuum of college options, perhaps because such a continuum
does not exist in the postsecondary market. In Georgia and other states, a student denied access
to the four-year public sector does not have other options similar in both price and quality. Community colleges are less expensive but have less money to spend on faculty and other resources
to support students progress toward degree completion. Private four-year colleges potentially of
interest to the marginal student here can not match the public sector’s tuition while maintaining
comparable quality, given the in-kind nature of state subsidies for higher education. Regardless of
the lack of such a continuum of college options, our results reinforce the benefits of encouraging
students to make test-taking and application choices that maximize their available postsecondary
options. The thresholds used by Georgia heighten the importance of such choices, with unclear
benefits to the state more broadly.
Second, that college sector and quality affect degree completion for relatively low-skilled students is inconsistent with claims that disadvantaged students benefit from choosing colleges that
enroll higher proportions of similar peers. By the nature of these minimmum thresholds, the
marginal student in this study benefits, in terms of degree completion, from enrolling in a college where he is substantially less academically skilled than his peers. This implies that measures
of absolute quality matter more than “match” quality. Our estimates reject the hypothesis that
low-skilled students should be discouraged from choosing four-year colleges because they are incapable of completing degrees at such institutions. A substantial fraction of the marginal students
we study do succeed in completing their bachelor’s degrees, a result consistent with naı̈ve OLS
estimates. This finding also bears directly on the debate over affirmative action, as it contradicts
the view that students benefit from attending colleges with less academically skilled peers.17
Third, our estimates suggest one potential concern about policies to reduce the cost of community college, such as the Tennessee Promise scholarship or the Obama administration’s free
community college proposal. Lowering such costs may improve college enrollment and degree
completion for students who would not otherwise have attended college. By changing the relative
17

A prominent example of this view arose during oral arguments for the Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin
affirmative action case, when Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia noted that “There are those who contend that it
does not benefit African-Americans to get them into the University of Texas where they do not do well, as opposed to
having them go to a less-advanced school, a slower-track school where they do well.”

16

price of the two- and four-year sectors, such programs may, however, lower degree completion
rates for students drawn out of the four-year and into the two-year sector. This is particularly true
given the large existing disparities in degree completion rates between these two sectors and our
finding that institutional completion rates are strong predictors of degree completion, particularly
for disadvantaged students who are likely most price sensitive. The net completion effect of such
proposals thus depends, in part, on the number of students on the margin between no college and
two-year college and the number on the margin between two- and four-year college. Early evidence from Tennessee suggests the latter number is nontrivial (Carruthers and Fox, 2016).18 Our
results suggest that policymakers should account for such students when designing proposals to
change the price, and potentially quality, of the community college sector.
Our work provides some of the clearest evidence to date on the importance of initial college
choice for students with relatively low academic skills. Further research is needed to determine
why college choice matters and which aspects of the college experience are responsible for the
degree completion effects we document. We also hope in future work to determine how these
degree completion effects translate into labor market outcomes.

18

In the first year of the Tennessee Promise scholarship, the state saw a 25 percent increase in community college
enrollment but a five to eight percent decrease in enrollment at four-year public institutions (Ashley A. Smith, “Promise
Provides Enrollment Boost”, Inside Higher Ed, November 24, 2015).

17

References
Abadie, A. (2003). Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response models.
Journal of Econometrics 113(2), 231–263.
Abadie, A., J. Angrist, and G. Imbens (2002). Instrumental variables estimates of the effect of
subsidized training on the quantiles of trainee earnings. Econometrica 70(1), 91–117.
Arcidiacono, P. and M. Lovenheim (2016, March). Affirmative action and the quality-fit trade-off.
Journal of Economic Literature 54(1), 3–51.
Bailey, M. and S. Dynarski (2011). Inequality in postsecondary education. In G. J. Duncan and
R. J. Murnane (Eds.), Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life
Chances: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances. New York: Russell Sage.
Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007). The changing role of family income and ability in determining
educational achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1(1), 37–89.
Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205–1242.
Black, D., J. Smith, and K. Daniel (2005). College quality and wages in the United States. German
Economic Review 6(3), 415–443.
Black, D. A. and J. A. Smith (2004). How robust is the evidence on the effects of college quality?
Evidence from matching. Journal of Econometrics 121(1), 99–124.
Black, D. A. and J. A. Smith (2006). Estimating the returns to college quality with multiple proxies
for quality. Journal of Labor Economics 24(3), 701–728.
Bound, J., B. Hershbein, and B. T. Long (2009). Playing the admissions game: Student reactions
to increasing college competition. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(4), 119–146.
Bound, J., M. F. Lovenheim, and S. Turner (2010). Why have college completion rates declined?
An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3), 129.
Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Crossing the finish line: Completing
college at America’s public universities. Princeton University Press.
Briggs, D. C. (2009). Preparation for college admission exams. Discussion paper, National Association for College Admission Counseling.
Canaan, S. and P. Mouganie (2015). Returns to education quality for low-skilled students: Evidence from a discontinuity. Working paper, SSRN.

18

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (2005). Would the elimination of affirmative action affect highly qualified minority applicants? Evidence from California and Texas. Industrial & Labor Relations
Review 58(3), 416–434.
Carrell, S. E. and B. Sacerdote (2013). Why do college going interventions work? Working Paper
19031, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carruthers, C. K. and W. F. Fox (2016). Aid for all: College coaching, financial aid, and postsecondary persistence in Tennessee. Economics of Education Review.
Castleman, B. L., L. C. Page, and K. Schooley (2014). The forgotten summer: Does the offer
of college counseling after high school mitigate summer melt among college-intending, lowincome high school graduates? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 33(2), 320–344.
Cohodes, S. R. and J. S. Goodman (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college completion:
Massachusetts’ Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 6(4), 251–285.
Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2014). Estimating the effects of college characteristics over the
career using administrative earnings data. Journal of Human Resources 49(2), 323–358.
Dillon, E. W. and J. A. Smith (2013). The determinants of mismatch between students and colleges.
Working Paper 19286, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dynarski, S. M., S. W. Hemelt, and J. M. Hyman (2015). The missing manual: Using National Student Clearinghouse data to track postsecondary outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 37(1 suppl), 53S–79S.
Goodman, J. (2008). Who merits financial aid?: Massachusetts’ Adams scholarship. Journal of
Public Economics 92(10), 2121–2131.
Hastings, J. S., C. A. Neilson, and S. D. Zimmerman (2013). Are some degrees worth more than
others? Evidence from college admission cutoffs in Chile. Working Paper 19241, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Hoekstra, M. (2009). The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: A
discontinuity-based approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4), 717–724.
Hoxby, C. and C. Avery (2013). The missing ”one-offs”: The hidden supply of high-achieving,
low-income students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring, 1–50.
Hoxby, C. and S. Turner (2013). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low income
students. Discussion Paper 12-014, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.
Hurwitz, M. and J. Smith (2016). Student responsiveness to earnings data in the College Scorecard.
Working paper, SSRN.

19

Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 933–959.
Jepsen, C., P. Mueser, and K. Troske (2016). Labor market returns to the GED using regression
discontinuity analysis. Journal of Political Economy.
Kaufmann, K. M. M., M. Messner, and A. Solis (2013). Returns to elite higher education in the
marriage market: Evidence from Chile. Working paper, SSRN.
Lee, D. S. and D. Card (2008). Regression discontinuity inference with specification error. Journal
of Econometrics 142(2), 655–674.
Leigh, D. E. and A. M. Gill (2003). Do community colleges really divert students from earning
bachelor’s degrees? Economics of Education Review 22(1), 23–30.
Long, B. T. and M. Kurlaender (2009). Do community colleges provide a viable pathway to a
baccalaureate degree? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(1), 30–53.
Long, M. C. (2008). College quality and early adult outcomes. Economics of Education Review 27(5), 588–602.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
A density test. Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 698–714.
Pallais, A. (2015). Small differences that matter: Mistakes in applying to college. Journal of Labor
Economics 33(2), 493–520.
Papay, J. P., R. J. Murnane, and J. B. Willett (2014). High-school exit examinations and the
schooling decisions of teenagers: Evidence from regression-discontinuity approaches. Journal
of Research on Educational Effectiveness 7(1), 1–27.
Pope, D. and U. Simonsohn (2011). Round numbers as goals: Evidence from baseball, SAT takers,
and the lab. Psychological Science 22(1), 71–79.
Reardon, S. F. and J. P. Robinson (2012). Regression discontinuity designs with multiple ratingscore variables. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness 5(1), 83–104.
Reynolds, C. L. (2012). Where to attend? Estimating the effects of beginning college at a two-year
institution. Economics of Education Review 31(4), 345–362.
Rouse, C. E. (1995). Democratization or diversion? The effect of community colleges on educational attainment. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13(2), 217–224.
Rouse, C. E. (1998). Do two-year colleges increase overall educational attainment? Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 17(4), 595–620.
Saavedra, J. E. (2008). The returns to college quality: A regression discontinuity analysis. Unpublished manuscript, University of Southern California.
20

Smith, J. (2013). Ova and out: Using twins to estimate the educational returns to attending a
selective college. Economics of Education Review 36, 166–180.
Smith, J., M. Hurwitz, and J. Howell (2015). Screening mechanisms and student responses in the
college market. Economics of Education Review 44, 17–28.
Smith, J., M. Pender, and J. Howell (2013). The full extent of student-college academic undermatch. Economics of Education Review 32, 247–261.
Smith, J. and K. Stange (2015). A new measure of college quality to study the effects of college
sector and peers on degree attainment. Working Paper 21605, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Vigdor, J. L. and C. T. Clotfelter (2003). Retaking the SAT. Journal of Human Resources 38(1),
1–33.
White House (2014). Increasing college opportunity for low-income students: Promising models
and a call to action. Report, Executive Office of the President.
Zimmerman, S. D. (2014). The returns to college admission for academically marginal students.
Journal of Labor Economics 32(4), 711–754.

21

Figure 1: First Stage

0.10

Enrolled in GSUS

0.46

(A) Maximum SAT Score

-60

0
Distance to Admissions Threshold

60

0.18

Enrolled in GSUS

0.47

(B) First SAT Score

-60

0
Distance to Admissions Threshold

60

Notes: Panel A shows the fraction of students enrolling at in-state, public, four-year colleges within
one year of high school graduation, as a function of the distance of students’ maximum SAT scores
from the GSUS eligibility threshold. Panel B shows enrollment rates by the distance of students’
first SAT scores from the threshold. The sample comprises Georgia’s 2004-08 high school classes.
Also shown are fitted regression lines from the baseline specification using a bandwidth of 60
points.
22

Figure 2: GSUS Enrollment

0.41

(B) Late SAT taker

0.14

Enrolled in GSUS

0.17

Enrolled in GSUS

0.44

(A) Low income

-60

0

60

-60

0

60

(C) Very low income, black

(D) Very late SAT taker, black

0.11

Enrolled in GSUS

0.20

Enrolled in GSUS

0.41

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.49

Distance to Admissions Threshold

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: Each panel shows the fraction of students enrolling at in-state, public, four-year colleges
within one year of high school graduation, as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores
from the GSUS eligibility threshold. Panel A includes students who reported family incomes below
$60,000. Panel B includes students who took their first SAT no more than 12 months prior to June
of their high school graduation year. Panels C and D include black students who respectively
reported family income of less than $30,000 and who took their first SAT no more than 6 months
prior to June of their high school graduation year. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the
baseline specification using a bandwidth of 60 points.
23

0

0.59

60

-60

0

60

(C) Very low income, black

(D) Very late SAT taker, black

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.26

Enrolled in Four-Year College

-60

0.59

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.72

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.39

Enrolled in Four-Year College

-60

(B) Late SAT taker

0.30

Enrolled in Four-Year College

0.64

(A) Low income

0.34

Enrolled in Four-Year College

Figure 3: Four-Year College Enrollment

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: Each panel shows the fraction of students enrolling at any four-year college within one
year of high school graduation, as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from
the GSUS eligibility threshold. Panel A includes students who reported family incomes below
$60,000. Panel B includes students who took their first SAT no more than 12 months prior to
June of their high school graduation year. Panels C and D include black students who respectively
reported family income of less than $30,000 and who took their first SAT no more than 6 months
prior to June of their high school graduation year. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the
baseline specification using a bandwidth of 60 points.
24

Figure 4: Bachelor’s Degree Completion

0.35

(B) Late SAT taker

0.20

Completed B.A.

0.23

Completed B.A.

0.42

(A) Low income

-60

0

60

-60

0

60

(C) Very low income, black

(D) Very late SAT taker, black

0.12

Completed B.A.

0.22

Completed B.A.

0.24

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.43

Distance to Admissions Threshold

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: Each panel shows the fraction of students completing a bachelor’s degree within six years
of high school graduation, as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from the GSUS
eligibility threshold. Panel A includes students who reported family incomes below $60,000. Panel
B includes students who took their first SAT no more than 12 months prior to June of their high
school graduation year. Panels C and D include black students who respectively reported family
income of less than $30,000 and who took their first SAT no more than 6 months prior to June
of their high school graduation year. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the baseline
specification using a bandwidth of 60 points.
25

0.52

Retook SAT

0.63

Figure 5: SAT Retaking

-60

0
Distance to Admissions Threshold

60

Notes: Shown above is the fraction of students retaking the SAT at least once, as a function of the
distance of students’ first SAT scores from the GSUS eligibility threshold. Also shown are fitted
regression lines from the baseline specification using a bandwidth of 60 points.

26

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Disadvantaged

Very disadvantaged

All
Georgia
students
(1)

RD
analysis
sample
(2)

Low
income
students
(3)

Late
SAT
takers
(4)

Very low
Very late
income, SAT takers,
black
black
(5)
(6)

0.54
0.60
0.26
0.04
0.32

0.57
0.57
0.30
0.04
0.35

0.61
0.40
0.44
0.05
1.00

0.56
0.49
0.37
0.05
0.43

0.66
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00

0.55
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.60

966.75
0.66
0.60
1009.62
0.73

905.56
0.60
0.59
946.41
0.73

892.14
0.54
0.50
923.46
0.66

891.67
0.55
0.38
911.74
0.63

862.69
0.43
0.47
887.08
0.54

856.92
0.40
0.17
862.83
0.43

0.37
0.61
0.20
0.45

0.36
0.57
0.24
0.40

0.33
0.51
0.25
0.33

0.29
0.46
0.29
0.28

0.36
0.57
0.19
0.30

0.27
0.43
0.25
0.18

300,796

144,676

51,248

73,195

11,807

10,628

(A) Demographics
Female
White
Black
Hispanic
Low income
(B) SAT scores
First SAT score
GSUS eligible, first SAT
Retook SAT at least once
Maximum SAT score
GSUS eligible, maximum SAT
(C) College outcomes
Enrolled at GSUS college
Enrolled any four year college
Enrolled any two year college
Completed BA within six years
N

Notes: Listed above are mean values of key variables. Column 1 includes all Georgia SAT takers from the high
school classes of 2004-08. Column 2 limits the sample to those within 60 SAT points of the GSUS eligibility
threshold. Columns 3 and 4 limit the regression discontinuity sample respectively to students who report family
income of less than $60,000 and who take their first SAT no more than 12 months prior to June of their high school
graduation year. Columns 5 and 6 limit the regression discontinuity sample to black students who respectively
report family income of less than $30,000 and who take their first SAT no more than 6 months prior to June of
their high school graduation year. Panel C defines uses indicators for college enrollment within one year and B.A.
completion within six years of high school graduation.

27

Table 2: First Stage Impact of Eligibility on GSUS Enrollment
BW = 40
(1)

BW = 50
(2)

BW = 60
(3)

BW = 70
(4)

BW = 80
(5)

0.018∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.021∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.025∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.032∗∗∗
(0.007)

Non-low income
(Control mean = 0.36, IK = 50)

0.009
(0.013)

0.006
(0.011)

0.007
(0.011)

0.013
(0.011)

0.021∗
(0.012)

Early SAT taker
(Control mean = 0.30, IK = 50)

0.004
(0.009)

0.006
(0.009)

0.000
(0.008)

0.004
(0.008)

0.012
(0.009)

Low income
(Control mean = 0.35, IK = 60)

0.034∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.037∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.042∗∗∗
(0.006)

Late SAT taker
(Control mean = 0.41, IK = 60)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.037∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.044∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.052∗∗∗
(0.007)

Very low income, black
(Control mean = 0.26, IK = 40)

0.074∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.067∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.070∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)

0.077∗∗∗
(0.013)

Very late SAT taker, black
(Control mean = 0.26, IK = 60)

0.063∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.081∗∗∗
(0.010)

0.079∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.071∗∗∗
(0.011)

0.087∗∗∗
(0.014)

(A) All students
All
(Control mean = 0.33, IK = 40)
(B) Advantaged students

(C) Disadvantaged students

(D) Very disadvantaged students

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each estimate comes from a local linear regression of an indicator for on-time
enrollment in a GSUS college on an indicator for scoring at or above the GSUS threshold, using the listed bandwidth and controlling for high school class fixed effects. The sample comprises Georgia’s 2004-08 graduating high
school classes. Low income and very low income students are those reporting family income less than $60,000 and
$30,000 respectively. Late and very late SAT takers are those who respectively took their first SAT no more than
12 or 6 months prior to the June of their high school graduation year. Also listed are the Imbens-Kalyanaraman
optimal bandwidth (rounded to tne nearest 10) and the mean rate of on-time GSUS enrollment for students 10 SAT
points below the threshold.

28

Table 3: Initial College Enrollment
Any
four-year
college
(RF)
(1)

Any
four-year
college
(IV)
(2)

Any
two-year
college
(IV)
(3)

No
college
(IV)
(4)

College
mean
PSAT
(IV)
(5)

B.A.
completion
rate
(IV)
(6)

0.017∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.52

0.813∗∗∗
(0.143)

-0.666∗∗∗
(0.122)

-0.147
(0.154)

1.034∗∗∗
(0.383)
-0.80

0.511∗∗∗
(0.124)
0.10

0.024∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.49

0.648∗∗∗
(0.082)

-0.450∗∗∗
(0.163)

-0.198
(0.123)

0.776∗∗∗
(0.257)
-0.59

0.352∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.23

0.029∗∗∗
(0.008)
0.43

0.666∗∗∗
(0.075)

-0.474∗∗∗
(0.057)

-0.192∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.893∗∗∗
(0.117)
-0.66

0.389∗∗∗
(0.026)
0.20

0.046∗∗
(0.016)
0.56

0.663∗∗∗
(0.136)

-0.600∗∗∗
(0.145)

-0.064
(0.126)

0.907∗∗∗
(0.331)
-0.83

0.375∗∗∗
(0.091)
0.19

0.059∗∗∗
(0.010)
0.44

0.753∗∗∗
(0.124)

-0.449∗∗∗
(0.138)

-0.304∗∗∗
(0.098)

0.626∗∗∗
(0.113)
-0.74

0.275∗∗∗
(0.060)
0.20

(A) All students
All
Control (complier) mean
(B) Disadvantaged
Low income
Control (complier) mean
Late SAT taker
Control (complier) mean
(C) Very disadvantaged
Very low income, black
Control (complier) mean
Very late SAT taker, black
Control (complier) mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Column 1 presents reduced form estimates of the impact of eligibility
on four-year college enrollment. The remaining columns present instrumental variables estimates of GSUS enrollment on college enrollment outcomes, with GSUS enrollment instrumented by eligibility. The final columns
characterize each student’s initial college by the mean standardized PSAT score and completion rate of B.A.s
within six years of all students who enrolled on time in that college. Column 1 also lists the mean four-year college
enrollment rate for those 10 SAT points below the threshold, while columns 5 and 6 list the predicted outcomes for
untreated compliers. All regressions use a bandwidth of 60 and include high school class fixed effects.

29

Table 4: College Degree Completion
Completed B.A. within six years
(RF)
(IV)
(OLS)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Completed A.A. within six years
(RF)
(IV)
(OLS)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.009∗∗
(0.003)
0.37

0.410∗∗∗
(0.131)
0.19

0.257∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.003)
0.05

-0.084
(0.137)
0.08

-0.066∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.015∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.31

0.425∗∗∗
(0.128)
0.16

0.275∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.002
(0.005)
0.06

0.045
(0.131)
0.00

-0.076∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.26

0.424∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.11

0.256∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.003)
0.06

-0.078
(0.063)
0.08

-0.072∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.020∗
(0.011)
0.30

0.289∗
(0.154)
0.10

0.248∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.005)
0.04

-0.082
(0.068)
0.08

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.030∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.16

0.385∗∗∗
(0.085)
0.00

0.207∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.016∗
(0.009)
0.05

-0.206∗
(0.116)
0.21

-0.061∗∗∗
(0.004)

(A) All students
All
Control (complier) mean
(B) Disadvantaged
Low income
Control (complier) mean
Late SAT taker
Control (complier) mean
(C) Very disadvantaged
Very low income, black
Control (complier) mean
Very late SAT taker, black
Control (complier) mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Columns 1 and 4 present reduced form estimates of the impact of eligibility
on B.A. and A.A. completion within six years of high school graduation. Columns 2 and 5 present instrumental
variables estimates of the impact of GSUS enrollment on degree completion, with GSUS enrollment instrumented
by eligibility. Columns 3 and 6 present OLS estimates of the impact of GSUS enrollment on degree completion.
Columns 1 and 4 list the mean completion rates for those 10 SAT points below the threshold, while columns 2 and
5 list the predicted completion rates for untreated compliers. All regressions use a bandwidth of 60 and include
high school class fixed effects.

30

Table 5: SAT Retaking Behavior
Retook
SAT
(1)

Number
of takes
(2)

Ever GSUS
eligible
(3)

Maximum
SAT
(4)

0.031∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.58

0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
1.87

-0.509∗∗∗
(0.004)
1.00

2.691∗∗
(1.029)
936.15

0.032∗∗
(0.011)
0.66

0.071∗∗∗
(0.021)
2.02

-0.412∗∗∗
(0.009)
1.00

4.273∗∗
(1.679)
947.52

0.037∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.51

0.049∗∗∗
(0.010)
1.71

-0.596∗∗∗
(0.007)
1.00

2.338
(1.839)
922.50

0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.80

0.007
(0.020)
2.34

-0.300∗∗∗
(0.003)
1.00

1.942
(1.270)
964.90

0.030∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.40

0.041∗∗∗
(0.008)
1.47

-0.700∗∗∗
(0.005)
1.00

0.814
(1.323)
911.40

(A) All students
All
Control mean
(B) By income
Non-low income
Control mean
Low income
Control mean
(C) By SAT taking date
Early SAT taker
Control mean
Late SAT taker
Control mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is a reduced form estimate of the impact of initially scoring
below the GSUS threshold on the listed outcome. Low income students are those reporting family income less
than $60,000. Late SAT takers are those who took their first SAT no more than 12 months prior to June of their
high school graduation year. Listed below each estimate is the mean outcome for students at the threshold. All
regressions use a bandwidth of 60 and include high school class fixed effects.

31

Density

.05

Figure A.1: Density of Distances to the Threshold

0

Georgia
USA
-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: The closed circles show the fraction of Georgia students whose first SAT scores place them
at a given distance from the GSUS eligibility threshold. The open circles show the fraction of
non-Georgia students whose first SAT scores place them at that distance. Both samples consist of
the 2004-08 graduating high school classes.

32

Figure A.2: Covariate Balance

-60

0

0.33
0.32

60

-60

0

60

(C) Family income, late SAT taker

(D) Completion, late SAT taker

-60

0

60

0.27

0.29

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Predicted B.A. Completion

48.60

(B) Completion, low income

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Income ('000s)

64.09

30.23

Income ('000s)

Predicted B.A. Completion

36.21

(A) Family income, low income

-60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: Panels A and C show mean reported income for low income and late SAT taking students
respectively, as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from the GSUS eligibility
threshold. Panels B and D show the mean predicted B.A. completion rates for low income and
late SAT taking students respectively, with predictions based on gender, race, family income and
parental education. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the baseline specification using a
bandwidth of 60 points.

33

0.57

(A) Enrollment, non-low income

(B) Completion, non-low income

0.34

0.21

Completed B.A.

Enrolled in GSUS

0.50

Figure A.3: Placebo Tests

0

60

-60

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

(C) Enrollment, early SAT taker

(D) Completion, early SAT taker

0.61

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0.38

0.25

Completed B.A.

Enrolled in GSUS

0.52

-60

-60

0

60

-60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

0

60

Distance to Admissions Threshold

Notes: Panels A and C show mean GSUS enrollment rates for non-low income and early SAT
taking students respectively, as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from the
GSUS eligibility threshold. Panels B and D show the mean B.A. completion rates for non-low
income and early SAT taking students respectively. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the
baseline specification using a bandwidth of 60 points.

34

Figure A.4: Alternative Distance Measures

0.33

(B) Completion

0.21

0.16

Completed B.A.

Enrolled in GSUS

0.38

(A) Enrollment

0

60

-60

0
Distance to Math Threshold

(C) Enrollment

(D) Completion

0.34

Distance to Math Threshold

60

0.22

0.18

Completed B.A.

Enrolled in GSUS

0.39

-60

-60

0

60

-60

Distance to Verbal Threshold

0

60

Distance to Verbal Threshold

Notes: Panels A and B show mean GSUS enrollment rates and B.A. completion rates, as a function
of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from the math threshold. Panels C and D show such
outcomes as a function of the distance of students’ first SAT scores from the verbal threshold. The
sample in each panel consists of late SAT takers whose other SAT subject score satisfies the GSUS
eligibility requirements. Also shown are fitted regression lines from the baseline specification
using a bandwidth of 60 points.

35

36
2,503
1,776

3,129
5,138
4,884
4,208
5,541
2,283
4,762
1,902
13,854
3,836
2,415
2,857
8,399

14,374
8,854

15,789
21,437
30,388

1,575
1,127

2,774
2,602
2,592
2,670
2,676
2,782
3,596
2,798
2,724
2,808
2,830
2,754
2,774

2,912
2,860

4,076
3,920
4,078

(2)
Tuition
and
fees

887

920
1020
970
995
980
930
1120
965
1065
1075
880
1135
1000

1050
1005

1325
1090
1205

(3)
Median
SAT
score

73

84
84
66
71
62
44
44
75
61
36
49
62
61

54
68

70
56
75

Admit
rate

(4)

3,324
3,097

5,211
4,370
3,761
3,525
4,048
6,106
5,205
4,901
3,789
4,488
4,737
5,340
3,911

4,130
4,361

8,988
5,161
6,057

(5)
Instr.
spending
per FTE

40
18
19
14
27
30
37
32
31
50
31
23
30

38
38

72
41
72

(6)
Six-year
grad.
rate

330
330

430
460
430
430
440
430
430
430
490
430
430
500
430

430
440

430
430
430

310
310

400
430
400
400
410
400
400
400
460
400
400
500
400

400
410

400
400
400

960

900

(8)
(9)
SAT
thresholds
Verbal Math Total

(7)

Notes: Figures in columns 1-6 are taken from the 2004 Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System. Median SAT scores are computed as the sum
of the mean of the 25th and 75th percentile math and verbal SAT scores. The SAT thresholds listed in columns 7-9 are taken from academic handbooks
from 2004.

State colleges (primarily two-year)
Technical colleges (two-year)

(D) Other GA public colleges

Albany State U.
Armstrong Atlantic State U.
Augusta State U.
Clayton State U.
Columbus State U.
Fort Valley State U.
Georgia Coll. &State U.
Georgia Southwestern State U.
Kennesaw State U.
North Georgia Coll. & State U.
Savannah State U.
Southern Polytechnic State U.
U. of West Georgia

(C) State universities

Georgia Southern U.
Valdosta State U.

(B) Regional universities

Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia State U.
U. of Georgia

(A) Research universities

FTE
students

(1)

Table A.1: Characteristics of GSUS Colleges

37
0.078
(0.216)
17.06
2.043
(1.399)
35.50

Very low income, black

Very late SAT taker, black

-0.013
(0.011)
0.27

0.004
(0.003)
0.29

0.003
(0.004)
0.30

Missing
income
(2)

0.004
(0.008)
0.47

0.012∗
(0.006)
0.39

0.008
(0.009)
0.32

0.008
(0.010)
0.42

-0.021
(0.017)
0.56

0.005
(0.005)
0.57

0.018∗
(0.010)
0.43

0.005
(0.004)
0.14

-0.018∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.40

-0.001
(0.008)
0.62

0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.57

Female
(7)

0.007
(0.018)
0.67

0.005
(0.004)
0.15

0.002
(0.003)
0.14

-0.012
(0.008)
0.47

-0.007
(0.005)
0.33

Black
(5)

Other
race
(6)

0.010
(0.014)
0.52

0.004
(0.006)
0.36

0.004
(0.005)
0.30

0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.26

0.006
(0.005)
0.31

Dad, no
college
(4)

Mom, no
college
(3)

-0.003
(0.004)
0.60

0.001
(0.003)
0.55

-0.002
(0.001)
0.55

-0.004∗
(0.002)
0.52

-0.002∗
(0.001)
0.56

Predicted
4-yr coll.
(8)

-0.004
(0.004)
0.32

0.002
(0.003)
0.28

0.002
(0.001)
0.37

-0.002∗∗
(0.001)
0.33

-0.001
(0.001)
0.39

Predicted
B.A.
(9)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
Each estimate comes from a local linear regression of the listed covariate on an indicator for scoring at or above the GSUS threshold. All regressions use
a bandwidth of 60 and include high school class fixed effects. The sample comprises Georgia’s 2004-08 graduating high school classes. Columns 8 and
9 use as outcomes predicted four-year college enrollment and B.A. completion rates generated by regressing indicators for those outcomes on a vector
of indicators for gender, race, income and parental education categories.

Control mean

Control mean

Control mean

0.768
(0.494)
55.58

-0.102
(0.149)
32.89

-0.024
(0.376)
63.08

Late SAT taker

Control mean

Low income

Control mean

All students

Income
(’000s)
(1)

Table A.2: Covariate Balance Tests

Table A.3: Robustness Checks
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.739∗∗∗
(0.231)
0.573∗∗∗
(0.093)
0.614∗∗∗
(0.103)
0.744∗∗∗
(0.125)
0.784∗∗∗
(0.198)

0.813∗∗∗
(0.180)
0.695∗∗∗
(0.085)
0.648∗∗∗
(0.088)
0.603∗∗∗
(0.175)
0.833∗∗∗
(0.132)

0.813∗∗∗
(0.143)
0.648∗∗∗
(0.082)
0.666∗∗∗
(0.075)
0.663∗∗∗
(0.136)
0.753∗∗∗
(0.124)

0.776∗∗∗
(0.116)
0.624∗∗∗
(0.077)
0.636∗∗∗
(0.076)
0.682∗∗∗
(0.132)
0.702∗∗∗
(0.127)

0.748∗∗∗
(0.083)
0.687∗∗∗
(0.074)
0.697∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.657∗∗∗
(0.134)
0.765∗∗∗
(0.109)

0.794∗∗∗
(0.086)
0.747∗∗∗
(0.080)
0.738∗∗∗
(0.059)
0.662∗∗∗
(0.138)
0.758∗∗∗
(0.109)

0.432∗∗
(0.170)
0.555∗∗∗
(0.172)
0.517∗∗∗
(0.078)
0.481∗∗
(0.209)
0.806∗∗∗
(0.217)

0.285∗
(0.158)
0.436∗∗∗
(0.141)
0.457∗∗∗
(0.068)
0.340∗
(0.176)
0.449∗∗∗
(0.104)

0.410∗∗∗
(0.131)
0.425∗∗∗
(0.128)
0.424∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.289∗
(0.154)
0.385∗∗∗
(0.085)

0.454∗∗∗
(0.102)
0.411∗∗∗
(0.125)
0.415∗∗∗
(0.060)
0.350∗∗
(0.155)
0.446∗∗∗
(0.106)

0.394∗∗∗
(0.077)
0.484∗∗∗
(0.118)
0.435∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.354∗∗∗
(0.124)
0.393∗∗∗
(0.088)

0.388∗∗∗
(0.060)
0.503∗∗∗
(0.121)
0.419∗∗∗
(0.048)
0.353∗∗∗
(0.113)
0.418∗∗∗
(0.091)

40
No

50
No

60
No

70
No

80
No

80
Yes

(A) Enrolled 4-year college
All students
Low income
Late SAT taker
Very low income, black
Very late SAT taker, black

(B) Completed B.A.
All students
Low income
Late SAT taker
Very low income, black
Very late SAT taker, black

Bandwidth
Demographic controls

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). All coefficients are instrumental variables estimates of the impact of GSUS
enrollment on the panel’s listed outcome, with GSUS enrollment instrumented by eligibility. All regressions use
a bandwidth of 60 and include high school class fixed effects. Column 6 also includes controls for gender, race,
family income and parental education.

38

Table A.4: Placebo tests
Eligibility threshold shifted by

-20
(1)

-10
(2)

0
(3)

10
(4)

20
(5)

-0.006
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.027
(0.017)
-0.030
(0.022)

0.005
(0.006)
0.008
(0.014)
0.013
(0.014)
0.016
(0.025)
0.005
(0.033)

0.021∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.036∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.044∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.070∗∗∗
(0.014)
0.079∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.021∗∗
(0.009)
0.020
(0.016)
0.023
(0.015)
0.026
(0.033)
0.041
(0.032)

0.014
(0.010)
0.019∗
(0.010)
0.024∗∗
(0.011)
0.014
(0.026)
0.045∗∗
(0.020)

-0.001
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.005)

0.002
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.004)

0.007
(0.011)
0.000
(0.008)

0.024∗∗
(0.010)
0.016
(0.012)

0.003
(0.012)
0.000
(0.012)

0.006∗
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.006
(0.011)
0.002
(0.015)

0.002
(0.004)
0.006
(0.008)
0.006
(0.008)
0.004
(0.013)
0.015
(0.017)

0.009∗∗
(0.003)
0.015∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.020∗
(0.011)
0.030∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.006
(0.005)
0.008
(0.006)
0.006
(0.007)
0.017
(0.015)
0.005
(0.014)

0.001
(0.006)
0.005
(0.006)
0.010
(0.005)
-0.009
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.013)

0.007
(0.006)
0.005
(0.006)
0.003
(0.002)

0.003
(0.008)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.001
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.012)
0.008
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.003)

0.014
(0.015)
0.005
(0.011)
0.006
(0.004)

-0.016
(0.014)
-0.010
(0.011)
0.010∗∗∗
(0.002)

(A) Enrolled, GSUS college
All students
Low income
Late SAT taker
Very low income, black
Very late SAT taker, black

Non-low income
Early SAT taker
(B) Completed B.A.
All students
Low income
Late SAT taker
Very low income, black
Very late SAT taker, black

Non-low income
Early SAT taker
Low income, non-Georgia

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). All coefficients are reduced form estimates of the impact of GSUS eligibility
on the panel’s listed outcome, with the threshold shifted by the specified distance. The final row’s sample comprises low income SAT takers outside of Georgia. All regressions use a bandwidth of 60 and include high school
class fixed effects.

39

Table A.5: Alternative Distance Measures
Running variable

Both
(1)

Math
(2)

Verbal
(3)

All

0.021∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.024∗∗
(0.008)

0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)

Low income

0.036∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)

0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)

Late SAT taker

0.044∗∗∗
(0.007)

0.046∗∗∗
(0.010)

0.041∗∗∗
(0.008)

All

0.009∗∗
(0.003)

0.008
(0.008)

0.007
(0.006)

Low income

0.015∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.028∗∗
(0.013)

0.013∗∗
(0.006)

Late SAT taker

0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.018∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.024∗∗∗
(0.005)

All

0.410∗∗∗
(0.131)

0.343
(0.321)

0.419
(0.287)

Low income

0.425∗∗∗
(0.128)

0.589∗∗
(0.277)

0.425∗
(0.218)

Late SAT taker

0.424∗∗∗
(0.061)

0.404∗∗∗
(0.103)

0.576∗∗∗
(0.118)

(A) GSUS enrollment (reduced form)

(B) B.A. completion (reduced form)

(C) B.A. completion (instrumental variables)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Panels A and B show reduced form estimates of the impact of GSUS eligibility
on GSUS enrollment and B.A. completion. Panel C shows instrumental variables estimates of the impact of GSUS
enrollment on B.A. completion, instrumenting GSUS enrollment with eligibility. Column 1 repeats estimates from
the baseline specification, using as a running variable the minimum of a student’s distances to the math and verbal
thresholds. Column 2 uses distance to the math threshold as a running variable and conditions the sample on satisfying the verbal threshold. Column 3 uses distance to the verbal threshold as a running variable and conditions the
sample on satisfying the math threshold. All regressions use a bandwidth of 60 in the given running variable and
include high school class fixed effects.

40

Table A.6: College Degree Completion, Using Maximum SAT Scores
Completed B.A. within six years
(RF)
(IV)
(OLS)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Completed A.A. within six years
(RF)
(IV)
(OLS)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.022∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.30

0.225∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.31

0.244∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.002)
0.06

-0.025
(0.023)
0.02

-0.070∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.022∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.27

0.229∗∗∗
(0.058)
0.29

0.258∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.006)
0.06

-0.012
(0.057)
0.01

-0.077∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.022∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.24

0.251∗∗∗
(0.040)
0.23

0.242∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.003)
0.06

-0.044
(0.036)
0.04

-0.072∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.015
(0.010)
0.29

0.121∗
(0.068)
0.29

0.235∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.009∗∗
(0.004)
0.05

-0.075∗∗
(0.037)
0.08

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.039∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.18

0.383∗∗∗
(0.088)
0.00

0.206∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.012
(0.008)
0.04

-0.120∗
(0.068)
0.12

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.003)

(A) All students
All
Control (complier) mean
(B) Disadvantaged
Low income
Control (complier) mean
Late SAT taker
Control (complier) mean
(C) Very disadvantaged
Very low income, black
Control (complier) mean
Very late SAT taker, black
Control (complier) mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by distance to the admissions threshold are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Distance to the threshold is defined by maximum SAT scores. Columns 1 and
4 present reduced form estimates of the impact of eligibility on B.A. and A.A. completion within six years of high
school graduation. Columns 2 and 5 present instrumental variables estimates of the impact of GSUS enrollment
on degree completion, with GSUS enrollment instrumented by eligibility. Columns 3 and 6 present OLS estimates
of the impact of GSUS enrollment on degree completion. Columns 1 and 4 list the mean completion rates for
those 10 SAT points below the threshold, while columns 2 and 5 list the predicted completion rates for untreated
compliers. All regressions use a bandwidth of 60 and include high school class fixed effects.

41

