                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              REFERENCE POINTS AND REDISTRIBUTIVE PREFERENCES:
                          EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE

                                           Jimmy Charité
                                         Raymond Fisman
                                         Ilyana Kuziemko

                                       Working Paper 21009
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21009


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2015




We thank Alberto Alesina, Angus Deaton, Stefano DellaVigna, Marc Fleurbaey, Larry Katz, Benjamin
Lockwood, David Moss, Howard Rudnick, Stefanie Stantcheva and Matt Weinzierl for helpful discussions,
as well as seminar participants at the AEA meetings, Berkeley, Bocconi, UCSB, Chicago, Columbia,
Harvard, LSE, NBER, Northwestern, Princeton, UPF, and Stockholm. Financial support from the
Tobin Project is gratefully acknowledged. Adith Srinivasamurthy provided invaluable assistance with
JavaScript programming. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jimmy Charité, Raymond Fisman, and Ilyana Kuziemko. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reference Points and Redistributive Preferences: Experimental Evidence
Jimmy Charité, Raymond Fisman, and Ilyana Kuziemko
NBER Working Paper No. 21009
March 2015
JEL No. C9,D63,H21,H23

                                              ABSTRACT

If individuals evaluate outcomes relative to the status quo, then a social planner may limit redistribution
from rich to poor even in the absence of moral hazard. We present two experiments suggesting that
individuals, placed in the position of a social planner, do in fact respect the reference points of others.
First, subjects are given the opportunity to redistribute unequal, unearned initial endowments between
two anonymous recipients. They redistribute significantly less when the recipients know the initial
endowments (and thus may have formed corresponding reference points) than when the recipients
do not know (when we observe near-complete redistribution). Subjects who are themselves risk-seeking
over losses drive the effect, suggesting they project their own loss-aversion onto the recipients. In
a separate experiment, respondents are asked to choose a tax rate for someone who (due to luck) became
rich either five or one year(s) ago. Subjects faced with the five-year scenario choose a lower tax rate,
indicating respect for the more deeply embedded (five-year) reference point. Our results thus suggest
that respect for reference points of the wealthy may help explain why voters demand less redistribution
than standard models predict.


Jimmy Charité                                        Ilyana Kuziemko
School of Business                                   Department of Economics
Columbia University                                  Princeton University
8C Uris Hall                                         322 Wallace Hall
3022 Broadway                                        Princeton, NJ 08544
New York, NY 10027                                   and NBER
jc4144@columbia.edu                                  kuziemko@princeton.edu

Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
622 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

In a standard welfarist model of taxation with no moral hazard, a utilitarian social planner
will aspire to equalize wealth across all members of society (Mirrlees, 1971). While moral
hazard makes the social planner redistribute less, recent work suggests that standard esti-
mates of labor supply elasticity yield higher marginal tax rates than are typically observed.1
Moving from the normative to the positive, a democratic political process would similarly
be expected to generate a high degree of redistribution: given a right-skewed ex-ante income
distribution, the majority of voters have an incentive to expropriate the rich (Meltzer and
Richard, 1981).
    However, many scholars have observed that neither survey-based expressions of policy
preferences nor actual policies consistently reflect the more egalitarian predictions of stan-
dard models (see, e.g., Roemer, 1998 and citations therein). Perhaps the clearest challenge to
the standard model is individuals’ reluctance to fully redistribute exogenous, initial wealth,
a contradiction to utilitarianism recently noted by Saez and Stantcheva (2013) and Weinzierl
(2014). Scholars have proposed a number of explanations for the limited demand for redistri-
bution. Past work has focused on the prospect of upward mobility (Benabou and Ok, 2001),
the effects of “policy-bundling” redistribution with other, cross-cutting issues (typically race
in the U.S. context, see Lee and Roemer, 2006), and the public’s misinformation about in-
come inequality (see Ariely and Norton, 2011 on the level of misinformation, though see also
Kuziemko et al. (forthcoming) on the limited effect of information on policy preferences).2
    This paper proposes an additional, heretofore unexplored explanation for the limited de-
mand for redistribution, based on reference-dependent preferences. Whereas standard utility
functions assume that only absolute levels of consumption enter into utility, decades of re-
search support the view that in many important contexts individuals behave as though they
evaluate options relative to a reference point, typically the status quo. In particular, indi-
viduals are loss-averse relative to this reference point, in that the reduction in utility from a
(relative) loss is greater than the increase in utility from a corresponding gain. Further, to
the extent that voters recognize the reference-dependence of others (and incorporate others’
welfare into their own utility), they may demand limited redistribution from rich to poor,
even with exogenous, unearned initial endowments.
    1 SeeDiamond and Saez (2011), who argue that a utilitarian social welfare function would yield
top marginal tax rates over 70 percent given consensus estimates of labor supply elasticity.
   2 There is a related literature (see Harms and Zink, 2003 for a review) that examines why policy

outcomes may be more regressive than voters’ preferences even in a democracy (e.g., due to efforts
by lobbying groups), but here we focus on the question of why voters’ preferences might be more
regressive than the predictions of standard models suggest they would be.



                                                1
    We explore the consequences of reference dependence on the demand for redistribution
in an experimental setting where endowments are random and exogenous, thus removing
concerns of deservedness or efficiency, two key factors that could limit redistribution. Our
subjects (referred to for convenience in the paper as “redistributors,” though such language
is never used in the experiments) were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (mTurk),
a rapidly growing online labor market, which we describe in more detail later in the paper.
The experiment confronts subjects with a redistributive decision involving two other (ran-
domly selected and anonymous) mTurk participants, who received (based on a coin flip)
initial endowments, with one assigned to receive 5 dollars and the other 15. For most re-
distributors, the decision was presented as hypothetical; for a subset we confirmed that the
results hold when subjects are informed that with 10 percent probability their decisions will
be implemented for real stakes.
    To vary redistributors’ beliefs about the recipients’ reference points, redistributors in
the treatment arm were told that the recipients had already been informed of their ex-ante
allocation; redistributors in the control arm were told that the recipients had not been
informed of their ex-ante endowments and would thus only be informed of their ex-post
allocation. Subjects were then free to redistribute (or not) any whole dollar amount between
recipients, so long as all ex-post allocations remain non-negative. Each redistributor was
presented with both treatment and control conditions, with the ordering chosen at random.
For most of our analysis we use between-subject estimates of the loss aversion treatment
based on subjects’ responses to the first condition they are presented with.
    Our main finding is that subjects in the reference-point treatment (where subjects are told
that recipients have been informed of their ex-ante endowments) are significantly less likely to
reduce inequality between recipients than subjects in the control condition. In our preferred
specification, control group redistributors erase 94 percent of the initial 10 dollar difference
between the recipients’ endowments, while only 77 percent of endowment differences are
removed through reallocation in the treatment group. Our estimates hold across a large
number of robustness checks—dropping those who finish the survey in a suspiciously short
amount of time, dropping those who choose to increase inequality, changing presentational
aspects of the experiment, and moving from hypothetical to “real stakes” scenarios. Further,
the estimates remained stable as we collected data on these variants over the course of nearly
a year.
    It bears repeating that we do not view our reference-point mechanism as supplanting
other explanations for limited redistribution and take care to calibrate the size of our effect
relative to what the literature suggests is one of the key barriers to redistribution: the sense



                                               2
that the well-off have earned (and hence deserve) their income.3 In one session, we asked
respondents to redistribute unequal endowments between recipients whose initial allocations
were assigned either by a coin toss, or earned by correctly answering Scholastic Assessment
Test (SAT) questions, the main college admissions exam in the US. In both cases, the re-
cipients would only know their final endowments, so the coin-toss scenario is identical to
the control arm of the main experiment. Consistent with past work, we find strong effects
of deservedness: in the SAT treatment, redistributors close 56% of the ex-ante gap. Our
hypothesized “reference-dependence” mechanism thus has an effect size that is over half of
the luck-versus-merit effect, suggesting it could be an important and heretofore overlooked
explanation for limited redistribution.
    There are several candidate explanations for the reference-dependent redistributive de-
cisions of our subjects. Redistributors may (1) view initial allocations as property rights;
(2) exhibit a status-quo bias; (3) believe that telling the recipients their initial endowments
serves as an implicit promise, and thus reject redistribution on procedural justice grounds;
(4) respect subjects’ reference points. The near total redistribution in the control condition
argues against the most straightforward versions of explanations based on property-rights
or status-quo bias. To examine the potential role of procedural justice, we ran a version
of the survey which informed subjects that recipients in the treatment condition had been
told up front that their initial allocations could change before the receipt of payment. This
phrasing should minimize procedural justice concerns, as redistributors can now reallocate
money without worry of breaking an implicit promise to the treatment group recipients. Our
results continue to hold in this variation, indicating that procedural justice is unlikely to be
the primary explanation for our treatment effect.
    Finally, we included a set of questions to measure redistributors’ own loss aversion to
assess whether individuals who themselves are more loss averse are less willing to redis-
tribute in the treatment scenario. The vast majority of papers documenting loss-aversion
use between-subject designs to establish the existence of loss-aversion. We need individual-
level measures in the intensity of loss-aversion to test whether this individual trait predicts
differential treatment effects. We propose several such measures, each with its own shortcom-
ings, which we discuss in greater detail in Section 3.2. We find that the treatment effect is
driven almost entirely by subjects who are risk-loving in the loss domain: the interaction of
this loss-aversion measure and treatment status is highly significant, and its inclusion drives
the main treatment effect close to zero. We find no significant results for other loss-aversion
proxies we employ. Overall, there is thus mixed evidence that individuals’ own loss aversion
predicts the magnitude of the treatment effect.
   3 See,   for example, Alesina and Angeletos (2005) and Durante et al. (2013).


                                                  3
    Having established robust evidence that individuals respect recipients’ reference points
over small dollar amounts, we go on to examine whether reference points help explain voters’
preferences over actual redistributive policies, using a survey experiment that elicits respon-
dents’ optimal tax rates on high-income individuals. Subjects were randomly assigned to one
of two vignettes describing a person whose annual income had increased to $250,000 owing
to circumstances unrelated to skill or effort. The only difference between the treatment and
control conditions was the length of time that the protagonist had been earning the higher
income—in the treatment condition, he had been earning $250,000 for five years and in the
control condition for only one year. If respect for the reference points of the rich deters voters
from demanding more redistribution, then the effect should be stronger in situations where
that reference point has become more deeply embedded, i.e., for the individual who had
already been earning $250,000 for five years.
    Consistent with this view, respondents chose a tax rate in the five-year scenario that is
roughly 1.7 percentages points lower than in the one-year scenario (for which they chose
a rate of 28 percent). This 1.7 percentage point difference is over half the size of the gap
between tax rates chosen by Obama and Romney supporters, and is thus comparable in
magnitude to other important predictors of tax preferences.
    Our work joins a large body of economics papers that attempts to incorporate insights
from social psychology. While earlier researchers have fruitfully modeled the implications of
“behavioral agents” for the taxation of goods, to our knowledge, little work has adopted the
optimal income tax framework to consider the consequences of non-standard preferences like
reference-dependence on the demand for redistribution.4 This omission is surprising for at
least two reasons. First, social preferences have played a central role in the field of behavioral
economics and, in turn, social preferences are a central consideration in constructing a social
welfare function and thus for determining optimal income taxation. Second, at least in the
American context, income taxes account for a far greater fraction of revenue than do taxes on
specific goods, and thus better understanding voters’ preferences in this area has important,
practical policy implications.5
    Second, we contribute to a relatively recent literature on reconciling differences between
   4 See  Bernheim and Rangel (2004) on optimal taxation when agents can become addicted to
a good, O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006) on optimal “sin taxes” when agents lack self-control, and
Allcott et al. (2014) on optimal energy taxes and subsidies when agents are inattentive. The work
on optimal income tax is theoretical, not experimental, and focuses on relative utility—when utility
is a function of consumptions levels of peers—and not on loss-aversion. See Boskin and Sheshinski
(1978) and Oswald (1983).
    5 Alesina and Passarelli (2014) analyzes how loss aversion affects policy formulation in general.

Their finding of a status quo bias is driven by the strength of preferences by losers versus winners,
rather than voters’ regard for the losses of others, as in our approach.


                                                 4
individuals’ stated policy preferences and the prescriptions from standard utilitarian opti-
mal tax models. Both Saez and Stantcheva (2013) and Weinzierl (2014) point to individuals’
reluctance to fully redistribute income even in the absence of moral hazard as a serious chal-
lenge to the utilitarian framework. We offer some evidence that the full-redistribution result
can be largely rehabilitated within standard utilitarianism, albeit with non-standard individ-
ual utility functions. Both these papers note other important departures from utilitarianism
(e.g., limited use of tagging) that we do not address in this paper.
    Finally, to our knowledge, our study is one of the few to document choices that reflect the
presumption of non-standard preferences on behalf of others. In this sense, our framework
is related to models of guilt aversion (Battigalli and Dufwenberg, 2007), where individuals
suffer disutility from a failure to meet the expectations of others, and as a result incorporate
others’ utility into their own choices (see Battigalli et al. (2013) and Ellingsen et al. (2010) for
experimental tests of guilt aversion). Our results are novel in their application to important
questions in public finance and their contribution to our understanding of redistributive
preferences and policies.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a simple framework for thinking about
optimal tax decisions with reference-dependent individuals. Section 3 describes the main lab
experiment and Section 4 our mTurk sample. Section 5 reports the main results from the
redistribution experiment. Section 6 introduces the tax-policy survey experiment and reports
the results. Section 7 offers directions for future work and some concluding thoughts.


2     Reference points and optimal taxation

We begin by briefly examining how reference-dependent utility affects the prescriptions of
a standard model of optimal taxation, focusing primarily on a single-period static case. We
close with a discussion of how dynamics and possible adaptation would change the analysis.
In our experiment we will not be explicitly testing this model; rather, it provides a framework
for motivating and organizing our results based on existing theory.


2.1     Redistribution in a static optimal tax model
2.1.1   With standard utility assumptions

Even in the absence of moral hazard the standard optimal tax exercise would be intractable
without assumptions on individual utility. As Mankiw et al. (2009) point out, despite the
general caveat that utility cannot be compared across individuals, the typical optimal tax
exercise does exactly that and further assumes that individuals have identical utility func-


                                                 5
tions: a function f : x → u maps consumption x (which in the static model is identical to
income or wealth) into utility u, with f 0 > 0 and f 00 < 0.
    With these assumptions, optimal taxation in the utilitarian framework with no moral
hazard is a simple exercise. Assuming a single convex function can capture all agents’ utility,
welfare is maximized at the point of total equality.
    Figure 1 illustrates this logic for two individuals p (poor) and r (rich), with ex-ante
unequal wealth endowments xp and xr , xp < xr . Given r’s lower marginal utility of wealth, a
social planner can increase total utility by transferring some ∆ from r to p. The social planner
can continue to do so and still increase total welfare up to the point where f 0 (xr ) = f 0 (xp ),
that is, xr = xp .

2.1.2     With reference-dependent utility

If utility is reference-dependent, we lose the analytical convenience of both a common util-
ity function across individuals as well as differentiability. Figure 2 shows typical reference-
dependent utility functions.6 Importantly, r and p no longer share a utility function, as each
has a point of non-differentiability at their status-quo position. Transferring ∆x from r to
p no longer guarantees welfare improvements. As shown in the figure, moving to complete
equality is welfare-reducing, as is any smaller perturbation that transfers endowments from
r to p.
    While we have drawn gains as concave and losses as convex in Figure 2, such restrictions
are not necessary for the local result. So long as losses loom larger than gains relative to
the reference point, then small amounts of redistribution will reduce welfare. It is harder
to make specific claims about much larger changes, which will depend on third derivatives.
The main point is that reference dependence weakens the claim that, without moral hazard,
redistribution is necessarily welfare-enhancing in a utilitarian framework.
    An alternative mechanism that delivers the same result is to assume that subjects have
standard utility, but that the social planner himself overweights the utility of losers relative
to winners, as in Saez and Stantcheva (2013). That is, loss-aversion enters via the social
welfare weights, not the individuals’ utility functions. Our experiments will not be able to
distinguish between these two mechanisms.
   6 Wedraw the shape of the utility functions in Figure 2 to roughly approximate those calibrated
in Abdellaoui et al. (2007).




                                                6
2.2     Reference points in a dynamic setting
The analysis in the previous subsection assumes a static setting where an individual forms a
single reference point from her ex-ante endowment and then experiences a one-time change
in utility based on the ex-post distribution. In reality, the government sets tax and transfer
policy continuously. While a decision to substantially redistribute income or wealth in a
given year might well have the utility consequences described above in the year that follows,
if individuals adapt to their new reference points then the formerly rich will experience only
momentary disutility in subsequent years.
     It is an open question how quickly people adapt to changes in income and thus how
malleable reference points are over time.7 Strictly speaking, our empirical work will sidestep
this question: we merely test whether individuals appear to respect others’ reference points
when deciding whether to redistribute. Finding, as we do, that they respect others’ reference
points implies that individuals think that others’ reference points are not completely mal-
leable, or that they think myopically when making redistributive decisions. Thus, the actual
adaptation of reference points is not relevant to the positive question of whether individuals,
acting as social planners, believe others’ reference points should enter into redistributive
decisions.
     However, while not the focus of our analysis here, adaptation is an important consid-
eration in drawing normative implications from this positive result. If adaptation is slow
and losses loom larger than gains, then voters who seek to limit redistribution are plausibly
maximizing welfare in the utilitarian model. While past work (Chetty and Szeidl, 2007) has
shown that reference points (in their case, built on the micro-foundation of consumption
commitments) imply higher levels of social insurance against adverse events (as losses have
greater utility cost with reference points than with standard utility), by the same logic ref-
erence points might also suggest lower levels of redistribution for the purpose of condensing
the current income or wage distribution.
     On the other hand, if adaptation is rapid, voters seeking to limit redistribution out of
respect for others’ references points might not be maximizing welfare, or at least not in
a longer-run, steady-state sense. If voters or policy-makers overestimate the persistence of
reference points, then their chosen level of redistribution may be lower than the optimal,
welfare-maximizing point.
   7 See,
        e.g., Di Tella et al. (2010) and citations therein. They find that individual happiness
measures return to baseline roughly four years after an income shock.




                                              7
3     Experimental design

We recruited and compensated our subjects through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (mTurk)
marketplace (which we describe in detail in Section 4), but redirect them to surveys that we
built with Qualtrics’ online survey software, adding functionality with JavaScript as needed.
    We collected data from ten distinct sessions. In seven of these, respondents proceeded
through modules of the survey in the following order: (1) the main redistribution experiment;
(2) questions on loss-aversion; (3) background questions on political beliefs and demograph-
ics. We describe each below. In three of the later surveys, subjects were presented first with
questions on income taxation, which we describe in detail in Section 6. See Appendix Table
1 for the dates of the surveys and the attributes of each.8


3.1        Main redistribution experiment
The centerpiece of the survey presents respondents (whom we term “redistributors” in the
paper, though at no time do we use this term in the survey itself) with the opportunity, in
most cases hypothetical, to transfer money between two other anonymous mTurk partici-
pants. In all cases, the redistributor received only his show-up fee regardless of his decision,
so he has no direct self-interested motivation.
    Respondents randomized into the control arm of the survey encountered the following
instructions:

      Consider two other participants on mTurk, person A and person B. Based on a
      coin flip, we have given $5 to person A and $15 to person B.

      You can now transfer money between persons A and B. Persons A and B are
      not told how much money they were initially given. If you decide to give Person
      A $X instead of $5, he or she will simply be told that they have been given $X,
      and will not know how much they started with. Nor will they know that there is
      another person (Person B) involved, or that a third party (you) determined the
      money they received.

      Please indicate below what transfer, if any, you would make.

   A slider and interactive bar graph (which reflects in real time movements of the slider)
appeared directly below these instructions, allowing respondents to easily and transparently
    8 Wehad technical problems in one session and thus do not include it in the main analysis.
A description of the problem as well as results from that session appear on the last page of the
Appendix.

                                               8
transfer money between players. The default position of the slider was on the ex-ante ($5,
$15) distribution. Appendix Figure 1 provides a screenshot.
    For those randomized into the treatment arm, the second paragraph of the control in-
structions was modified as follows:

        You can now transfer money between persons A and B. Persons A and B have
        already been told how much money we have given them. If you decide to give
        Person A $X instead of $5, they will be told that they now have $X instead of
        $5. They will not know that there is another person (Person B) involved, or that
        a third party (you) determined the money they received.

Appendix Figure 2 provides a screenshot.
    To test the robustness of the results to within-person instead of between-person varia-
tion, we also performed the “reverse experiment” and so immediately after answering the
treatment (control) version of the question, treatment (control) respondents answer the con-
trol (treatment) version of the question (with the labels “Persons A and B” replaced with
“Persons C and D”). The survey is available for interested readers to take online.9
    Two presentational aspects of the main experiment deserve mention. First, the use of the
slider requires a default position, which we set to the status-quo allocation of $5 and $15
dollars. As such, we suspect that anchoring bias could lower the amount of redistribution in
both treatment and control and thus attenuate any treatment effect. Second, to illustrate
clearly the treatment scenario, we write: “If you decide to give Person A $X instead of $5,
they will be told that they now have $X instead of $5.” By using the poorer person as the
illustration, if anything we should prime redistributors to think of the pleasant surprise that
the person starting with $5 will experience, again biasing the experiment against finding our
hypothesized effect.
    To ensure the robustness of our findings, we ran several variants on the main experiment
described above. First, for one group of subjects (session 7), the subjects were informed,
prior to seeing the instructions, that there was a ten percent chance their decision would be
implemented for real stakes:

        The next two questions will give you the opportunity to determine the payments
        to two other mTurk participants.
   9A  version of the online experiment where the redistribution experiment is presented first
can be taken at the following link: https://az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_b2Tk5a7LuYAk38F&
Preview=Survey&BrandID=columbia. A version of the online experiment where the tax exper-
iment is presented first can be taken at this link: https://az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_
0MnchCiPWRxAsqV&Preview=Survey&BrandID=columbia. These versions of the surveys are in “pre-
view” mode and thus we do not collect any identifying data—such as IP addresses—via these links.

                                               9
      After you make your decisions, the computer will pick at random whether or
      not to implement your decision. There is a 10% percent chance that one of your
      decisions will actually be implemented. Because you do not know ahead of time
      whether your decision will be chosen, you should make your decisions as if they
      were for real money.

    In another robustness check (session 8), none of the text was italicized or underlined,
and the underlined reminder message (see screenshots in the Appendix) placed next to the
slider was removed. In a final check (session 10), we altered the language in the treatment
condition to convey to redistributors that the initial endowments should not be seen as a
promise or obligation to persons A or B. As Leventhal (1980) notes, the procedural justice
“rule of adhering to commitments...dictates that fairness is violated unless persons receive
that which has been promised to them.” To limit redistributors’ sense of commitment to
an initially promised allocation, we modified the wording of the underlined portion of the
instructions to read: “Persons A and B were told how much money they were initially given,
though they have also been told that the amount might increase or decrease.” All other text
was unchanged.


3.2    Questions to determine respondents’ own sensitivity to refer-
       ence points
We will also examine the role of redistributors’ own loss aversion on the treatment effect. In
the theory presented in Section 2 the social planner incorporates individuals’ loss aversion in
calculating social welfare; we conjecture that this tendency may be greater amongst subjects
who are themselves more sensitive to reference points. Such individuals will therefore exhibit
a larger treatment effect, as they project their own loss-aversion onto recipients’ outcomes.
    This test requires an individual-level measure of loss-aversion. However, the vast majority
of papers on loss-aversion use between-subject analysis—for example, the classic endowment-
effect experiments are demonstrated by one group’s willingness to accept being higher than
another group’s willingness to pay which, by construction, is a between-subject exercise.
Similarly, in their work showing that respondents judge the fairness of market transactions
based on reference points, Kahneman et al. (1986) use comparisons between groups assigned
to read different vignettes.
    Our approach is largely to take the questions asked in between-subject designs and present
both versions to each subject. Our primary measure of loss aversion, adapted from Kahneman
and Tversky (1979), uses the following sets of questions to measure risk-attitudes over gains
relative to losses.

                                              10
     Imagine that you face the following decisions. For each decision, please examine both
     options and indicate the one that you prefer.

        • Decision One:
            – A sure gain of $5.
            – 50% chance to gain $8 and 50% chance to gain nothing.
        • Decision Two:
            – A sure gain of $5.
            – 50% chance to gain $11 and 50% chance to gain nothing.
        • Decision Three:
            – A sure gain of $5.
            – 50% chance to gain $14 and 50% chance to gain nothing.

   Subjects then faced the same gambles, but in the loss domain:

        • Decision One:
            – A sure loss of $5.
            – 50% chance to lose $8 and 50% chance to lose nothing.
        • Decision Two:
            – A sure loss of $5.
            – 50% chance to lose $11 and 50% chance to lose nothing.
        • Decision Three:
            – A sure loss of $5.
            – 50% chance to lose $14 and 50% chance to lose nothing.

    We supplement this approach with additional questions on behaviors that prior re-
searchers have suggested relate to loss aversion. The first is motivated by the empirical
results documented in Genesove and Mayer (2001) showing that sellers of owner-occupied
homes eschew offers below the price at which they bought their own house to avoid realizing
a loss:

     Suppose you bought a house for $250,000 a few years ago. The housing market
     in your neighborhood has since declined, and you have seen houses very similar
     to yours sell for $200,000, though some sell for a bit more and some sell for a
     bit less. You expect the current housing market conditions in your neighborhood
     to remain relatively stable. You are planning to relocate in the coming year for
     a new job. Someone is interested in buying your house. What is the least you
     would be willing to accept as a sale price?


                                              11
   Subjects were then confronted with a question that was identical, except that the house’s
purchase price was changed from $250,000 to $300,000.
   Second, we take a question from Kahneman et al. (1986) that relates to reference-
dependent preferences over an employee’s wages:

      A small coffee shop has one employee who has worked there for six months
      and earns $10 per hour. The shop continues to do fairly good business, though
      unemployment in the area has increased due to a factory closure nearby. As a
      result, other small restaurants have now hired reliable workers at $8 an hour to
      perform jobs similar to those done by the coffee shop employee. The owner of
      the coffee shop reduces the employee’s wage to $8. The owner’s actions were: ◦
      Completely fair ◦ Acceptable ◦ Unfair ◦ Very unfair.

    Subjects were then presented with a version of the question where the penultimate sen-
tence is changed to: “The current employee leaves, and the owner decides to pay a replace-
ment worker $8 an hour.”
    Appendix Table 2 shows the correlation among these measures. Intriguingly, the answers
to the vignettes appear largely uncorrelated with the classic measure of being risk-loving over
losses, suggesting that they are capturing distinct phenomena. We return to the limitations
of these proxies later in the paper.


3.3    Demographic and political opinion questions
The survey ended with standard demographic questions, as well as a question of affiliation
in the 2012 presidential election. These questions allow us to examine whether our treat-
ment effect is larger for certain groups, and also to compare the mTurk sample to more
representative populations such as the American Community Survey. Given that we collect
these questions after the experiment (so as not to prime the results in the experiment), it is
possible that some answers may be primed by the experiment itself; comparisons by these
covariates should thus be viewed with this potential priming in mind. The final questions of
the survey relate to whether respondents felt any part of the survey was confusing or biased
and also asked for any other feedback they wished to share.




                                              12
4      Data

4.1       Data collection procedures
All of our subjects were recruited through mTurk, an online labor market where “requesters”
can post human intelligence tasks (HITs) to be completed by “workers.” As of this writing,
mTurk advertises that requesters can “access more than 500,000 workers.” The most common
posted HIT currently is “extract purchased items from a shopping receipt” and pays 8 cents
(the requester also pays a ten percent commission to Amazon).10
    Over the past few years, social scientists have increasingly used mTurk to perform exper-
iments and collect survey data (see Kuziemko et al., forthcoming and papers cited therein
for a review). We registered as a requester and posted the following HIT: “Short (less than
ten minutes) opinion survey on a variety of topics.” We tried to use a neutral description
that would limit selection bias while also giving workers an honest description of the task.
Compensation was set to $1, which approximated minimum wage assuming that subjects
took seven or eight minutes to complete it. Actual median completion time was 10.1 minutes,
implying an hourly wage of $6.09. Though we cannot find official data on average wages on
mTurk, reading through worker forums suggests that we are paying a very generous wage
(and indeed when we post a request for 300 survey takers, the full sample is typically gathered
within an hour).
    Each worker logs in with an mTurk worker ID. We collected data over ten separate
sessions, dropping any worker who has taken a previous survey with the same ID so as to
gather a fresh sample each time (though our main results hold when we keep repeat-takers in
the sample, see Appendix Table 6). Of course, if workers have multiple worker IDs then some
individuals may have participated in a previous session. Outside of surveys (which appear to
make up a very small share of all HITs), in which case requesters may want unique workers,
there is little financial incentive for mTurk workers to create multiple mTurk IDs, but we
cannot completely eliminate the possibility that some have done so, and thus could have
passed through our screening process.
    Another issue that arises on mTurk is the possibility of ‘robots,’ algorithms that mas-
querade as humans. To address this concern we begin each survey with a “captcha” (non-
standard writing difficult for computers to interpret).11 To the extent some robots remain in
our sample, they would attenuate any treatment effect.
    10 Details
           cited in this paragraph are based on viewing the mTurk homepage on 10:56 AM EDT,
August 12, 2014.
  11 Examples of “captchas” can be found here: http://www.fileflash.com/graphics/screens/

Captcha_Creator_PHP_Script-69.gif.


                                              13
    To limit heterogeneity of the sample, we collect all data on workdays during daylight
hours on the East Coast of the United States. Individuals were automatically prompted for a
response when they tried to skip questions (to discourage robots or inattentive respondents).
Particularly given our focus in some parts of the survey on American tax policy, we limited
the survey’s availability to those with U.S. billing addresses; we further asked respondents
to confirm their residency in the United States. To further ensure the attentiveness of our
subjects, we limit respondents to those with positive ratings from at least 90 percent of past
requesters.
    The data pass basic reality checks (for example, subjects that report having supported
Mitt Romney in 2012 tend to be white and male, mirroring patterns observed in polling
data). Over three quarters of respondents went on to answer an open-ended “feedback”
question, with the vast majority providing positive feedback on the survey.12
    In Appendix Tables 3 we show how questions on perceived political bias of the survey vary
with treatment status. About 87 percent of respondents felt that the survey was unbiased,
with about 9 percent finding that it had a liberal slant and 3 percent a conservative slant.
There is a borderline significant difference in perceived bias among treatment and control
subjects (column 3), though the bias is split between those that say the experiment was left-
and right-wing biased (columns 1 and 2), and neither directional bias is significant. Similarly,
survey fatigue should not affect our estimates of the treatment effect, as the average number
of minutes taken to complete the survey is also independent of treatment status.


4.2    Data sample
Table 1 provides detail on the mTurk workers who completed our survey, comparing them
to the (weighted) population of adults sampled in the 2010 American Community Survey.
Consistent with past work using mTurk, we find that younger, male, and college-educated
subjects are over-represented in our sample, while minorities are under-represented.
    Table 2 provides a longer list of covariates, while Table 3 examines differences between the
control and treatment groups. Overall, there appears to be good experimental balance, with
no variable showing a statistically significant difference at the five-percent level. In particular,
a variable that would be expected to have an impact on redistributive decisions—an indicator
for supporting President Obama in the 2012 election—is essentially identical between the
treatment and controls groups (p value of 0.89).
    Our loss-aversion measures also appear relatively balanced across survey arms. R-loving
  12 The  positive feedback likely reflects the tedium of most other mTurk tasks. Essentially all of
the negative feedback concerned the difficulty of some of the “captchas,” suggesting that it would
be difficult for robots to pass through this screen.

                                                14
in losses is coded as 0 if the respondent rejects all three gambles in the loss domain, 1 if she
accepts only the $8 gamble, 2 if both the $8 and $11, and 3 if she accepts all three gambles.
R-loving in gains is defined in a parallel manner. Our respondents are more risk-loving in
losses than gains, but there are no differences across survey arms. L-G risk subtracts R-
loving in gains from R-loving in losses as an additional loss-aversion measure: in this case,
how much more risk-loving a respondent is in losses than in gains.
    The last two variables refer to our loss-aversion vignettes. Higher WTA indicates that the
respondent demanded a higher house price with a $300,000 initial price than the $250,000
price. 80% of our respondents felt that the initial price was relevant to their decision. Finally,
∆ wage unfairness takes the 1-4 rating of unfairness that the employer would cut the current
employee’s wage to $8, and subtracts the same rating for the new employee. It is thus
a measure of how much more unfair the cut is to the current employee and, indeed, our
respondents view it as substantially more unfair. Thus, for both measures the reference
point effect survives a within-subject comparison, despite subjects seeing the scenarios side
by side.


5      Results from the redistribution experiment

5.1       Main results
Table 4 shows, for the full sample, the main between-subject differences in total redistribu-
tion for those first assigned to the control versus those first assigned to the treatment. Recall
that redistributing $5 from the “richer” to “poorer” recipient would result in complete re-
distribution. Column (1) shows the treatment effect controlling only for session fixed effects.
Those in the control group achieve nearly complete redistribution, shifting an average of $4.55
from the richer recipient to the poorer one, or 91% of the level of redistribution required
for strict equality. Recall that the default position of the slider was the status quo ($5 and
$15) allocations, suggesting that anchoring may, if anything, bias the control group results
against inequality-reducing redistribution. Those assigned to the treatment redistribute on
average $0.80 (or 17 percent) less than those in the control.
    Column (2) drops subjects who finished the survey in less time than one could reasonably
be capable of completing it.13 The control group mean increases slightly, consistent with
the view that some rapid finishers simply clicked thoughtlessly through the redistributive
decisions, leaving the sliders in their default positions. The treatment effect increases when
    13 Specifically,
                  less than three minutes for the first session (as it did not have the module on
loss-aversion), and six minutes for the other sessions.



                                               15
these subjects are dropped.
     Column (3) further excludes subjects for whom the $5/$15 experiment was not the first
item of the survey. This restriction removes subjects that may be contaminated by exposure
to our income tax survey experiment (which we discuss in Section 6 below). We take the
results in this column as our preferred specification: the control group closes nearly 94% of
the gap (4.682 ÷ 5), whereas the treatment group only 77 ((4.683 − 0.829) ÷ 5). Thus, our
treatment reduces redistribution by 17 percentage points.
     The rest of the table provides a number of additional robustness checks. In column (4)
we drop subjects who choose to make inequality-increasing reallocations. We present results
with these subjects excluded to ensure that our average treatment effect is not being driven
by them (though one could imagine such choices as welfare-maximizing under, say, a convex
utility function). Column (5) includes a number of demographic control variables; given the
balance across the control and treatment arms documented in Table 3, it is not surprising
that the treatment effect is unchanged with the inclusion of these controls. Column (6)
presents results for the “real stakes” subsample of redistributors who were informed that
there was a 10 percent chance that their decision would be implemented, while in Column
(7), we show results for the group of subjects where none of the text in the experiment was
highlighted or underlined. We find that our basic result continues to hold in each of these
subsamples, though the effect is attenuated, particularly in the non-underlined version.
     Finally, in column (8) we present the results of the variant designed to assess whether
procedural justice concerns can account for our treatment effect, labeled “Ex. promised
payment” in the table. Recall that in this version, subjects in the treatment group were
informed that “Persons A and B were told how much money they were initially given, though
they have also been told that the amount might increase or decrease.” While the treatment
effect is marginally smaller than that observed in our main results (-0.51 versus -0.83), it is
still significant at the 10% level. This check is quite demanding: by warning (hypothetical)
subjects in the treatment condition that their ex-ante allocation could change, we are not
only avoiding making a promise but also softening their reference points. As such, even if
procedural justice issues played no role in the main treatment effect, we might expect the
treatment effect in this session to be somewhat smaller if redistributors are instead responding
to the softened reference point of the hypothetical subjects.
     Our main results are consistent across sessions more generally, as shown in Figure 3. Here,
using our preferred sample restrictions, we plot the coefficients and 95 percent confidence
intervals for the treatment effect, disaggregated by session date. The only treatment effect
that stands out is the very first survey, which is larger in magnitude than the others. While,
as noted, we drop individuals who participated in previous sessions with the same mTurk ID,


                                              16
the large treatment effect for the first survey potentially suggests that individuals who already
took the survey using a different worker ID may have attenuated the measured treatment
effect in later sessions. The session-by-session results highlight how the “real stakes” and
“unemphasized” versions of the survey have nearly identical treatment effects as the two
standard surveys that followed the initial session.
    Figure 4 shows histograms of the final allocation for the ex-ante “poorer” player, both
for the treatment and control groups. For both groups, the distribution is bimodal, with
most of the mass at (10, 10) but also a second, shorter peak at (5,15); there is almost no
mass in between these two points. Thus, most of the treatment effect occurs at the extensive
margin—the decision to redistribute at all—as opposed to increases in partial redistribution.
If losses are “more convex” than gains are “concave,” then after no redistribution, complete
redistribution is the utility-maximizing outcome. As such, the lack of partial redistribution
is consistent with subjects responding to the convexity of losses.
    Table 5 shows these extensive margin results in a regression framework. Approximately
four-fifths of control group respondents set final allocations at (10, 10), as compared to only
60 percent of the treatment group, for a treatment effect of 25 percent along the extensive
margin. As before, this result is highly robust to the addition of controls, as well as excluding
suspiciously short surveys, and choices that increase inequality.
    As noted in Section 3, all subjects are presented with the “reverse” experiment: those
first assigned to the treatment also face the control scenario, and vice versa. Our emphasis
is on the between-subjects analysis presented above, as respondents are likely to anchor at
least partially on their first response, and past work has further shown that the tendency to
anchor may be related to loss-aversion.14 Nonetheless, the within-subject treatment effect is
highly significant, and near-identical in magnitude to the between-subject estimates. Table
6 shows an average treatment effect of -0.873 (column 1), with a somewhat smaller effect
(column 2) for those who start with the treatment scenario than those who start with the
control scenario (column 3). The final column shows that the within-subject result holds also
for the real-stakes session.


5.2        Magnitude of the reference point effect
To gauge the magnitude of the effect we document above, we compare our treatment effect
to the impact of having endowments earned by merit (score on SAT questions) rather than
luck (a coin flip). This comparison is motivated by prior work using polling data, which has
shown that one of the most important determinants of support for redistribution is whether
  14 See   Beggs and Graddy (2009).


                                               17
income is seen as the result of merit versus luck (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005).
    To make this comparison, we ran a session where the control arm was kept the same
(the $5 and $15 endowments were determined by a coin flip, and the recipients will only
know their final allocations), while in the treatment arm respondents were told “the initial
amounts given to Persons A and B were based on their performance on SAT questions [emph.
in original].” As with the control version of the experiment, the redistributor is told that
Persons A and B would only learn of their own final allocation.
    The results are reported in Table 7. Consistent with past work demonstrating the im-
portant role of perceived merit in attitudes toward redistribution, the coefficient on the
treatment variable is large in magnitude, indeed larger than in our reference-point experi-
ment. Dividing the coefficients in this table by their analogues in Table 4 suggests that our
reference-point effect is about half of the luck-versus-merit difference.15 It is possible that
the SAT treatment contains an implicit reference point treatment as well: a subject would
likely have a rough sense of their performance, and thus form a reference point over their
expected compensation. To the extent that redistributors take this expectation into account,
we would over-estimate the pure “merit” effect (thus underestimating the magnitude of our
main reference-point treatment effect as a share of the merit effect).
    Interestingly, the histogram of final outcomes in the luck-merit experiment takes a some-
what different shape than what we observe for the main experiment (see Appendix Figure 5).
There are still mass points at $5 and $10, but other intermediate choices are now more com-
mon. Whereas, conditional on redistributing something, only 12 percent of those assigned to
the original treatment chose an “in between” final allocation in the reference-point experi-
ment, 28 percent do so in the luck-versus-merit experiment, highlighting that respondents
are more sensitive to the assigned reference points in our main loss aversion treatment.


5.3     Why do redistributors exhibit reference dependence?
There are several primary candidate explanations for the treatment effect we observe: prop-
erty rights over initial endowments, status-quo bias, initial endowments as a commitment
or promise, and the projection of loss-averse preferences on recipients by the redistributors.
The data are harder to reconcile with either of the first two explanations. The most straight-
forward property rights explanation is inconsistent with the near-complete redistribution in
our control condition. This result also casts doubt on status-quo bias, which would also limit
  15 Ourluck-versus-merit results are similar to those found in preliminary work by Chevanne et al.
In an undated online draft of their paper, they find that third-party dictators redistribute roughly
32 percent less when they are told that initial inequality was due to effort, quite close to the effect
we obtain in our experiment (a 36 percent reduction in the specification with controls).


                                                  18
redistribution in the control scenario.
    Of course, applying the notion of “property rights” is complicated in our control condition:
can one have “property rights” over something one was unaware that one possessed? In
the “no promises” variant of the experiment, however, “property rights” in the treatment
condition are deliberately weakened by warning the recipients that their ex-ante allocations
could change. Yet the treatment effect remains, suggesting a respect for property rights are
not the main constraint on redistributors in the treatment condition. Moreover, this “no
promises” variant also argues against a dominant role of distributive obligations as a result
of commitments or promises.
    In the remainder of this section, we assess the evidence for the final candidate explanation—
that the redistributor projects reference-dependent preferences onto the potential recipients
A and B. We hypothesize that this is more likely if a redistributor is himself more loss-averse.
We thus examine how the treatment effect varies with measures of own loss aversion in Table
8, using regressions of the form

Redistributioni = β1 Loss-Aversei × T reatedi + β2 T reatedi + β3 Loss-Aversei + γXi + i .

We conjecture that β1 < 0; that is, those who are loss-averse will redistribute relatively less
than others when exposed to the treatment condition.16
    Table 8 shows mixed support for the notion that the treatment is strongest among loss-
averse subjects. In column (1) we replicate our preferred specification from the main ex-
periment, for ease of comparison. In column (2) we add the interaction between treatment
status and our measure of risk-seeking over losses (along with its main effect, though we
do not report this coefficient in the interest of space).17 The coefficient on the interaction
term is negative and highly significant; moreover, it reduces the main effect of the treatment
essentially to zero. Column (3) shows that risk attitude over gains has no significant effect
on the treatment. When we subtract risk attitude in gains from risk attitude in losses (to
compare risk-taking over losses relative to risk-taking over gains) we also find a significant
interaction effect in the expected direction (column 4).
    However, when we turn to our alternative loss aversion measures, neither interaction
term approaches statistical significance (and in fact both point estimates go against the
  16 This regression presents a demanding test: as Table 2 shows, a large majority of individuals
give answers consistent with loss aversion in the surveys. Given that the main treatment effect
acts primarily through the extensive margin, it is plausible that individuals with varying degrees
of loss aversion over own payoffs will have similar treatment effects, so long as they are above some
threshold level of loss-aversion.
   17 Main effects of each of the reference-dependence proxies are all small and statistically insignif-

icant; the coefficients flip signs depending on which proxy is used.


                                                  19
hypothesized direction). As we note earlier, none of our three main loss aversion measures
show strong correlation with one another, raising the larger concern of how best to measure
loss aversion in a simple and comprehensible way at the individual-level, a question we intend
to take up in future research. It is also worth noting that the non-gamble loss-aversion
measures have limited variation (e.g, roughly 80 percent of subjects say they would be
unwilling to realize a loss when selling their house), so our ability to compare treatment effects
by these measures are limited. Finally, because we always ask the loss-aversion questions after
the main $5/$15 experiment, priming from the main experiment (as well as priming among
the loss-aversion questions) is likely. For the remainder of the subsection we focus on the
gamble-based measures of loss-aversion.
    Returning to our result in column (2), the strong effect of the interaction term could
merely reflect a differential treatment effect along another margin that correlates with loss-
aversion. In Appendix Table 4 we show results for our main covariates interacted with
the treatment effect. Rather remarkably, of the eleven variables, only one (age) is even
marginally significant. As such, differential treatment effects appear very small (outside of
risk-preferences in the loss domain). Indeed, the Risk-loving in losses × T reatment effect
in column (2) remains large and significant when in column (7) we simultaneously control
for all the interactions documented in Appendix Table 4 (along with all underlying main
effects), consistent with these additional controls having very little explanatory power. Col-
umn (8) shows that including all the Covariate × T reatment interactions does not affect the
coefficient on interaction with risk-aversion over losses relative to risk-aversion over gains.
    While the results in Table 8 indicate that our main results are driven by subjects who
are risk-loving in the loss domain, it may be that these individuals are simply more sensitive
to treatment effects more generally. To test this claim, in Appendix Table 5 we replicate
the analysis in Table 8, using data from the SAT/coin-toss version of the experiment. While
the sample size is small and our estimates correspondingly noisier, the pattern of coefficients
offers no hint that being risk-loving over losses affects the treatment effect in the luck/merit
experiment. The coefficient on the treatment’s main effect is virtually unchanged when the
interaction term is added, in sharp contrast to the patterns observed in Table 8.


5.4    Discussion
We find very robust evidence that in their role as social planner, subjects’ decisions are
affected by whether recipients are aware of their initial endowments. While subjects appear
to respect the reference points of the potential recipients, we provide only tentative evidence
that they project their own reference-dependence onto recipients, as the relationship of the


                                               20
treatment effect with own loss aversion is sensitive to the exact loss-aversion proxy used.
    These experimental results suggest that respect for reference points may be one reason
individuals eschew complete redistribution even in the absence of moral hazard. When re-
distributors need not consider recipients reference points, as in our control condition, we
essentially recover the Mirrleesian full-redistribution result, making the results from the con-
trol arm interesting in their own right. We can thus rehabilitate the full-redistribution result
within classic utilitarianism, albeit with non-standard utility functions.
    As noted earlier, Chetty and Szeidl (2007) present a model of consumption commit-
ments that could similarly diminish redistribution by a social planner who takes into account
the commitments of relatively well-off individuals. As they observe, however, in a context
such as ours it is implausible that actual consumption commitments could drive subjects’
decisions—the individuals over whom they were making decisions were given money that,
by construction, had not yet been spent.18
    Our findings to this point indicate that subjects are sensitive to others’ reference points
in redistributive decisions in laboratory settings over small stakes. In order to relate our
findings more directly to policy-relevant questions, we now turn to results from a survey
experiment on preferences over income tax rates.


6       Survey results on reference points and preferred top income tax
        rates

The question of what constitutes an appropriate income tax rate on high-income households
is a much-discussed issue in American politics today. A threshold of $250,000 has become
a focal point in this discussion, and surveys often ask about support for higher taxes on
households with annual incomes of at least that level.19 While the majority of respondents in
surveys tend to support higher income taxes on this group, the strength of those preferences
has been debated. For example, while survey respondents in 2010 exhibited strong support
for letting the so-called “Bush tax cuts” (those specified in the 2001 and 2003 tax relief acts)
expire for individuals earning over $250,000, in that year’s midterm Congressional elections
Republicans won handily despite their having made extending these tax cuts a major focus
    18 If
       individuals develop reference-dependent heuristics as a result of commonly observing con-
sumption commitments in their day-to-day lives, it could help to provide an underlying model
for reference dependent preferences. Examining this possibility may be an interesting direction to
pursue but is outside the scope of our paper.
  19 See, e.g., http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2012/12/06/trio-of-polls-support-

for-raising-taxes-on-wealthy/.



                                               21
of their campaign.20
    The survey experiment below tests whether respect for reference points might weaken
respondents’ preference to tax high-income households.


6.1    The survey experiment
Subjects were presented with a vignette describing an individual that had received an un-
expected increase in earnings. In most waves, the source of the increase was a corporate
takeover of the company where the individual is employed (the “takeover” vignette). Sub-
jects were randomly assigned to either a treatment or control arm, which differed only in the
timing of when the earnings increase took place.
    The “control” arm of the vignette took the following form:21

      There has been much talk about whether wealthy families are paying their fair
      share in taxes.

      Consider the following person. He has been working for about five years as a
      regional sales manager at a medium-sized firm. This year, his firm was taken
      over by a larger corporation. While he will be doing the same job as before, to
      make his pay compatible with the earnings of employees in his position at the
      larger firm, his salary is now doubled, to $250,000.

      If it were up to you, how much of his salary should he pay in taxes? (As a basis of
      comparison, the average American pays about 22 percent in taxes on the income
      they make.)

    In the treatment variant, we attempt to make the protagonists’ reference income of
$250,000 more deeply embedded. Instead of receiving the raise just this year, he received it
five years ago. Specifically, the second paragraph in the treatment vignette reads:

      Consider the following person. He started five years ago as a regional sales man-
      ager at a medium-sized firm. Soon after starting, his firm was taken over by a
      larger corporation. While he did the same job as before, his salary was doubled
      to make his pay compatible with the earnings of employees in his position at the
  20 Larry   Bartels discussed this tension in a 2010 online post: http://today.yougov.com/news/
2010/10/26/taxes-energized-minority/.
   21 In the vignettes we reference a tax rate of 22 percent on the “average American.” We base this

figure on NBER Taxsim estimates for combined federal and state income tax, and then add the
employee side of payroll taxes.

                                                22
      larger firm. Since then, his annual salary has been roughly steady and is now
      $250,000.

    After reading either the control or treatment version of the vignette, subjects provided
their response using a slider positioned immediately below the vignette, with values in the
range [0,100] percent and the default set to zero. See Appendix Figures 3 and 4 for screen
shots.
    In a later session, to assess the generalizability of our findings, we changed the reason
for the individual’s increase in income. In the control version of this later wave, the second
paragraph of the vignette above is replaced with:

      Consider the following person. This year, he won the state lottery. As a result,
      he will receive $250,000 a year for the rest of his life (note that lottery winnings
      are treated as taxable income).

    As before, in the treatment version, to strengthen the reference point, we simply re-
placed “This year” with “Five years ago” and changed the verb tense (from “will receive”
to “receives”) as appropriate.
    In a subset of sessions, following the vignette and the associated slider question, we
asked subjects about their tax preferences more generally as follows: “In general, how do
you feel about increasing taxes on those making $250,000 or more (as has been proposed in
Congress recently)?” Respondents could choose from “strongly oppose,” “oppose,” “favor,”
and “strongly favor” (though we collapse these choices into an indicator variable for favoring
or strongly favoring the policy).
    Our analysis in this section is motivated by models of habit formation whereby individuals
acclimate to conditions—financial or otherwise—over time (see, for example, Bowman et al.
(1999)). Thus, we conjecture that subjects presented with a vignette where the protagonist
has been receiving $250,000 for nearly five years will set a lower ideal tax rate than those
presented with a protagonist that has received high earnings for only a short time, and hence
is not yet accustomed to it.


6.2    Results
We begin by presenting results based on the pooled sample of both takeover and lottery vi-
gnettes. In the first column of Table 9, we present the basic treatment effect, where Treated
denotes that a subject was presented with the vignette where the protagonist’s earnings (via
corporate acquisition or lottery) increased five years ago, using the full sample of mTurk
participants (even those that did not see the tax survey experiment first). Treated subjects

                                              23
choose a tax rate for the protagonist that is 1.17 percentage points lower than control sub-
jects, significant at the 10 percent level; by comparison, the control group mean is 28.8
percent. As with the $5/$15 experiment, our preferred sample includes only those who saw
the tax experiment first (and thus cannot be contaminated with the $5/$15 redistribution
experiment). When we focus on the subsample where the tax vignette appeared first (column
2), the treatment effect increases to 1.71 percentage points (with a control group mean of
28.6).
    A small fraction of subjects choose extreme values: about one percent of subjects selected
a tax rate of zero while a few chose tax rates of 99 and 100 percent. In column (3) we omit the
top 1 percent and bottom 5 percent of observations to limit the influence of these extreme
observations.22 This restriction has only a slight impact on the size of the treatment effect.
In Appendix Table 7, we show that the treatment effect is robust to a number of alternative
ways of dealing with outliers, including estimates based on median regressions, winsorizing
instead of dropping outliers, dropping only zero tax rates, and dropping regressive (<21
percent) tax rates. In all specifications, the treatment effect’s magnitudes are comparable to
the figures presented in Table 9. In column (4) we include controls, which has essentially no
impact on the treatment effect.
    While we tried to hold everything constant in the treatment and control arms except
the strength of the reference point, it is possible respondents read other differences into the
stories. We suspect that the most likely biases push against finding our result. In the five-
year (treatment) scenario, the protagonist would have had a greater capacity to accumulate
wealth and thus could cover the costs of a greater tax burden more easily than the protagonist
who only just received the raise (control scenario). Moreover, we suspect respondents might
think it unfair that, purely due to luck, in the five-year scenario the protagonists enjoys the
large raise after having barely worked for the company, whereas in the one-year scenario
he put in his time before getting the big raise. Given the greater willingness to redistribute
gains due to luck both in our $5/$15 experiment as well as in work cited earlier, respondents
should choose a higher tax rate for the protagonist in the control scenario.
    However, a concern that pushes in the opposite direction in the takeover vignette is that
individuals confronted with the five-year scenario may credit the protagonist with greater
merit because he has worked at the larger corporation for longer. While we emphasized that
in both cases the individual would receive a raise even though he would be doing the same
job as before, in the five-year scenario the individual has apparently managed to fit in at
the larger corporation, at least to the point that he has kept his (high-paying) job for half
  22 Anotherreason to exclude zero in particular is that it is the default position of the slider and
thus many of these individuals may have been simply skipping through the survey.


                                                 24
a decade. In the one-year scenario, the future performance of the protagonist at the new
corporation is left unclear.
    For this reason, it is useful to examine the estimates from the takeover and lottery
vignettes separately, as only in the former case would the merit argument apply. Column (5)
shows estimates from the takeover vignette and column (6) the lottery vignette. While the
treatment effect for the takeover vignette is larger, both are negative and are statistically
indistinguishable from one another.
    In the final two columns, we test whether the treatment moves respondents’ views about
upper-income tax rates more generally. Treatment respondents are seven percentage points
(roughly ten percent) less likely to support a tax hike on individuals making $250,000 or
more, though significant only at the ten-percent level. This result suggests that the vignette’s
framing is sufficiently salient to affect respondents’ views on preferred tax rates for all high-
income individuals, not just the one portrayed in the vignette. Of course, this outcome may
be primed by the answer to the slider question (which always precedes it), so should be
interpreted with caution.


6.3       Discussion
The results from the survey experiment show that individuals appear to reward more deeply
embedded references points (i.e., income levels that have been experienced for longer periods
of time) with lower tax rates. The magnitude of this effect is quite large. For example, Obama
supporters choose a tax rate 2.96 percentage points greater than do other respondents (not
shown), suggesting that our reference-point effect is over half as large as an “Obama effect.”23
    While the survey experiments have documented that the strength of an individual’s
reference point reduces the tax rates assigned by our subjects, the precise mechanism is
unclear. A literal application of consumption commitments cannot account for the results of
the $5/$15 experiment (as the money had not yet been spent and the stakes were modest).
However, respondents could well be responding to the perceived consumption commitments
of the protagonists in the vignettes, in the spirit of Chetty and Szeidl (2007). It is plausible
that the person who became rich five years earlier would since have taken on a hefty mortgage
and enrolled her children in private schools. This consumption commitments view presents
a possible foundation for the existence of a loss aversion heuristic, whether for oneself or,
  23 To estimate this effect, we use our preferred specification from Table 9 (i.e., column 3) but
substitute a “Supported Obama” indicator for the treatment indicator. The mean tax rate chosen
among the control group (i.e., those who did not support Obama) is 26.1 percent. When we instead
repeat this analysis with the binary “support a general upper-income tax hike” variable as our
outcome, our treatment effect is 29% of the corresponding “Obama” effect.


                                               25
as is the case in our experiment, on behalf of others. In this paper we aim to document
how asymmetric responses to gains and losses affect redistributive preference more generally
and upper-income tax policy in particular, rather than attempting to distinguish amongst
underlying explanations for this behavior.
    It is also interesting to note that, at least along some policy dimensions, there appears to
be respect for reference points in the distribution of transfer policies as well. For example, a
policy that has gained popularity during the Great Recession would require welfare and food
stamp recipients to pass drug tests. In a 2011 Rasumussen poll, while 53% of respondents
supported mandatory drug test for new applicants to welfare, only 29% supported that same
requirement for current recipients.24 As such, respondents seemed to view individuals’ current
benefits as more of an entitlement. The fact that many cuts in benefits are “grandfathered
in” can also be viewed as an implicit respect for beneficiaries’ reference points.


7      Conclusion

Past work has established that in many contexts, individuals display reference-dependent
preferences. We provide robust evidence that, in a laboratory setting, individuals who are
given the opportunity to redistribute between two recipients with unequal endowments are
highly sensitive to the recipients’ reference points. When the recipients do not know their
initial endowments, the redistributor erases close to the full ex-ante income gap. However,
redistribution is reduced by nearly twenty percent when the recipients do know their ex
ante endowments. This reference-point effect is large in magnitude, more than one-half of
the effect of having endowments determined via performance on an academic test versus
a coin flip. Moreover, it is strongest among respondents who themselves appear the most
loss-averse, at least as measured by the willingness to bear risk in the loss domain.
    These findings have implications for models of optimal taxation. If losses—even for the
wealthy—loom larger than gains, part of the welfare gain from redistribution may be erased.
If individuals project their own loss-aversion onto others when forming their redistributive
preferences, then loss-aversion might help explain the gap between voters’ stated policy
preferences and the more egalitarian normative prescriptions of optimal tax models or the
positive predictions from standard political economy models.
    Future work might examine the extent to which preference anomalies exist in decisions
with direct consequences for others’ (rather than one’s own) payoffs in contexts other than
redistribution. The limited work we have found on this question suggests that context may
    24 See     http://stopthedrugwar.org/chronicle/2011/jul/22/national_poll_finds_
support_welf for a discussion of these results.


                                              26
be important, as Marshall et al. (1986) do not find, as we do, that individuals project loss-
aversion when they act as advisors on others’ behalf. Beyond voters and advisors, there are
many other roles that entail making decisions with consequences for others, such as parents,
employers, and physicians.
    In this paper, we have not confronted the normative issue of whether preference anomalies
such as loss aversion should be respected by the social planner. Suppose that individuals
behave as if their own utility is reference-dependent and that, as our work shows, they take
others’ loss-aversion into account when acting as social planners. Should policy-makers and
economists nonetheless still restrict themselves to classical utility and social welfare functions
when conducting welfare analysis? Such questions have recently been taken up in Lockwood
and Weinzierl (2014).
    The existence of reference-dependent preferences in redistributive decisions may also help
to explain some puzzling aspects of tax policy. For example, if wealth is a more salient
reference point than income, it could help to explain the lack of broad-based support for
wealth taxes (and may be reason for skepticism that recent wealth tax proposals will get
much traction). Our findings may suggest that tax increases—whether based on wealth
or income—might be better-received if policymakers can commit to them several years in
advance of their implementation, thus allowing individuals to adjust their reference wealth
or income ahead of the actual change. A fuller analysis of the consequences of reference-
dependent utility for taxation—how reference points are set and evolve in response to policy
changes or pronouncements; whether there are circumstances that attenuate or intensify the
role of reference-dependence in redistributive preferences; and so forth—is a further area for
future research.
References
Abdellaoui, M., Bleichrodt, H. and Paraschiv, C. (2007). Loss aversion under
 prospect theory: A parameter-free measurement. Management Science, 53 (10), 1659–
 1674.
Alesina, A. and Angeletos, G.-M. (2005). Fairness and redistribution. American Eco-
 nomic Review, pp. 960–980.
— and Passarelli, F. (2014). Loss aversion and politics.
Allcott, H., Mullainathan, S. and Taubinsky, D. (2014). Energy policy with exter-
 nalities and internalities. Journal of Public Economics.
Ariely, D. and Norton, M. I. (2011). Building a better americaone wealth quintile at a
 time. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6 (1), 9–12.
Battigalli, P., Charness, G. and Dufwenberg, M. (2013). Deception: The role of
 guilt. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 93, 227–232.
— and Dufwenberg, M. (2007). Guilt in games. The American Economic Review, pp.
 170–176.
Beggs, A. and Graddy, K. (2009). Anchoring effects: Evidence from art auctions. The
 American Economic Review, pp. 1027–1039.
Benabou, R. and Ok, E. (2001). Social mobility and the demand for redistribution: The
 POUM hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2), 447–487.
Bernheim, B. D. and Rangel, A. (2004). Addiction and cue-triggered decision processes.
 The American Economic Review, 94 (5), 1558–1590.
Boskin, M. J. and Sheshinski, E. (1978). Optimal redistributive taxation when individual
 welfare depends upon relative income. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 589–601.
Bowman, D., Minehart, D. and Rabin, M. (1999). Loss aversion in a consumption–
 savings model. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 38 (2), 155–178.
Chetty, R. and Szeidl, A. (2007). Consumption commitments and risk preferences. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2), 831–877.
Di Tella, R., Haisken-De New, J. and MacCulloch, R. (2010). Happiness adap-
 tation to income and to status in an individual panel. Journal of Economic Behavior &
 Organization, 76 (3), 834–852.
Diamond, P. and Saez, E. (2011). The case for a progressive tax: from basic research to
 policy recommendations. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (4), 165–190.
Durante, R., Putterman, L. and Van der Weele, J. J. (2013). Preferences for redis-
 tribution and perception of fairness: An experimental study. Forthcoming, Journal of the
 European Economic Association.
Ellingsen, T., Johannesson, M., Tjøtta, S. and Torsvik, G. (2010). Testing guilt
 aversion. Games and Economic Behavior, 68 (1), 95–107.


                                           28
Genesove, D. and Mayer, C. (2001). Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from
 the housing market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (4), 1233–1260.
Harms, P. and Zink, S. (2003). Limits to redistribution in a democracy: a survey. European
 Journal of Political Economy, 19 (4), 651–668.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L. and Thaler, R. (1986). Fairness as a constraint on
 profit seeking: Entitlements in the market. The American economic review, pp. 728–741.
— and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
 metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 263–291.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E. and Stantcheva, S. (forthcoming). How elastic
 are preferences for redistribution? evidence from randomized survey experiments. Ameri-
 can Economic Review.
Lee, W. and Roemer, J. E. (2006). Racism and redistribution in the United States: A
  solution to the problem of American exceptionalism. Journal of Public Economics, 90 (6),
  1027–1052.
Leventhal, G. S. (1980). What should be done with equity theory? Springer.
Lockwood, B. and Weinzierl, M. (2014). Positive and normative judgments implicit in
 us tax policy, and the costs of unequal growth and recessions. Harvard Business School
 BGIE Unit Working Paper, (14-119).
Mankiw, N. G., Weinzierl, M. and Yagan, D. (2009). Optimal taxation in theory and
 practice. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 147–174.
Marshall, J. D., Knetsch, J. L. and Sinden, J. A. (1986). Agents’ evaluations and
 the disparity in measures of economic loss. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
 7 (2), 115–127.
Meltzer, A. and Richard, S. (1981). A rational theory of the size of government. The
 Journal of Political Economy, 89 (5), 914–927.
Mirrlees, J. A. (1971). An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. Review
 of Economic Studies, 38 (2), 175–208.
O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (2006). Optimal sin taxes. Journal of Public Economics,
 90 (10), 1825–1849.
Oswald, A. J. (1983). Altruism, jealousy and the theory of optimal non-linear taxation.
 Journal of Public Economics, 20 (1), 77–87.
Roemer, J. E. (1998). Why the poor do not expropriate the rich: An old argument in new
 garb. Journal of Public Economics, 70 (3), 399–424.
Saez, E. and Stantcheva, S. (2013). Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for
  Optimal Tax Theory. Working Paper 18835, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Weinzierl, M. (2014). The promise of positive optimal taxation: normative diversity and
 a role for equal sacrifice. Journal of Public Economics, 118, 128–142.



                                           29
                       Figure 1: Redistribution with standard utility functions

                 (a) Utility for individual p                         (b) Utility for individual r




                                                                                               ∆r



      ∆p




            xp               xp +xr                                              xp +xr                   xr
                                2                                                   2

     Notes: A depiction of the optimal tax solution under a utilitarian social welfare function when
     utility (y-axis) is a positive and strictly concave function of consumption (x-axis).



                      Figure 2: Redistribution with reference-dependent utility

                 (a) Utility for individual p                         (b) Utility for individual r




                                                                                                     ∆r

      ∆p



∆r          xr               xp +xr                                              xp +xr                   xr
                                2                                                   2

     Notes: A depiction of changes in utility after full redistribution when utility functions exhibit
     loss-aversion. In this example, we have drawn losses from the reference point as convex and gains
     as concave.


                                                    30
Figure 3: Treatment effects and ninety-five-percent confidence intervals for the reference-
point experiment, by session




Notes: We show separately for each session the between-subject treatment effects for all rounds in
which the reference-point money-transfer experiment appears first (the sample in col. 3 of Table
4). As noted in the text, there are a total of seven sessions where the money-transfer experiment
appears first, but one (session six) contrasts endowments gained by luck versus merit instead of
references points. Those results are reported in Table 7 but are not plotted here.




                                               31
          Figure 4: Histogram of ex-post allocations for the ex-ante poorer player




Notes: Sample used in the figure is that in our “preferred” analysis sample (Column 3, Table 4).




                                               32
           Table 1: Basic summary statistics in mTurk sample compared to ACS

                                        (1)                               (2)
                                    mTurk Sample                       ACS sample
Age                                     33.04                            46.40
Female                                  0.444                             0.515
White                                    0.773                            0.669
Black                                   0.0730                            0.120
Hispanic                                0.0563                            0.143
Asian                                   0.0764                           0.0503
College                                  0.449                            0.257
Income ($1,000)                          49.47                            71.32
Obervations                              2,041                          2,369,395
Notes: Observation totals are the shared non-missing observations across all variables. Col. 1
includes all ten sessions of the experiment. Col. 2 includes all adults in the 2010 American
Community Survey (weighted with the provided individual-level weights). “Income” refers to
household income (in units of $1,000).

                      Table 2: Full summary statistics in mTurk sample


                                                              Mean        Std. Dev.         N
Age                                                            33.04         11.09        2041
Female                                                          0.44         0.50         2041
White                                                           0.77         0.42         2041
Black                                                           0.07         0.26         2041
Hisp                                                            0.06          0.23        2041
Asian                                                           0.08         0.27         2041
Income ($1,000)                                                49.47         39.33        2040
Fulltime                                                        0.43         0.49         2041
Partime                                                        0.14           0.35        2041
College                                                         0.45         0.50         2041
Student                                                         0.11         0.32         2041
Supported Obama in 2012                                        0.64           0.48        2040
R-loving (losses)                                               1.44          1.06        1534
R-loving (gains)                                                0.82          0.91        1572
∆ Wage unfairness for current v. new worker (cont)              1.41         1.02         1858
Higher WTA if bought house at $300K (binary)                    0.79         0.41         1582
Notes: See Section 3.2 for a detailed description of the loss-aversion variables (the last four
variables in the Table). Briefly, “R-loving (losses)” takes integer values from [0, 3], increasing in
the number of times you choose the lottery option over the risk free option over options involving
losses. “R-loving (gains)” is defined analogously, but over gains. “∆ wage unfairness” is increasing
in how much more unfair a respondent deems a wage cut to a current versus a new employee.
“Higher WTA” refers to measures of anchoring bias to the original sales price of a house.


                                                 33
               Table 3: Further summary statistics and experimental balance

                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)
                                                        Cont. mean Tr. mean       Diff.   P-val
Age                                                        33.26       32.94    0.326 0.513
Female                                                     0.446       0.436   0.0105 0.637
White                                                      0.779       0.769 0.00952 0.611
Black                                                     0.0692      0.0790 -0.00977 0.404
Hisp                                                      0.0536      0.0574 -0.00383 0.709
Asian                                                     0.0770      0.0738 0.00315 0.790
Income ($1,000)                                            49.11       49.18  -0.0756 0.965
Fulltime                                                   0.430       0.429 0.00111 0.960
Partime                                                    0.149       0.129  0.0199 0.199
College                                                    0.447       0.447 0.000189 0.993
Student                                                    0.102       0.121  -0.0187 0.184
Supported Obama in 2012                                   0.643        0.636 0.00775 0.718
R-loving (losses)                                          1.458       1.428   0.0303 0.582
R-loving (gains)                                           0.802       0.846  -0.0438 0.349
∆ Wage unfairness for current v. new worker (cont)         1.361       1.450  -0.0894 0.0621
Higher WTA if bought house at $300K (binary)               0.792       0.794 -0.00237 0.908
Observations                                               1030         987       2017     2017
Notes: Observation totals are the shared non-missing observations across all variables. Col. (1)
displays means for those randomized into the control version of the $5/$15 money-transfer
experiment (where recipients do not know their original endowment) and col. (2) displays means
for the treatment version (where recipients do know their original endowment). Col. (3) subtracts
col. (2) from (1) and Col. (4) is the p-value associated with H0 : Dif f = 0.




                                               34
        Table 4: Main between-subject results (using only first-stage observations)

                                                  Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                             (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)     (8)
Treated in                -0.797∗∗∗ -0.827∗∗∗ -0.829∗∗∗ -0.923∗∗∗ -0.824∗∗∗ -0.763∗∗ -0.669∗ -0.509∗
first stage                [0.104] [0.106] [0.134] [0.103] [0.134] [0.312] [0.369] [0.304]
Cont. gp. mean             4.553        4.585       4.682     4.542      4.683    4.451      4.787   4.625
Controls                    No           No          No        No         Yes      No         No      No
Ex. short duration          No           Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes     Yes
Ex. presented second        No           No          Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes     Yes
Ex. incr. ineq              No           No          No        Yes        No       No         No      No
Ex. hypothetical            No           No          No        No         No       Yes        No      No
Ex. emphasis                No           No          No        No         No       No         Yes     Yes
Ex. promised payment        No           No          No        No         No       No         No      Yes
Observations               2044         1903        1227      1151       1220      195        183     191
Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects. Controls: age, female, white, black, Hispanic,
asian, income, student status, full-time status, part-time status, Obama support, and college
degree. Ex. short duration: exclude subjects who finish the survey in a suspiciously short amount
of time. Ex. presented second: exclude survey sessions where the main redistribution experiment
was not presented first. Ex. incr. ineq: exclude subjects who choose to make inequality-increasing
reallocations. Ex. hypothetical: exclude survey sessions where the redistribution experiment was
entirely hypothetical. Ex. emphasis: exclude survey sessions where the instructions to the
redistribution experiment included underlined and italicized text and a reminder to the right of
the person A and B bar chart. Ex. promised payment: include only the survey session where the
instructions to the treatment arm of the redistribution experiment specify that the two other
mTurk participants have been told the amount they initially received might increase or decrease.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                     Table 5: Between-subject results (extensive margin)

                                               Dep. v.: Complete redistribution
                               (1)                   (2)                (3)                (4)
 Treated in first           -0.199∗∗∗             -0.203∗∗∗           -0.203∗∗∗          -0.211∗∗∗
 stage                       [0.0250]              [0.0241]            [0.0241]           [0.0627]
 Cont. gp. mean               0.820                 0.869              0.870              0.824
 Controls                      No                    No                 Yes                No
 Ex. odd choices               No                    Yes                Yes                No
 Ex. hypothetical              No                    No                 No                 Yes
 Observations                 1227                  1151               1144                195
Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects. Both subjects who finished the survey very
quickly and subjects not presented the distribution experiment first were excluded from these
regressions. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                    35
                                 Table 6: Within-subject results

                                                  Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                                 (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
 Treatment                   -0.762∗∗∗    -0.703∗∗∗       -0.812∗∗∗      -0.646∗∗∗   -0.727∗∗∗    -0.309∗
 stage                        [0.0803]     [0.126]         [0.103]        [0.193]     [0.235]     [0.181]
 Cont. gp. mean                 4.665       4.646          4.682          4.364       4.973       4.586
 Sample                          All        T→C            C→T             All         All         All
 Ex. hypothetical                No          No             No             Yes         No          No
 Ex. emphasis                    No          No             No             No          Yes         No
 Ex. promised payment            No          No             No             No          No          Yes
 Observations                   2373        1131           1242            390         366         382
Notes: All regressions include respondent fixed effects. Subjects who finished the survey very
quickly and were not presented the distribution experiment first were excluded. C → T denotes
the subsample that was first randomized into the control scenario and then the treatment
scenario. T → C denotes the subsample that was first randomized into the treatment scenario and
then the control scenario. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




          Table 7: Luck (control) versus merit (treatment), between-subject results

                      Dep. v.: Amount redistributed               Dep. v.: Complete redistribution
                       (1)                  (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Treated in first    -1.806∗∗∗            -1.641∗∗∗             -0.301∗∗∗              -0.257∗∗∗
stage                [0.360]              [0.368]               [0.0664]               [0.0682]
Cont. gp. mean          4.515              4.510               0.699               0.696
Controls                  No                Yes                 No                  Yes
Observations             206                205                 206                 205
Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects. Subjects who finished the survey very quickly
or were not presented the distribution experiment first were excluded from these regressions.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                     36
              Table 8: Interacting loss-aversion measures with treatment status

                                             Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
Treated in first        -0.829∗∗∗ -0.130 -0.712∗∗∗ -0.526∗∗∗ -1.009∗∗∗ -1.070∗∗∗ -0.171 -0.691
stage                    [0.134] [0.278] [0.223] [0.177] [0.355] [0.248] [0.588] [0.550]
Tr. x R-loving                    -0.395∗∗                                            -0.403∗∗
(losses)                           [0.156]                                             [0.157]
Tr. x R-loving                               0.0364
(gains)                                      [0.181]
Tr. x R-loving (L-G)                                   -0.237∗∗                                  -0.242∗∗
                                                        [0.114]                                   [0.115]
Tr. x Higher WTA                                                   0.475
                                                                  [0.400]
Tr. x ∆ Wage                                                                 0.221
unfairness                                                                  [0.140]
Cont. gp. mean            4.682     4.671     4.649     4.641     4.671      4.695     4.670      4.640
Incl. Covar x Treat        No        No        No        No        No         No        Yes        Yes
Observations              1227       791       811       781       812       1055       788        778
Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects. “Tr. x R-loving (losses)”, “Tr. x R-loving
(gains)”, and “Tr. x R-loving (L-G)” refer to the interaction of the the risk-loving over losses,
risk-loving over gains, and risk-loving over losses relative to that over gains variables with T reat.
“Tr. x Higher WTA” refers to the interaction of the variable that indicates that the respondent
demanded a higher house price with a $300,000 initial price than the $250,000 price and T reat.
“Tr. ∆ Wage unfairness” refers to the interaction of the difference between the fairness ratings of
the cut to the wages of the current and new coffee shop employees and T reat. “Inc. Covar x
Treat” means that interactions with T reat and the following list of variables are all included
simultaneously: age, female, white, income, student status, full-time status, Obama support, and
college degree. The main effects of these interactions are controlled for as well in columns 7 and 8.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 37
                                Table 9: Preferred tax for person who became rich five versus one year ago

                                                          Dept. var: Chosen tax rate                            Dept. var: Favor tax hike
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)             (8)
     Treated (rich for            -0.0117∗    -0.0171∗∗     -0.0168∗∗∗   -0.0168∗∗∗    -0.0185∗∗∗   -0.0120    -0.0735∗        -0.0728∗
     five yrs.)                  [0.00644]    [0.00751]      [0.00630]    [0.00631]     [0.00709]   [0.0134]   [0.0415]        [0.0407]
     Cont. gp. mean                0.288        0.286         0.288        0.288        0.290        0.284       0.777           0.777
     Ex. if presented second        No           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
     Adj. for outliers?             No           No            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         n.a.            n.a.
     Controls                       No           No            No           Yes          No           No          No              Yes
     Vignette                      Both         Both          Both         Both        Takeover     Lottery      Both            Both
     Observations                  1097          721           694          682          513          181         446             438
     Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects. Subjects who finished the survey very quickly are excluded from the regression. “Adj.
     for outliers” indicates that the lowest five percent and the highest one percent of chosen tax rates are dropped (the asymmetry is due to
     a small mass of zeros, the default position of the slider). “Vignette” refers to the brief description of the event that led to the sudden
38




     increase in earnings. “Controls” refer to those specified in Table 4. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Appendix Figure 1: Main redistribution experiment (control arm)




                              39
Appendix Figure 2: Main redistribution experiment (treatment arm)




                               40
 Appendix Figure 3: Income tax experiment (control arm)




Appendix Figure 4: Income tax experiment (treatment arm)




                           41
Appendix Figure 5: Histogram of ex-post allocations for the ex-ante poorer player, luck
(control) versus merit (treatment) session




.




                                          42
                          Appendix Table 1: Survey Session Details

Session      Date      Survey Obs Analysis Obs First Exper. $5/$15 version $250,000 Tax Q
One      Feb 13, 2014      187           187         $5/$15         Standard            No
Two      Feb 27, 2014      312           295         $5/$15         Standard            No
Three Mar 10, 2014         301           250         $5/$15         Standard            No
Four    Mar 21, 2014       352           282           Tax          Standard            Yes
Five    Mar 24, 2014       374           303           Tax          Standard            Yes
Six     Apr 25, 2014       321           228         $5/$15         Standard            No
Seven May 28, 2014         312           207         $5/$15         Standard            Yes
Eight May 30, 2014         332           216         $5/$15       Real Money            Yes
Nine     Jun 19, 2014      314           200           Tax        No Emphasis           Yes
Ten      Dec 11, 2014      307           196         $5/$15       No Promises           No
Notes: Total observations and analysis sample observations differ because in almost all analysis we
drop anyone who took a previous survey. Further details on each session can be found in the text.




                                                43
                   Appendix Table 2: Correlation across loss-aversion measures

                      R-loving (losses) R-loving (gains) R-loving (L-G) Higher WTA ∆ Wage unfairness
R-loving (losses)            1


R-loving (gains)          -0.0318            1


R-loving (L-G)            0.765∗∗∗       -0.668∗∗∗                 1


Higher WTA               0.0937∗∗∗        0.00588               0.0665∗∗         1


∆ Wage unfairness        -0.00906         0.0518∗∗              -0.0461∗     0.0794∗∗∗     1


Observations               1871
Notes: Any individual who had not taken a previous version of the survey is included in this
correlation table, regardless of which experiment he saw first.

Appendix Table 3: Assessing perceptions of bias and survey fatigue, by redistribution exper-
iment survey arm

                                (1)                (2)                       (3)           (4)
                              LW bias            RW bias                   No bias       Minutes
Treated in first               0.0241                0.00182               -0.0307        0.553
stage                         [0.0168]               [0.0106]              [0.0198]      [0.368]
Cont. gp. mean               0.0829               0.0341             0.878                11.43
Observations                  1216                 1216               1216                 1057
Notes: Subjects who finished the survey very quickly and were not presented the distribution
experiment first were excluded from these regressions.




                                                 44
                               Appendix Table 4: Differential treatment effects from between-subject results
                                                                  Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)           (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
     Treated in       -1.537∗∗∗ -0.904∗∗∗ -0.920∗∗∗ -0.819∗∗∗ -0.834∗∗∗ -0.811∗∗∗    -0.731∗∗∗     -0.851∗∗∗ -0.855∗∗∗ -0.814∗∗∗ -0.636∗∗∗ -0.621∗∗∗
     first stage        [0.428] [0.181] [0.291] [0.139] [0.139] [0.139]               [0.222]       [0.141] [0.179] [0.146] [0.182] [0.226]
     Tr. x Age         0.0211∗
                       [0.0120]
     Tr. x                        0.180
     Female                      [0.271]
     Tr. x                                  0.123
     White                                 [0.328]
     Tr. x                                           -0.0623
     Black                                           [0.544]
     Tr. x Hisp                                                 0.158
                                                               [0.555]
     Tr. x                                                                -0.180
45




     Asian                                                               [0.534]
     Tr. x                                                                          -0.00000194
     Income                                                                         [0.00000370]
     Tr. x                                                                                           0.292
     Student                                                                                        [0.460]
     Tr. x                                                                                                    0.0719
     Fulltime                                                                                                 [0.272]
     Tr. x                                                                                                              -0.0622
     Partime                                                                                                            [0.378]
     Tr. x                                                                                                                        -0.412
     College                                                                                                                      [0.271]
     Tr. x                                                                                                                                  -0.314
     Obama                                                                                                                                  [0.281]
     Cont. gp. mean 4.683         4.683     4.683      4.683    4.683      4.683       4.683      4.683     4.683     4.683    4.683     4.683
     Observations        1220     1220       1220      1220      1220      1220        1220        1220     1220      1220      1220     1220
     Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects and the controls listed in Table 4. Subjects who finished the survey very quickly and
     were not presented the distribution experiment first were excluded from these regressions. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Appendix Table 5: Interacting loss-aversion measures with treatment status (SAT v. coin
toss experiment)

                                             Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                           (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
Treated in first        -1.806∗∗∗ -1.963∗∗∗ -2.135∗∗∗ -1.695∗∗∗ -1.230 -2.155∗∗∗ -1.848 -1.760
stage                    [0.360] [0.612] [0.479] [0.400] [0.819] [0.673] [1.252] [1.223]
Tr. x R-loving                     0.0914                                              -0.146
(losses)                           [0.361]                                             [0.372]
Tr. x R-loving                                 0.438
(gains)                                       [0.381]
Tr. x R-loving (L-G)                                     -0.200                                  -0.296
                                                         [0.264]                                 [0.259]
Tr. x Higher WTA                                                   -0.758
                                                                   [0.913]
Tr. x ∆ Wage                                                                  0.239
unfairness                                                                   [0.381]
Cont. gp. mean            4.515     4.545      4.510     4.541     4.510     4.515     4.541 4.515
Incl. Covar x Treat        No        No         No        No        No        No        Yes   Yes
Observations               206       195        203       192       205       206       194   195
Notes: All regressions include session fixed effects and the controls listed in Table 4. “Tr. x
R-loving (losses)”, “Tr. x R-loving (gains)”, and “Tr. x R-loving (L-G)” refer to the interaction of
the the risk-loving over losses, risk-loving over gains, and risk-loving over losses relative to that
over gains variables with T reat. “Tr. x Higher WTA” refers to the interaction of the variable that
indicates that the respondent demanded a higher house price with a $300,000 initial price than
the $250,000 price and T reat. “Tr. ∆ Wage unfairness” refers to the interaction of the difference
between the fairness ratings of the cut to the wages of the current and new coffee shop employees
and T reat. “Inc. Covar x Treat” means that interactions with T reat and the following list of
variables are all included simultaneously: age, female, white, income, student status, full-time
status, Obama support, and college degree. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 46
Appendix Table 6: Main between-subject redistribution and tax results, includes subjects
that participated in multiple batches

                          Dept. var: Amount redistributed              Dept. var: Chosen tax rate
                          (1)                     (2)                                (3)
Treated                -0.785∗∗∗                -0.286                          -0.0138∗∗
                        [0.119]                 [0.239]                         [0.00564]
Tr. x R-loving                                 -0.282∗∗
(losses)                                        [0.135]
Cont. gp. mean           4.595                  4.584                               0.289
Observations             1577                   1090                                 908
Notes: The first column replicates the analysis from col. 3 of Table 4, the second replicates the
analysis from col 2. of Table 8, and the third replicates the analysis from col. 2 of Table 9.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




    Appendix Table 7: Replicating the main tax result with various outlier adjustments

                                               Dept. var: Chosen tax rate
                                   (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)
Treated (rich for            -0.0168∗∗∗        -0.0300∗∗∗     -0.0169∗∗    -0.0158∗∗        -0.0127∗∗
five yrs.)                    [0.00630]         [0.00883]     [0.00671]    [0.00739]        [0.00562]
Cont. gp. mean               0.288               0.286        0.286          0.287            0.306
Outlier adjustment      Drop (orig. spec.)       Qreg        Winsorize      Drop 0s         Drop regr.
Observations                  694                 721          721            717              602
Notes: The first column replicates the preferred specification from Table 9 (col. 3), where outliers
below the bottom fifth percent and above the higher one percentile are dropped. “Qreg” refers to
median regression on the entire sample. “Winsoring” winsorizes the outliers in Col. (1) instead of
dropping them. Col. (4) merely drops those who choose a zero tax rate while col. (5) drops
anyone who chooses a regressive tax rate (i.e., a rate less than the average rate of 22 percent).
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 47
Details from the excluded experimental session

In one session (April 17, 2014), instead of having individuals transfer money between the
recipients using the slider, we tried to use a drop-down menu (which listed all twenty possible
money transfers). In all cases, “no transfer” was listed first, which likely caused strong
anchoring effects. More seriously, we only realized ex post that the drop-down menu covered
up the graphic of the two recipients’ endowments (which in the slider version respondents
could see change in real time as they moved from one allocation to the other).
    We report results from this session below but do not include them in our main results.



                                                Dept. var: Amount redistributed
                                    (1)                  (2)                       (3)
Treated in                        -0.151               -0.467                     -0.521
first stage                       [0.336]              [0.318]                    [0.338]
Cont. gp. mean                     3.747                3.713                     3.699
Controls                            No                   No                        Yes
Ex. short duration                  Yes                  Yes                       Yes
Ex. incr. ineq                      No                   Yes                       Yes
Observations                        209                  200                       197
Notes: Subjects who finished the survey very quickly were excluded.
∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               48
