NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GRASP THE LARGE, LET GO OF THE SMALL:
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE STATE SECTOR IN CHINA
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Zheng (Michael) Song
Working Paper 21006
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21006
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

We thank Wancong Li and Jie Luo for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Chang-Tai Hsieh and Zheng (Michael) Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The Transformation of the State Sector in China
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Zheng (Michael) Song
NBER Working Paper No. 21006
March 2015
JEL No. N15,O0
ABSTRACT
Starting in the late 1990s, China undertook a dramatic transformation of the large number of firms
under state control. Small state-owned firms were privatized or closed. Large state-owned firms were
corporatized and merged into large industrial groups under the control of the Chinese state. The state
also created many new and large firms. We use detailed firm-level data to show that from 1998 to
2007, (i) state-owned firms that were closed were smaller and had low labor and capital productivity;
(ii) the labor productivity of state-owned firms converged to that of private firms; (iii) the capital productivity
of state-owned firms remained significantly lower than that of private firms; and (iv) total factor productivity
(TFP) growth of state-owned firms was faster than that of private firms. We find the reforms of the
state sector were responsible for 20 percent of aggregate TFP growth from 1998 to 2007.
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu
Zheng (Michael) Song
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL
Zheng.Song@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

A central feature of the industrial revolution in China over the last two decades is the decline
of the state-owned sector. Figure 1 illustrates that the share of state owned …rms in industrial
output declined from 50 percent in 1998 to 30 percent by 2005, and has continued to fall since
then, albeit at a slower rate. This fact naturally suggests that China’s growth was driven by
the growth of the private sector and the reallocation of resources away from state-owned …rms.
According to this view, the growth of the private sector was only possible when, starting in
the late 1990s, state-owned …rms were shut down or privatized. The shutdown of loss-making
state-owned …rms released resources that were more pro…tably employed by private …rms. In
turn, the privatization of state-owned …rms may have raised their productivity because such
…rms may have a closer alignment of control and cash-‡ow rights. The industrial revolution in
China is, thus, nothing more than the triumph of “Markets Over Mao ”, to quote the title of
a recent book (Lardy 2014).
There is another view that China’s growth was driven by “State Capitalism”. Advocates
of the role of “State Capitalism” point out that although many state owned …rms were closed
or privatized, …rms that remained under state control are among the largest …rms in China
today. For example, 67 of the 69 Chinese companies in Fortune Magazine’s 2014 list of the 500
largest companies in the world are state owned. One can also point to the experience of speci…c
state owned companies. Consider, for example, the experience of the Baoshan Steel Company.
Baoshan, a large steel manufacturer in Shanghai, became a publicly traded company in 2000.1
The controlling share (75 percent) was held by a holding company (the BaoSteel Group) wholly
owned by the Chinese central government.2 Baoshan has done very well since the late 1990s.
Total sales increased from USD 2.8 billion in 1998 to USD 17 billion by 2007. Pro…ts increased
by even more, from USD 122 million in 1998 to USD 2.5 billion by 2007. Baoshan is currently
the largest steel producer in China and the second-largest steel producer in the world.
The experience of Baoshan is an example of how many state owned …rms have changed.
Such …rms have been “corporatized ”and merged into large state-owned conglomerates. Many
are now publicly listed and are among the largest companies in China today. While the concern
1

Technically, Baoshan was closed in 2000, and a new company called Baoshan Company Limited was established with the assets of the old state company and publicly listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
2
Baoshan is legally controlled by the Central Government’s State Assets Supervisory Committee (SASAC),
and Baoshan’s senior executives are appointed by the Organization Department of the Chinese Communist
Party.

1

in the late 1990s was over the threat posed by the non-performing loans of state-owned …rms,
the concern now is that the state-owned …rms are too successful. A new popular phrase in
China is “guo jin min tui ”which translates roughly as “state advances, private sector retreats”.
Implicit in this slogan is the recognition that state-owned …rms have been successful, but their
success has had negative aggregate e¤ects.
What is missing in this debate is evidence, and this is what we provide in this paper. We use
detailed …rm-level data from China’s Industrial Survey to measure the quantitative importance
of the transformation of the state sector on aggregate productivity growth. We report the
following …ndings. First, small state-owned …rms were closed or privatized after 1998, and
these …rms generally had lower labor and capital productivity. Second, many new state-owned
…rms were established after 1998. These new …rms are typically large, with labor productivity
similar to that of the average private …rm but capital productivity that is signi…cantly lower.
Third, the labor productivity of surviving state-owned …rms and privatized …rms converged to
that of private …rms, but there is little change in the gap in capital productivity.
We then interpret these facts through the lens of a standard model of monopolistic competition with heterogeneous …rms. Under the assumption that the aggregate supply of capital
is elastic, we …nd that closing and privatizing state-owned …rms accounted for slightly more
than 3.2 percent of the aggregate growth in the industrial sector from 1998 to 2007. This is
driven by reallocation of resources from the closed and privatized state-owned …rms and by the
increase in productivity among the privatized …rms. In addition, productivity growth and the
release of surplus labor by surviving state-owned …rms (such as Baoshan) were responsible for
more than 13 percent of aggregate growth over the same period. Finally, the creation of new
state-owned …rms drives more than 7 percent of aggregate growth over this period.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we lay out a model to guide our
empirical analysis. Section 3 presents the facts regarding the characteristics of exiting …rms,
survivors, and entrants in the state sector relative to that of their private counterparts. We then
use the model to back out …rm-level productivity and distortions in Section 4. We also explore
the institutional forces behind the dramatic changes in the state sector. Section 5 quanti…es
the e¤ect of the reallocation towards private …rms and the productivity improvements among
state-owned …rms on aggregate GDP. Section 6 concludes.

2

A Model-Based Accounting Framework

This section presents a standard model of heterogeneous models with monopolistic competition.
We will use this framework to quantify the e¤ect of the di¤erent forces behind China’s growth.
2

Aggregate output is a CES aggregate of output of individual …rms,
N
X

Q=

!11

Q1i

i

:

(1)

Here, i indexes the …rm; N is the number of …rms; Qi is …rm output; and 1= > 1 is the
elasticity of substitution between varieties. Firm output is given by
Qi = Ai Ki L1i

;

where Ai denotes …rm-speci…c productivity (TFP).
Each …rm chooses factor inputs (and output and revenue) to maximize current pro…ts
i

= Pi Qi

L
i

1+

wLi

K
i

1+

rKi ;

(2)

where Pi is the …rm-speci…c output price; Li and Ki denote labor and capital inputs; w and r
L
i

denote the common undistorted cost of labor and capital; and

and

K
i

denote …rm-speci…c

distortions to the cost of labor and capital. These distortions can arise because of di¤erences
in the access to capital across …rms, …rm-speci…c subsidies or taxes, or political pressures to
maintain employment within state-owned …rms.
Pro…t maximization yields the standard …rst-order conditions:
M RP Li

(1

M RP Ki

) (1
(1

)

Pi Qi
= 1+
Li

Pi Qi
= 1+
Ki

)

L
i

K
i

w;

r:

(3)
(4)

This says that the marginal revenue product of labor (M RP Li ) and of capital (M RP Ki ) are
proportional to average labor and capital productivity. Crucial to this result is the assumption
of common markups and capital elasticities. Furthermore, marginal and average products of
L
i

labor and capital are higher in …rms with higher

K,
i

and

respectively.

The equilibrium allocation is characterized by
Ai

Pi Qi /
1
Li /
1+
Ki /

1
1+

1+

K
i

1+

L 1
i

!1

1+

K
i

1+

L 1
i

;

(6)

L 1
i

!1

:

(7)

Ai
K
i

1+

K
i

3

1+

(5)

!1

Ai
L
i

;

It is useful to combine equations (3), (4) and (5) to express …rm revenue in terms of variables
that we can measure in the data:
0

B
Pi Qi / @

11

Ai
Pi Qi
Li

C
A

1

Pi Qi
Ki

:

(8)

This says that …rm revenues are increasing in Ai and decreasing in labor and capital productivity. Intuitively, …rms with high labor and capital productivity are the ones in which the
marginal products of labor and capital are high, which reduce input demand and …rm size
(holding Ai …xed).
Finally, we assume labor supply is …xed (and normalized to one). In addition, we assume
r is exogenous and equal to the world interest rate. The elastic supply of capital assumption
seems realistic for China, as savings have exceeded investment for more than a decade since
the late 1990s. We later consider an alternative where the supply of capital in China is …xed.
After we impose pro…t maximization and the market clearing conditions, aggregate output
is:

"

Y = N1

A

where

X

1

!i

Yi

1 X 1
Ai
N

A

!

i

Yi
!i

1
N

Ai
A

r
M RP Ki

#

1

1
1

:

(9)

1

;

1

:

M RP L
M RP Li

1

;

(10)

and M RP L denotes the average MRPL.
The …rst term in (9) is the standard variety e¤ect. More entry and less exit, ceteris
paribus, increase aggregate output. The second term A is a harmonic mean of …rm TFP and
1
P 1
re‡ects the direct e¤ect of …rm TFP. The third term,
! i Yi
, measures the e¤ect of

resource misallocation: more dispersed marginal products across …rms, ceteris paribus, lower
the aggregate output. This term is one when the marginal product of labor and capital is the
same across …rms. Finally, 1= (1

) measures the e¤ect of endogenous capital accumulation.

If we drop the assumption that the cost of capital is exogenous and, instead, assume a …xed
supply of capital, this e¤ect would not be there and the coe¢ cient would be one.

4

We can now map the channels via which the transformation of the state sector a¤ects
aggregate output.
First, exit of state-owned …rms has two e¤ects. Holding the weighted average of …rm TFP
…xed, exit reduces the number of varieties N and aggregate output. Exit may also a¤ect the
weighted average of …rm TFP, depending on the marginal product of labor of exiting …rms
relative to the average marginal product. If the marginal product of resources used by the
exiting …rm is equal to the average marginal product, then the envelope theorem applies and
there is no net welfare gain from the reallocation of resources. In this case, the e¤ect of exit on
aggregate output is unambiguously negative. However, if the marginal product of exiting …rms
is signi…cantly lower than the average marginal product, then the reallocation of resources from
exiting …rms increases aggregate output. Thus, the net e¤ect on aggregate output depends on
whether the gain from reallocation exceeds the loss in the number of varieties.
The mechanisms via which entry a¤ects aggregate output are similar to those of exit. First,
entry increases the number of varieties. Second, the gain from reallocation to entrants depends
on whether the marginal product of entrants is higher or lower than that of existing …rms. In
the next section, we will measure the number of state-owned …rms that exited, the number of
new state-owned …rms, and the marginal product of these …rms.
Second, privatization of state-owned …rms has the following e¤ects. First, privatization has
no e¤ect on the number of varieties N . Second, privatization may improve …rm TFP, and the
e¤ect on aggregate productivity is given by
@Y
@Ai

=

=

1
1
1
1

Y @A
Y @
+
A @Ai
@Ai
0
B
B
@

Yi
Ai
|{z}

+

the direct e¤ect

(11)

1 Li
M RP Li
Ai
|
{z

1

C
M RP L C
A:
}

the reallocation e¤ect

The …rst term of (11) captures the e¤ect of Ai on A , holding the e¢ ciency of resource allocation
…xed. We think of this as the direct e¤ect of TFP. The second term re‡ects how Ai a¤ects
aggregate productivity through its e¤ect on the allocation of resources. The reallocation e¤ect
is negative if the …rm’s MRPL is below the average MRPL and positive otherwise. Intuitively,
when labor is reallocated towards …rm i with M RP Li < M RP L in response to higher TFP,
aggregate allocative e¢ ciency declines since the reallocation widens the gap between M RP Li
and M RP L. When the MRPL gap is su¢ ciently large, the negative reallocation e¤ect can
dominate the technological e¤ect. Speci…cally, (11) can be expressed as:
@Y
1
=
@Ai
1

1 Li
M RP Li
Ai
5

M RP L ;

(12)

(1
1

where

)(1
(1

)
)

< 1. If M RP Li < M RP L, an increase in the …rm’s TFP will lower

aggregate output. Whether higher TFP increases or lowers aggregate output depends on the
gap between the …rm’s MRPL and the average marginal product (and the value of ).
Privatization can also increase MRPL and MRPK of the privatized …rms (relative to the
other …rms). For example, if state-owned …rms were forced to employ more workers than
L
i

necessary,

of state-owned …rms could decline after they are privatized and no longer face

political constraints to keep unproductive workers on the payroll. Similarly, privatized stateowned …rms may no longer have preferential access to capital, which is modeled here as a
decline in

K.
i

The e¤ect of a change in the gap in MRPL relative to the average on aggregate

output is given by:
@Y
Li
1
(13)
=
M RP Li M RP L :
L
@ i
1+ L
i
This says that a decline in the gap between a …rm’s MRPL and the average MRPL always
increases aggregate output. Similarly, the e¤ect on aggregate output of a change in MRPK of
a given …rm follows:
Li
@Y
M RP L :
(14)
=
M RP Li
K
@ i
1+ K
i
The reason that this looks di¤erent from the e¤ect of changes in MRPL is the assumption that
capital is available elastically at world interest rates. A decline in MRPK of a …rm is like a
positive TFP shock, and the "TFP shock" can have a negative e¤ect on aggregate output if it
signi…cantly worsens the allocation of labor.
Third, the corporatization of state-owned …rms potentially has two e¤ects on aggregate
output. Firm TFP can increase, and the e¤ect of an improvement in …rm TFP is ambiguous,
depending on whether the direct e¤ect of higher TFP exceeds the e¤ect of changes in resource
allocation. State-owned …rms may also be able to increase their MRPL by shedding its surplus
labor, which has an unambiguous positive e¤ect on aggregate output.
Finally, while we have focused on the e¤ect of the state sector on aggregate output, the
channels via which the private sector a¤ects aggregate output are exactly the same. If the
marginal product of resources used by private …rms is the same as that of the state sector,
then entry of private …rms increases output via the …rst term in equation (9) and productivity
growth raises aggregate output through its e¤ect on the second term of the same equation. If
the marginal product of private …rms is higher compared to state …rms, then private entry and
productivity growth have the additional e¤ect of improving the allocation of resources (the
third term in (9) increases). This paper only analyzes the transformation of the state sector,
but it is important to keep in mind that private sector growth has surely played an important
role as well.
6

3

Facts

This section describes the institutional background behind the state sector reforms that began
in the late 1990s. We then present a comprehensive set of empirical facts found in China’s
industrial …rm data. We give special attention to the identi…cation of state ownership, which
is often disguised by the …rms’legal registration.

3.1

Institutional Background

The policy changes we describe below were formally announced in 1999 in the Fourth Plenum
of the Communist Party’s Central Committee.3 The slogan adopted by the Communist Party
to describe the proposed reforms was “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small.” “Let Go of the
Small” refers to the fact that small state-owned …rms were to be closed or sold.
As for the large state-owned …rms, the plan was that large …rms were to be “grasped”
by the state. By “grasp”, the central committee meant that large state-owned …rms were to
be merged into large industrial conglomerates and the control over these conglomerates was
to be consolidated by the central government or by local governments. In the steel sector,
for example, …ve large industrial groups were created in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and
ownership of the state-owned steel manufacturers was transferred to these groups. Three of
these groups are owned by the Chinese central government (the BaoSteel Group, the WuSteel
Group, and the AnSteel Group) and two by provincial governments (the Hebei Steel Group
and the Shandong Steel Group). The BaoSteel Group, for example, controls six large steel
manufacturers –three wholly owned by the Group and three publicly traded (such as Baoshan)
with the Group as the controlling shareholder. The automobile industry provides another
example. In this sector, state-owned automobile companies were consolidated into six stateowned conglomerates, the largest of which is the Shanghai Automobile Industrial Group (SAIC)
owned by the municipal government of Shanghai. The SAIC Group owns a controlling share of
the equity (73 percent) of the original state-owned …rm (SAIC Motor Co., Ltd.), which is now
a publicly traded company. SAIC Motor Co., Ltd., in turn, holds 50 percent of the equity of
two new companies jointly established with General Motors (Shanghai-GM) and Volkswagen
(Shanghai-Volkswagen).4
A more fundamental goal of “Grasp the Large” was to transform the large state-owned
3

See CCP (1999) for the formal announcement. As is typical with all the major reforms implemented in
China, the o¢ cial decision in 1999 was preceded by several years of small-scale experimentation. See Aivazian
et al. (2005) for an assessment of the initial experiments with reforms in corporate governance.
4
The SAIC Group also owns other companies, but the biggest company under its control is SAIC Motor Co.,
Ltd.

7

…rms into pro…t-maximizing …rms under the control of the Chinese State. Two aspects of the
reorganization of the large state-owned …rms were meant to accomplish this goal. First, stateowned …rms were often incorporated as limited liability corporations, and the managers were to
be held accountable for the …rm’s bottom line. The terminology used in China was that stateowned …rms were to be “corporatized.” The parent company, as the controlling shareholder,
was to monitor the …rm and be responsible for appointing and deciding the compensation of
the …rm’s senior managers. In turn, the senior executives of the parent company (the industrial
group) were to be directly appointed by the local government (in the case of groups owned
by local governments, such as the SAIC Group) or by the Central Organization Department
of the Communist Party (in the case of groups owned by the central government, such as the
BaoSteel Group).
In addition, although the plans laid out in the late 1990s did not mention the establishment
of new state-owned …rms, we will show that this has been an important part of what happened.
Because the new state-owned …rms are predominantly large …rms, we will also call this part of
what was meant by “Grasp the Large.”
The question is how the Chinese state chose to exercise its control right over the industrial groups and, in particular, what criteria it used to reward and punish the groups’senior
executives. In 2003, the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission
(SASAC) was set up as the legal owner of the state-owned groups.5 These bodies were set
up simultaneously at the central- and local-government levels. However, it is still the case
that the ultimate hiring and …ring authority was kept in the hands of the Communist Party’s
Organization Department, and we have little information on how the Party chose to exercise
its authority. What we can do is to measure the performance of these …rms, which we do in
the rest of Section 3.

3.2

State Ownership

The main data we use are the micro-data from the Annual Survey of Industries conducted by
China’s National Bureau of Statistics from 1998 to 2007. This survey is a census of all stateowned …rms and the non-state-owned …rms (referred to as private …rms, henceforth) with more
than …ve million RMB in revenues in the industrial sector. The unit of observation in the data
is a registered …rm. For the …rms owned by the state-owned industrial groups, each …rm owned
5
With the exception of state-owned tobacco companies and state-owned …nancial institutions, ownership
of all state-owned groups was transferred to the SASACs in 2003. Tobacco companies are controlled by the
State Tobacco Monopoly Administration and …nancial institutions by a holding company (Huijin) controlled by
China’s Banking Regulatory Commission.

8

by the group is a separate observation in our data.
Identifying state-owned …rms is key to our analysis. A common way to identify state ownership in China is through the …rm’s legal registration. Speci…cally, …rms in China are legally
registered as state-owned, collectively owned, privately owned, limited-liability corporations,
share-holding …rms (including publicly traded), or foreign …rms. With this classi…cation, state
ownership is typically de…ned as …rms that are legally registered as state-owned.
There are two problems with using the …rm’s legal registration to identify ownership, particularly for state-owned …rm. First, many …rms that are ultimately state-owned are legally
registered as foreign …rms. This can happen because …rms in which at least a third of the
ownership is foreign-held can be registered as foreign …rms. For example, the joint ventures of
the Shanghai local government with GM and Volkswagen (Shanghai-GM and Shanghai-VW)
are registered as foreign …rms. This can also happen when the …rm is owned by a holding
company registered outside of China. For example, Lenovo and CNOOC (a state-owned oil
company) are owned by holding companies registered in Hong Kong and, thus, legally registered as foreign …rms in China. Second, many state-owned …rms, particularly after 1998, are
registered as limited-liability or publicly traded companies, albeit with the controlling stake
held by a state-controlled holding company. The Baoshan steel company and Shanghai’s SAIC
Group’s stand-alone car company (SAIC) discussed earlier are examples of publicly listed companies (and, thus, registered as share-holding companies) but with a controlling stake held by
a holding company owned by the Chinese state (the Central government in the case of Baoshan
and the local Shanghai government in the case of SAIC).
Instead of using the …rm’s legal registration, we use another approach to identify state
ownership. First, our data provide the share of the …rm’s registered capital owned by the state,
collective, private persons, foreigners, and legal person. Here, a legal person can be another
…rm or a holding company. For example, publicly traded state-owned …rms such as Baoshan
and SAIC typically have a minority share of their registered capital held by “private persons”
(the publicly traded share) and a majority share held by a “legal person” (the state-owned
parent holding company). Our data do not provide additional information on the identity of
the “legal person,”but the share of the registered capital owned by a “legal person” in the
Chinese industrial sector has increased since 1998, particularly among large …rms.6 Second,
our data provide information on the …rm’s controlling shareholder. In particular, it classi…es
the “controlling shareholder” of the …rm as the state, a collective, a foreigner, or a private
6

Among the …rms that survived from 1998 through 2007, 22 percent had the legal person registered capital
share above ten percent in 1998. The share increased to 30 percent in 2007. Among the large …rms with the
initial value added in the top decile, the shares were 27 and 43 percent in 1998 and 2007, respectively.

9

person.
We use these two variables to de…ne state-owned …rms. Speci…cally, we de…ne a …rm as
state-owned when the share of registered capital held directly by the state exceeds or equals
50 percent or when the state is reported as the controlling shareholder. The former de…nition
captures traditional state-owned …rms when the state owns all or the majority of the …rm’s
registered capital. The latter de…nition captures publicly traded …rms when the state holds a
controlling stake through a holding company, but excludes …rms when the state may hold a
minority share through a holding company.
We supplemented this de…nition of state ownership by manually checking the websites of all
the industrial …rms in the top one percentile of the …rm value added distribution in 2007. We
…nd that virtually all the …rms that we identi…ed as state owned via this laborious procedure
are also coded as state owned using our de…nition. Interestingly, our forensic analysis indicates
that more than two-thirds of the …rms of the top one percentile …rms are directly or indirectly
controlled by SASAC, but almost half of these …rms are legally registered as private …rms. Our
procedure might understate the state share if some companies do not publicly reveal the state’s
ownership stake on their websites. On the other hand, we could overstate the state share if
some SASAC …rms are ultimately privately owned but use SASAC to mask their ownership
stake. For example, the Sydney Morning Herald reported in 2011 that a large shadow bank
in Chongqing (Chongqing International Trust) was legally owned by the local government of
Chongqing, but was in fact privately owned by a crony of the Party Secretary of Chongqing
at the time.7 .
The top panel of Figure 1 shows that the revenue share of state-owned …rms, by our
de…nition, is similar to that reported by the China Statistical Yearbook through the sample
period, indicating that our de…nition is closer to the o¢ cial one. In contrast, the dashed line
shows that using the …rm’s registration status to de…ne state ownership would understate the
size of the state sector. Figure 2 plots the number of the state-owned …rms that are registered
as private …rms as a share of the number of …rms we de…ne as state owned. In 1998, 15 percent
of state-owned …rms were registered as private …rms. By 2007, almost one half of the stateowned were registered as some form of privately owned …rm. Among the state-owned …rms
registered as private …rms in 2007, 60 percent were registered as limited-liability corporations;
16 percent were publicly traded companies; and 18 percent were registered as foreign …rms.8
Table 1 presents the number and total employment of the …rms in our sample in 1998 and
7
8

John Garnaut, Sydney Morning Herald, August 7, 2011.
See the online appendix for details.

10

2007.

3.3

Size, Labor and Capital Productivity

We use …rms’registration ID provided in the data to match …rms over time. The registration
ID may change when a …rm is restructured or acquired by another …rm. For the sample of
…rms that we cannot match over time with the registration ID, we also use the …rm’s name,
address, and phone number to identify surviving …rms that changed their registration ID.9 .
About 95 percent of the panel from 1998 to 2007 is identi…ed by the registration ID, while the
remainder are matched by the …rm’s name, address, and phone number.
The other variables from the data we use are value added, employment, and the book value
of the …rm’s capital stock. We de…ne the real capital stock at time t as
Kt = (1

)Kt

1

+

BKt

BKt
PtK

1

;

where BK is the book value of capital and P K is the price of capital.10 Labor input is measured
by employment, as our data do not have the composition of the …rm’s labor force. However,
as a robustness check, we use the …rm-level records of the 2004 Economic Census (which has
information on the educational composition of …rm’s labor force) to measure di¤erences in
labor quality across …rms.
To control for industry e¤ects, all the …rm-level variables we present are, unless otherwise
stated, scaled by their median values of surviving private …rms in the same two-digit industry.
3.3.1

Exiters

Table 2 presents the average annual exit rate for state-owned and privately owned …rms for the
1991-1995 and 1998-2007 time periods.11 The average exit rate for state-owned …rms was under
one percent a year from 1991 to 1995 and increased to 13 percent per year after 1998. Among
private …rms, the exit rate was roughly similar in the two time periods, at 12-13 percent a year.
Figure 3 presents the average annual exit rate from 1998-2007 of state-owned and private …rms
9

We follow the procedure used by Brandt et al. (2012).
We use Perkins and Rawski’s (2008) estimates of the price of capital. The initial book value of capital stock
is initial book value reported by the …rm for …rms established after 1998. For …rms founded before 1998, we
assume that the book value in 1998 is given by BKt0 = BKt1 = (1 + g)t1 t0 , where BKt0 is the projected initial
book value of the capital stock in year t0 ; BKt1 is the book value of capital stock when the …rm …rst appears
in the dataset in year t1 ; and g is the average growth rate of the capital stock in the period we observe in the
data after year t1 .
11
The exit rate from 1998 to 2007 is computed from the Annual Industrial Survey. The exit rate from 19911995 is computed from the 1996 China Statistical Yearbook and the micro-data of the 1995 Industrial Census.
State-owned …rms that were privatized by 2007 are not considered exiting …rms. See the online appendix for
additional details.
10

11

for each size bin de…ned by the …rm’s value added in 1998. Exit rates of smaller state-owned
are higher than those of comparably sized private …rms. The annual exit rate exceeds 30
percent among state-owned …rms in the bottom ten percentiles of the size distribution, about
ten percentage points higher than comparably sized private …rms.
Table 3 quanti…es the characteristics of state-owned …rms in 1998 (the omitted group is
private …rms that survived until 2007). Comparing the …rst row (exiting state-owned …rms)
with the third row (surviving state-owned …rms), it can be seen that value added, labor productivity, and capital productivity are generally lower among exiting state-owned …rms than
among surviving state-owned …rms. These patterns are roughly consistent with the goal implicit in the slogan “Let go of the small”, although the implementation seems far from perfect.
Many small state-owned …rms were not closed and some large state-owned …rms were closed.
3.3.2

Survivors

We now turn to the balanced panel of …rms between 1998 and 2007. We focus on three groups
of surviving …rms in the balanced panel: state-owned, privatized state-owned and private …rms.
Figure 4 plots the percent of privatized state-owned …rms in bins de…ned by the …rm’s value
added in 1998. There is an inverse U shape relationship between the probability of privatization
and the initial size of the state-owned …rms in 1998. Although the goal was that small stateowned …rms were to be closed or privatized (“let go”), many of the smallest state-owned …rms
were kept under state control. For example, only 30 to 35 percent of the state-owned …rms
in the bottom decile of the size distribution were privatized. The privatization rate is highest
among mid-sized state-owned …rms, and is lowest among the largest state-owned …rms. These
last two facts are consistent with the o¢ cially stated goal that large …rms were to be kept
under state control, or “grasped” by the Chinese state. But again, implementation of was
highly imperfect, as many small state-owned …rms were not privatized (or closed).
Figure 5 presents the distribution of employment by value added among state-owned (top
panel) and privatized …rms (bottom panel) in 1998 and 2007. The size distribution of stateowned and privatized …rms shifted slightly to the left from 1998 to 2007, relative to the value
added of private …rms in each year. Furthermore, the change in size distribution is similar for
state-owned and privatized …rms.
Figure 6 plots the corresponding distribution of employment by labor productivity (value
added/employment). The …gure shows that the labor productivity of the two groups of stateowned …rms was signi…cantly lower than that of private …rms in 1998. The di¤erence in
1998 was about 40 percent (Table 3). By 2007, the gap in labor productivity had narrowed

12

signi…cantly, and about equally for the …rms that remained under state control and for the
…rms that were privatized by 2007. On average, the labor productivity for the two groups of
…rms had narrowed from about 60 percent of the labor productivity of private …rms in 1998
to 75 percent of the labor productivity of private …rms in 2007 (Table 4).
Figure 7 plots the corresponding distribution of capital productivity (value added/capital).
The capital productivity of state-owned …rms is also signi…cantly lower than that of private
…rms in 1998. Table 3 indicates that the average capital productivity of state-owned …rms
was 34 percent of that of private …rms in 1998. By 2007, the gap in capital productivity
had narrowed slightly: capital productivity of state-owned …rms was then 46 percent of that of
private …rms. And, perhaps surprisingly, there was still a signi…cant gap in capital productivity
between privatized and private …rms in 2007.
There are also distinctive patterns between small and large state-owned …rms. While stateowned …rms grew, on average, at the same rate as private …rms (Figure 5), state-owned …rms
that were small (large) in 1998 grew at a slower (faster) rate compared to private …rms with
the same initial size. The heterogeneity across the size distribution is similar for the relative
labor productivity growth but less pronounced for the relative capital productivity growth. In
contrast, there is no evidence that the relative output growth and the narrowing of the labor
and capital productivity gaps di¤er between small vs. large privatized state-owned …rms.
3.3.3

Entrants

We now turn to the 2007 entrants, de…ned as …rms created after 1998. Table 1 indicates
that one third of the state-owned …rms in 2007 were established after 1998. Figure 8 plots
the distribution of value added (top panel), labor productivity (middle panel), and capital
productivity (bottom panel) of state-owned entrants and private entrants. As before, we
normalize by the corresponding statistic for surviving private …rms. The top panel shows
that new state-owned …rms are signi…cantly larger than new private …rms. The middle panel
shows that the labor productivity of new state-owned …rms and new private …rms is about
the same as that of surviving private …rms. Finally, the bottom panel shows that the capital
productivity of new state-owned …rms is lower than that of surviving private …rms, while the
capital productivity of new private …rms is about the same.
To summarize, the main facts are:
1. Exit: Exit rates increased after 1998 among state-owned …rms, particularly for small
state-owned …rms.

13

2. Privatization: Large state-owned …rms were kept mostly under state control, but the
smallest state-owned …rms that survived were also kept under state ownership. Midsized state-owned …rms were the most likely to be privatized.
3. State-Owned vs. Privatized Firms: The performance of the average state-owned …rm is
similar to that of the average privatized …rm. For both groups of …rms, from 1998 to
2007, the labor productivity gap with surviving private …rms narrowed signi…cantly and
the capital productivity gap by much less. Capital productivity was still less than 50
percent that of private …rms.
4. Small vs. Large State-Owned Firms: The labor productivity gap with surviving private …rms narrowed signi…cantly between 1998 and 2007 for large state-owned …rms and
widened for small state-owned …rms. The capital productivity gap widened for small
state-owned …rms.
5. New State-Owned Firms: New state-owned …rms are larger, have the same labor productivity, and have lower capital productivity compared to new private …rms.
We end this section by presenting evidence on the patterns after 2007. We do not have
access to comparable …rm-level data. So, the only information we have is from the published
aggregates provided by the China Statistical Yearbook.12 Figure 9 plots the weighted average
of aggregate labor productivity and capital productivity across two digit industries for stateowned …rms relative to private …rms. For comparability, Figure 9 also plots the weighted
average of aggregate labor productivity and capital productivity calculated from our microdata. Aggregate data are less than ideal because they do not allow us to separately measure
entrants vs. exiters vs. incumbents. As can be seen, the narrowing of the gap in aggregate
labor productivity is much larger than that seen among incumbent …rms (in Figures 6 and
7). Similarly, while there is little convergence in capital productivity between incumbent
state-owned …rms and private …rms, the aggregate data suggest a rapid convergence in capital
productivity. Clearly, an important factor driving this di¤erence is the high exit rate of stateowned …rms from 1998 to 2007 with low labor and capital productivity.
Nonetheless, with these caveats …rmly in mind, it seems clear that the convergence in
labor productivity from 1998 to 2007 ended after 2007. In fact, there is some evidence of a
decline in relative labor and capital productivity in 2009, perhaps driven by e¤orts undertaken
by the government to combat the world recession by forcing state-owned …rms to increase
12
The China Statistical Yearbook stopped publishing the series on industry employment and capital after
2011.

14

employment and to overinvest. And it is also not the case that the convergence in labor and
capital productivity ended simply because the state sector caught up with the private …rms
by 2007. Figures 6 and 7 indicate that labor and capital productivity were still below that of
private …rms in 2007. Instead, it appears that the political forces behind the transformation
of the state-owned …rms ran out of steam after 2007.

4

Productivity and Distortions of State-Owned and Privatized
Firms

We now interpret the facts presented above through the lens of the model in Section 2. We
apply the model to each industry and then aggregate industry output into aggregate output.
To capture the industry e¤ects, we allow , w and
the labor force to be …xed in an

to be industry-speci…c. We also assume

industry.13

We begin with the di¤erences in labor productivity between state and private …rms. According to equation (3), di¤erences in the average product of labor re‡ect di¤erences in

L
i

and the marginal revenue product of labor. The convergence in labor productivity from 1998
to 2007 between state-owned and private …rms shown in Figure 6 indicates that MRPL in
state-owned …rms increased relative to that of private …rms over this time period.14 Similarly,
equation (4) indicates that the gap in capital productivity between state-owned and privatized
…rms relative to private …rms re‡ects di¤erences in MRPK. Therefore, the evidence in Figure
7 indicates that MRPK in state-owned …rms was lower than that of privately …rms, and that
much of this gap was still present in 2007. Furthermore, there is little di¤erence in MRPL
and MRPK between state-owned …rms that remained under state control and those that were
privatized. In particular, MRPK of the privatized state-owned …rms in 2007 was almost the
same as that of the state-owned …rms, as if the privatized …rms continued to have access to
capital on the same terms as the state-owned …rms. And among the state-owned …rms established after 1998, Figure 8 indicates these …rms’MRPL is similar to that of private …rms, but
MRPK is substantially lower.
The fact that MRPK is lower among state-owned …rms, and has remained low, is not surprising if the low marginal product is due to such …rms having preferential access to capital.
Preferential access to capital increases the pro…ts of …rms with access. Under this interpretation, it appears that formerly state-owned …rms, even after they are privatized, continue to
bene…t from preferential access to capital.
13

We can generate a …xed labor supply in an industry by assuming that aggregate output is a Cobb-Douglas
aggregate of aggregate industry output.
14
See also Kamal and Lovely (2013) for the convergence of MRPL between state and private …rms.

15

In contrast to the patterns in capital productivity, there is signi…cant convergence of labor
productivity between state-owned and private …rms. We see this among the surviving stateowned …rms, among the newly established state-owned …rms, and even among the privatized
state-owned …rms. This …nding is hard to interpret if lower labor productivity re‡ects a lower
marginal cost of labor. Firms’ pro…ts increase when capital costs are low and when labor
costs are low. However, suppose that the lower average product of labor does not re‡ect lower
marginal products. Speci…cally, consider a production function that incorporates overhead
labor, fi :
Qi = Ai Ki (Li

fi )1

:

(15)

Here, fi has a straightforward interpretation for state-owned …rms: It represents the redundant
workers who have zero MRPL but cannot be …red. When fi 6= 0, the marginal product of labor
is no longer proportional to the average product of labor. We denote ^L
i as the distortions

that a¤ect MRPL, while

L
i

still stands for the distortions that a¤ect labor productivity. To

see the relationship between the two distortions, we rewrite the …rst-order condition as
Pi Qi
/1+
Li

L
i

=

1

fi
Li

1 + ^L
i :

The gap in the average product of labor, as represented by

L,
i

(16)

can be decomposed into two

components: fi and ^L
i . A reduction in fi will not a¤ect the marginal product of labor but
will increase the average product.
The fact that the average product of labor is lower among state-owned …rms in 1998 could
be due to oversta¢ ng in these …rms.15 The political pressure to employ redundant workers
declined after 1998, as state-owned …rms became corporatized and presumably were incentivized to maximize pro…ts. In our data, employment in the surviving state-owned …rms
declined by 3.6 million workers from 1998 to 2007, about 40 percent of their initial employment. We do not know how many of these workers were redundant workers, but note that a
decline in the number of redundant workers will show up as a decline in the average product
of labor and in the labor share. Speci…cally, we can rewrite (16) as:
1 + ^L
i wLi
/
Y
1
|
{zi
}

1
:
fi =Li

(17)

Labor Share

Equation (17) shows that the labor share falls when fi =Li falls. Figure 10 plots the average
15

According to a survey conducted by the Chinese Academy of Social Science in 1995, the narrowly-de…ned
redundant workers –i.e., those who are idle and have no de…nite position –accounted for more than ten percent
of total employment in about half of the state-owned …rms (Dai, 1996).

16

labor shares of state-owned, privatized, and private …rms in the 1998-2007 balanced panel.16
The initial labor shares of state-owned and privatized …rms were considerably higher than
those of private …rms. Moreover, the labor shares of state-owned and privatized …rms fell
substantially after 1998.
Finally, from equation (8), …rm productivity A can be measured as the residual of …rm
value added after controlling for the e¤ect of the average product of capital and labor. We
use the labor share of private …rms in each two-digit industry to measure industry-speci…c ,
where we adjust the labor share in each sector such that we match the labor share in China’s
industrial sector.17 We use a baseline value of 1= = 7, corresponding to a markup of 1:17.18
Figure 11 plots the resulting distribution of A of state-owned …rms (top panel) and privatized …rms (bottom panel) in the balanced panel. The top panel indicates that A of state-owned
…rms was lower than that of private …rms in 1998. By 2007, the gap in A between state-owned
…rms and private …rms had narrowed. Similarly, A of privatized …rms was lower compared to
private …rms, but the gap had also declined by 2007. Speci…cally, the weighted average TFP
of surviving state-owned …rms relative to that of surviving private …rms increased from 55 to
75 percent. The relative TFP of surviving privatized …rms increased from 60 to 77 percent.
We next examine the heterogeneity in the change in A across the size distribution. The
top panel of Figure 11 plots the ratio of A of state-owned relative to private …rms in bins
de…ned by the value added in 1998 (top panel). This …gure indicates that A of state-owned
…rms in the top decile in …rm size in 1998 was 30 to 40 percent of that of the privately owned
…rms of comparable size in 1998. By 2007, A among the top decile of state-owned …rms had
increased to 60 percent of that of the same group of private …rms. For small state-owned …rms,
the pattern is exactly the opposite. In 1998, A of the smallest state-owned …rms was 80 to 90
percent of that of private …rms of comparable size. By 2007, A among state-owned …rms had
dropped to 40 percent of that of the same group of private …rms. The bottom panel plots the
relative A of the privatized …rms. Here, there is less heterogeneity across the size distribution.
On average, A of privatized …rms grows at faster rates than that of private …rms does, and
this is the case throughout the size distribution. These …ndings are the mirror images of the
facts documented in Section 3.3.
In summary, we …nd high growth rates of TFP and reduction in labor distortions among
16

We use value added shares of an industry (averaged over 1998-2007) as the weight to aggregate labor shares
across industries.
17
See the online appendix. We use the labor share of private …rms because distortions may bias the labor
share of state-owned …rms.
18
We later show the results with di¤erent values of 1= , as well as allowing markups to di¤er across state-owned
and private …rms.

17

state-owned and privatized …rms since the late 1990s. However, the return to capital among
state-owned and privatized …rms continues to be signi…cantly lower than those in private …rms.
Large state-owned …rms have particularly high growth rates in TFP relative to their private
counterparts, but the opposite is true for small state-owned …rms.
We end this section with three sets of robustness checks. First, we measure labor input by
employment, which implicitly assumes that labor quality is the same across …rms. However,
the gap in labor productivity between state and private …rms shown in Figure 9 may be due
to di¤erences in worker quality. To check this, we use the data from the 2004 Economic
Census to measure the di¤erences in worker quality between state and private …rms.19 The
2004 Census indicates that workers in state-owned …rms have, on average, 1.3 more years
of schooling than workers in private …rms. When we adjust for the implied gap in worker
quality (using estimates of the Mincerian return to schooling), this reduces labor productivity
among surviving privatized state-owned …rms by about ten percent. The convergence of labor
productivity between state and private …rms is not a¤ected, though.
Second, the convergence of TFP is robust to alternative assumptions on markups. Lowering 1= to three gives essentially the same relative TFP growth of surviving state-owned
…rms. Our calculations assume that markups are the same for all …rms. We now consider
the possibility that state-owned …rms have higher markups than private …rms. This has two
e¤ects on the empirical results.20 First, although higher markups among state-owned …rms
change the implied levels of TFP,

L,
i

and

K
i

for these …rms, it does not change their implied

growth rates. Second, if we assume that markups among privatized state-owned …rms decline
after becoming privatized, then the implied growth rate of TFP among privatized …rms would
be higher than shown in Figure 10. In addition, the implied reduction in labor and capital
distortions among the privatized …rms would be larger than shown in Figures 6 and 7.
Finally, the evidence presented above suggests that the convergence of labor productivity
between state-owned and private …rms can be explained by the reduction in the number of
surplus workers in the state sector (instead of an increase in the marginal product of labor in
state-owned …rms). Notice that with the presence of surplus labor, Ai has to be adjusted by fi .
We consider the following scenario in which (i) redundant workers exist only in the …rms that
are initially state-owned and have labor productivity below the average of surviving private
…rms in the same industry; and (ii) the labor productivity gap entirely re‡ects the number of
redundant workers. These assumptions are rather extreme, implying massive labor redundancy
19

The 2004 Economic Census provides data on the educational composition of employment in each …rm. See
the online appendix.
20
See the online appendix for details on the model with variable markups, as well as the empirical results.

18

that accounts for 54 and 35 percent of state employment in 1998 and 2007, respectively. The
TFP growth of state-owned …rms has to be adjusted downwards by falling surplus labor. The
weighted average TFP of surviving state-owned …rms relative to that of surviving private
…rms grew by 36 percent from 1998 through 2007 in the benchmark case, while the growth
would decrease to 26 percent if we were to adopt the above assumptions on fi . Yet the TFP
convergence between state and private …rms remains qualitatively unchanged.

4.1

Why Have State-Owned Firms Changed?

We now turn to institutional forces that may be behind the patterns presented in the last
section.
First, governance may have improved among large state-owned …rms. Figure 2 shows that
almost half of the state-owned …rms in 2007 were legally registered as private …rms. For a
subset of these …rms for which we can put together detailed ownership information, the typical
form this takes is that state-owned …rms are “corporatized”with a minority share traded in the
stock market and merged into a large state-owned conglomerate. We do not have information
on the precise ownership structure of all the …rms in the data, but we do know the share of
registered capital held by “legal person.” For the sample of state-owned …rms for which we
have ownership information, the legal person is essentially the equity share of the state-owned
conglomerate. Figure 12 shows that the average share of registered capital held by legal persons
increased dramatically among all state-owned …rms from 1998 to 2007.
Second, there is clear evidence that state-owned …rms face greater competition from private
…rms. Although the goal of the Chinese government was to restrict entry by private …rms in
the “strategic” or “pillar” industries, private …rms have entered in many of the industries in
which the state has sought to maintain the dominance of state-owned …rms.21 Table 5 presents
the value added share of state-owned …rms in nine such industries (these industries account
for about half of China’s industrial output). Although state-owned …rms have a dominant
share in most of these industries, the state’s share has shrunk in all sectors (except for Electric
and Heat Power). The decline in the other (non-strategic) sectors is even more dramatic: The
overall value added share of state-owned …rms in the industrial sector fell from 55 to 34 percent
in the same period.
Table 6 examines the correlation of private-sector entry with productivity growth in the
state sector across two-digit sectors. We de…ne the private entry rate as the number of new
private …rms created in a year relative to the number of all private …rms in that year. The
21

See the online appendix for details on “strategic” and “pillar” industries.

19

private entry rate averaged 7.6 percent in the 1998-2007 period, with a standard deviation of
eight percentage points across industries. Column 1 shows that the private-sector entry rate
is positively correlated with productivity growth. The e¤ect is independent of ownership.
Third, many of the state-owned …rms in 2007 were newly established. Figure 9 shows that
these …rms were large and also enjoyed preferential access to capital. Such …rms may also
have provided competition to the surviving state-owned …rms. The entry rate of state-owned
…rms is 2.1 percent per year, with a standard deviation of 0.8 percentage points across twodigit sectors (the correlation between the private entry rate and state …rm entry rate is 0.6).
Column 2 (Table 6) shows that the entry rate of state-owned …rms is also positively correlated
with TFP growth of state-owned …rms. Comparing the R2 in Columns 1 and 2, it appears
that the entry of new state-owned …rms explains more of the variation in TFP growth among
surviving state-owned …rms. The entry rate of state-owned …rms is also positively correlated
with TFP growth in the privatized state-owned …rms, but not in the surviving private …rms.
More generally, an explicit goal of the organizational design was to generate competition
among the state-owned …rms. In the case of the automobile industry, Dunne (2011) argues that
the main competition faced by Shanghai-GM (GM’s joint venture with the state-owned SAIC
Group) is between the two large automobile companies owned by its joint-venture partner (the
SAIC Group). For example, Dunne (2011) describes how SAIC’s joint venture with Volkswagen
introduced the Volkswagen Passat to undercut the Shanghai-GM’s pro…ts from the Buick. To
capture this force, we measure the market power of state-owned …rms using the Her…ndahl
index. Column 3 shows that TFP growth among surviving state-owned …rms is lower in
sectors in which the Her…ndahl index of surviving state-owned …rms increases. This fact also
suggests that the high TFP growth rate among surviving state-owned …rms is not simply
mismeasured monopoly power. If it were, then we should …nd a positive correlation between
market concentration of state-owned …rms and TFP growth of the same …rms. However, the
facts suggest that the exact opposite is true.
Finally, there is some evidence that unsuccessful state-owned conglomerates are forced to
sell their …rms to other state-owned conglomerates. For example, the Baoshan Steel Company,
discussed earlier, is perhaps the most successful steel manufacturer in China. Since 2007, its
parent company (the BaoSteel Group) has acquired three large steel manufacturers owned
by other state-owned industrial groups.22 One of these companies is ShaoSteel, a publicly
traded steel manufacturer that was owned by local governments in Guangdong Province. After
ShaoSteel su¤ered losses totaling almost USD 400 million from 2008 to 2012, the BaoSteel
22

Speci…cally, BaoSteel acquired the Bayi Steel in 2007, Ningbo Steel in 2007, and ShaoSteel in 2012.

20

Group acquired the …rm in 2012.23 The case of the Nanjing Auto Group (owned by the local
government of Nanjing) is another example. This company also ran perpetual de…cits before
the SAIC Group acquired the entire group in 2007.
There are no systematic data on the extent of this reallocation, but some basic facts about
the groups and …rms owned by the Central SASAC suggest this may have been important.
When Central SASAC was …rst established in 2003, it was in charge of 189 industrial groups
that controlled a total of 15,546 …rms. By 2010, the number of industrial groups it owned had
been whittled down to 124. At the same time, these 124 groups controlled a total of 23,738
…rms. Put di¤erently, due to this reallocation process, the number of …rms controlled by the
average Central SASAC Group increased from 82 in 2003 to 191 in 2010.

5

Welfare Implications

We now turn to the assessment of the aggregate implications of the changes observed in the state
sector. Although it might seem that high TFP growth and a reduction in labor distortions in
the state sector would have positive e¤ects on aggregate welfare, there will be o¤setting e¤ects
in general equilibrium. And, under some assumptions, these o¤setting e¤ects may be large
enough that aggregate welfare is lower when state-owned …rms increase TFP and reduce labor
distortions.

5.1

Counterfactual Experiments

We conduct counterfactual experiments to quantify the welfare implications of “Grasp the
Large, Let Go of the Small.”We start with the 2007 data and then calculate aggregate output
under two counterfactuals: “Let go of the Small” and “Grasp the Large,” de…ned as follows:
1. “Grasp the Large” assumes that (i) TFP and distortions of surviving state-owned …rms
would be the same as their initial values; and (ii) no new state-owned …rms would be
established.
2. “Let Go of the Small” assumes that (i) TFP and distortions of privatized …rms would
be the same as their initial values; and (ii) exiting state-owned …rms would survive, with
TFP and distortions equal to their initial values.
In each counterfactual, we start with the 2007 data and calculate the hypothetical level of
aggregate output under each scenario. We keep the aggregate labor supply …xed and assume
23
News reports indicate that ShaoSteel’s senior management was replaced after it was acquired by the Baosteel
Group.

21

that the aggregate supply of capital is available elastically at an exogenously determined world
interest rate in the benchmark calculation (we relax this assumption later).
Table 8 presents the percentage decline in aggregate output in 2007 in each scenario. The
…rst column, “no surplus labor,” assumes that

L
i

represents gaps in the marginal product

of labor, so, here, increases in TFP among …rms with a su¢ ciently low average product of
labor may lower aggregate output. The …rst three rows present the e¤ect of the closure and
privatization of state-owned …rms. The …rst row shows that 2007 aggregate output in the “LetGo-of-the-Small” counterfactual is 1.6 percent lower. The next two rows present the e¤ects
of exit vs. those of privatization. Exit has a positive e¤ect, increasing aggregate output by
0.3 percent. Privatization alone raises aggregate output by 1.4 percent. Both results deserve
comment. The reason that the e¤ect of privatization is relatively small, despite the TFP gains
among these …rms, is that output per worker among privatized …rms is still lower than the
average. Since we assume that lower average product re‡ects lower marginal product, higher
TFP among these …rms worsens the allocation of labor, which o¤sets the e¤ect of higher TFP
on aggregate output.24 The positive e¤ect of exit on aggregate output is also driven by the
same force. In the model we use, exit always lowers aggregate output when resources are
allocated e¢ ciently. However, when the marginal product of labor in exiting …rms is low,
which is the case in China, exit improves the allocation of labor. In the Chinese context, the
marginal product of labor is low enough that the e¤ect of improved allocation due to exit more
than o¤sets the direct e¤ect of exit on aggregate output.
The next three rows present the e¤ect of “Grasp the Large,” which accounts for ten percent of 2007 aggregate output. The reforms among surviving state-owned …rms raises the
2007 aggregate output by 6.1 percent, and the creation of new state-owned …rms accounts
for …ve percent of the aggregate output in 2007. The fact that newly formed state-owned
…rms contribute almost as much to aggregate output as surviving state-owned …rms may be
surprising, given that total value added of surviving state-owned …rms in 2007 was about four
times larger than that of the new state-owned …rms. The di¤erence in the contribution of these
groups of large state-owned …rms stems from the fact that average labor productivity among
new state-owned …rms is about the same as that of the average private …rm, so entry of these
…rms does not worsen the allocation of labor. In contrast, the average product of labor among
state-owned …rms in 2007 was still lower than that of the average private …rm. So, here, as is
24

Our benchmark parameterization implies a mean of 0:78 for across industries (see equation (12)). We
have shown that labor productivity of state-owned and privatized …rms was about half and three quarters of
that of private …rms in 1998 and 2007, respectively. Therefore, many state-owned and privatized …rms would
easily satisfy the condition.

22

the case with privatized state-owned …rms, higher TFP among state-owned …rms worsens the
allocation of labor, which o¤sets the e¤ect of higher …rm TFP on aggregate output.
The estimates in column 1 assume that gaps in the average product of labor re‡ect di¤erences in the marginal product. However, the evidence presented in Section 4 suggests that the
convergence of labor productivity between state-owned and private …rms can be explained by
the reduction in the number of surplus workers in the state sector (instead of an increase in the
marginal product of labor in state-owned …rms). In column 2, we assume that (i) gaps in the
average product of labor between state and non-state-owned …rms entirely re‡ects the number
of redundant workers in the state sector, but that the marginal product of labor is the same in
the two sectors;25 and (ii) redundant workers in the state sector have zero productivity and,
hence, reducing fi does not a¤ect labor supply. Then, TFP growth in …rms with low labor
productivity does not worsen the allocation of labor. As can be seen, the e¤ects on aggregate
output are now almost twice as large (compared to the estimates in column 1). “Let Go of the
Small” accounts for three percent of aggregate output in 2007, and “Grasp the Large” for 18
percent. The two reforms together, shown in the last row, account for 21 percent of aggregate
output in 2007.
We have so far assumed that the aggregate supply of capital in China is perfectly elastic.
This can be the case because of capital mobility or because a consumption Euler equation
generates a constant interest rate. Song et al. (2011) documents that savings has exceeded
investments in China, suggested that an open economy with an elastic supply of capital is a
reasonable assumption for China. In addition, Bai et al. (2006) …nd that the return to capital
to non-state …rms was roughly constant over this time period, which is consistent with a …xed
cost of capital.
Nonetheless, it is useful to examine the welfare e¤ects when we assume a …xed capital
stock at the aggregate level. The results are reported in the last two columns. Since the
marginal product of capital is lower among surviving state-owned …rms, privatized state-owned
…rms, and newly established state-owned …rms, the implication of a …xed capital stock is that
higher productivity growth among these …rms raises the equilibrium interest rate and worsens
the allocation of capital. Column 3 further assumes that low labor productivity re‡ects low
marginal product, so the e¤ect of TFP growth among low-labor-productivity …rms also worsens
the allocation of labor. This is the worse-case scenario because higher TFP growth among
state-owned …rms potentially worsens the allocation of both labor and capital. As can be seen,
the e¤ect of this alternative assumption is dramatic. For example, the e¤ect of higher TFP
25

fi =Li is assumed to be the same among state-owned …rms.

23

growth among surviving state-owned …rms worsens aggregate output by almost …ve percent.
Intuitively, the marginal products of capital and labor are low enough in these …rms in 2007
such that the e¤ect of higher TFP on resource misallocation overwhelms the direct e¤ect of
higher TFP on aggregate output. This e¤ect is less strong among the newly established stateowned …rms. This is because the creation of these …rms worsens the allocation of capital (the
average productivity of capital is lower in these …rms) but not the allocation of labor (the
average productivity of labor in these …rms is about the same as the average).
The last column assumes that gaps in labor productivity re‡ect redundant workers (as in
column 2), so, here, higher TFP growth in low-labor-productivity …rms has no e¤ect on the
e¢ ciency of labor allocation. Thus, comparing columns 2 with 4 isolates the e¤ect of TFP on
capital allocation. The e¤ect of worse capital allocation due to TFP growth in low-capitalreturn …rms is very large. The e¤ect of worse capital allocation due to TFP growth among
surviving state-owned …rms lowers aggregate output by more than 14 percent (13.2 + 0.9).
The e¤ect of worse capital allocation due to the entry of high-TFP but low-capital-return
state-owned …rms lowers aggregate output by 5.6 percent (7.2 - 1.6).
In summary, the magnitude of the welfare gain depends on the extent to which capital
supply is elastic. If the reality is that the cost of capital to private …rms does not change
due to the reform of state-owned …rms, then the e¤ect of the reform is likely to have increased
aggregate output signi…cantly. Similarly, the e¤ect of TFP growth also depends on the extent to
which it worsens the allocation of labor. Although we present evidence that the convergence in
labor productivity between state and private …rms is due to the reduction in redundant workers,
we do not know whether the remaining gap in 2007 re‡ects di¤erences in the marginal product
of labor or in the number of redundant workers.

6

Conclusion

We document the dramatic transformation of Chinese state-owned …rms from 1998 to 2007.
Smaller state-owned …rms were closed or privatized; large state-owned …rms were corporatized
and merged into large state-owned holding companies; and new state-owned …rms were created.
We show that labor productivity and TFP increased in the privatized and surviving state-owned
…rms. In contrast, there was little convergence in the capital productivity of these two types of
…rms from 1998 to 2007. Among the newly established state-owned …rms, we show that TFP
of the state-owned …rms is signi…cantly higher than that of their private counterparts, while
labor productivity is about the same and capital productivity signi…cantly lower.
Although these changes unambiguously increase state-sector pro…ts, the e¤ects on welfare
24

are more ambiguous. If higher TFP in state-owned …rms does not worse resouce allocation,
then the reform of the state sector is potentially responsible for 20 percent of aggregate output
in 2007. However, if the aggregate supply of capital is …xed, the e¤ect of higher TFP and the
creation of new high-TFP state-owned …rms can worsen the allocation of capital by enough that
the net e¤ect on aggregate output may be negative. Likewise, if the marginal product of labor
among state-owned …rms is low, higher TFP can also lower aggregate output by reallocating
workers away from private …rms, where the marginal product of labor is presumably higher.
In addition, although we provide suggestive evidence that changes in corporate governance, competition from private …rms and other state-owned groups, and reallocation of assets
between state-owned groups may have been important drivers of the changes observed in stateowned …rms, the evidence is far from conclusive. Furthermore, our analysis of the welfare e¤ect
of “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small” relies on a speci…c model, but the e¤ect may be
di¤erent with a di¤erent model. Finally, our …rm-level data end in 2007, and based on the
industry-level data in the post-2007 period, it seems possible that some patterns could have
changed since then. We …nd some evidence that this might have been the case, but de…nitive
answers will only come once similar micro-data for the post 2007 period is available.

References
[1] Aivazian, Varouj A., Ying Ge and Jiaping Qiu (2005): “Can Corporatization Improve
the Performance of State-Owned Enterprises Even Without Privatization?” Journal of
Corporate Finance, 11, 791-808.
[2] Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Yingyi Qian (2006): “The Returns to Capital in
China,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 37, 61-102.
[3] Berkowitz, Daniel, Hong Ma and Shuichiro Nishioka (2014): “Recasting the Iron Rice
Bowl: The Evolution of China’s state-owned Enterprises,” mimeo.
[4] Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck and Yifan Zhang (2012): “Creative Accounting
or Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing,”
Journal of Development Economics, 97, 339-351.
[5] Brandt, Loren, Trevor Tombe and Xiaodong Zhu (2013): “Factor Market Distortions
Across Time, Space and Sectors in China,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16, 39-58.
[6] China’s Communist Party (1999): “The Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on Major Issues Concerning the Reform and Development of State25

Owned Enterprises,”Fourth Plenum of the 15th China’s Communist Party of China Central Committee.
[7] Cooper, Russell, Guan Gong and Ping Yan (2010): “Dynamic Labor Demand in China:
Public and Private Objectives,” NBER Working Paper 16498.
[8] De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski (2012): “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,” American Economic Review, 102, 2437-71.
[9] Garnaut, John (2011), “Bo Can Do! On Man Does Hit Bit to be the Great Will of
China,”Sydney Morning Herald, August 7, 2011.
[10] Gilchrist, Simon, Jae Sim and Egon Zakrajsek (2013): “Misallocation and Financial Frictions: Some Direct Evidence from the Dispersion in Borrowing Costs,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16, 159–176.
[11] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP
in China and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403-1448.
[12] Kamal, Fariha and Mary E. Lovely (2013): “Labor Allocation in China: Implicit Taxation
of the Heterogeneous Non-State Sector,” CESifo Economic Studies, 59, 731-758.
[13] Lardy, Nicholas R. (2014): “Markets over Mao: The Rise of Private Business in China,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics.
[14] Li, Xi, Xuewen Liu and Yong Wang (2012): “A Model of China’s State Capitalism,”
mimeo.
[15] Perkins, Dwight H. and Thomas G. Rawski (2008): “Appendix to Forecasting China’s
Economic Growth to 2025,” mimeo.
[16] Qian, Zhenjie and Xiaodong Zhu (2012): “Why Is Labor Income Share So Low in China?”
mimeo.
[17] Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson (2008), “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707-720.
[18] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2011): “Growing Like China,”
American Economic Review, 101, 202-241.
[19] Song, Zheng and Guiying Laura Wu (2014): “Identifying Capital Misallocation,” mimeo.
26

[20] Zhang, Junsen, Yaohui Zhao, Albert Park and Xiaoqing Song (2005): “Economic Returns
to Schooling in Urban China, 1988 to 2001,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 33,
730-752.

27

Figure 1: Revenue Shares of State-Owned Firms
0.6
CSY
firm data by our definition
firm data by registration type

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Note: This figure plots the revenue share of state-owned firms in China’s industrial sector. CSY
refers to the share computed from aggregate data published in the China Statistical Yearbooks
(CSY). Using firm-level data described in Section 3.2, the solid and dashed lines plot the share of
state-owned firms identified by our definition (see Section 3.2 for details) and by their registration
types, respectively.

	  
	  

Figure 2: Share of State-Owned Firms Registered as Private Firms

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Note: This figure plots the number of the state-owned firms (by our definition) that are registered
as private firms as a share of the number of all state-owned firms.

	  
	  

Figure 3: Exit Rate 1998-2007
35

Annual Exit Rate (%)

30
25
20

State Owned
Private

15
10
5
0
1

10

25

50

75

90

99

Size Percentile (based on 1998 Value-Added)

Note: The solid and dotted lines plot the annual exit rate for state-owned and private firms, defined
as state and privately owned in 1998, respectively. See the online appendix for the definition of the
annual exit rate.

	  
	  

Figure 4: Privatized State-Owned Firms/All Surviving State-Owned Firms
50
45

Percent Privatized

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
1

10

25

50

75

90

99

Size Percentile (based on 1998 Value-Added)

Note: This figure plots the ratio of the number of private firms in 2007 that were state-owned in
1998 divided by the number of state-owned firms in 1998 that survived until 2007 (including
state-owned firms in 1998 that were privatized by 2007).

	  
	  

Figure 5: Distribution of Firm Value added

0

Density of Employment

.05

.1

.15

.2

State Owned Firms

1/32 1/16 1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

32

64

128 256

.2

Privatized State Owned Firms
1998

0

.05

.1

.15

2007

1/32 1/16 1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

32

64

128 256

Value-Added (Mean Private Firms = 1)
Notes: The sample is the balanced panel from 1998 to 2007. Size is measured by firm value added
normalized by weighted mean of value added of private firms in each year. Observation for each
firm is weighted by employment. State-owned firms are defined as state-owned in 1998 and 2007.
Privatized firms are defined as state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007.
	  
	  

Figure 6: Distribution of Labor Productivity

0

Density of Employment

.1

.2

.3

.35

State Owned Firms

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

Privatized State Owned Firms

.35

1/16

.3

1998

0

.1

.2

2007

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

VA/Worker (Mean Private Firms = 1)

Notes: Sample is the balanced panel from 1998 to 2007. Labor productivity is normalized by
output weighted mean of labor productivity of surviving private firms in each year. Observation
for each firm is weighted by firm employment. State-owned firms are state-owned in 1998 and
2007. Privatized firms are state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007.

	  
	  

Figure 7: Distribution of Capital Productivity

0

Density of Employment

.1

.2

.3

State Owned Firms

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

Privatized State Owned Firms

.4

1/16

1998

0

.1

.2

.3

2007

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

VA/Capital (Mean Private Firms = 1)

Notes: Sample is the balanced panel from 1998 to 2007. Capital productivity is normalized by
output weighted mean of capital productivity of surviving private firms in each year. Observation
for each firm is weighted by employment. State-owned firms are state-owned in 1998 and 2007.
Privatized firms are state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007.
	  
	  

Figure 8: Distribution of Size, Labor Productivity, and Capital Productivity among Entrants
(Mean Surviving private Firms = 1)

0

.1

.2

VA

1/64 1/32 1/16

1/8

1/4

1

2

4

8

16

32

64

VA/Worker

.3

Density of Employment

1/2

State Owned

0

.1

.2

Private

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

32

4

8

16

32

VA/Capital

0

.1

.2

.3

1/16

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

Notes: Sample is firms in 2007 established after 1998. Size is Value added (VA), Labor
Productivity is VA/Worker, and Capital Productivity is VA/Capital. Observations are weighted by
employment and normalized by weighted mean of surviving private firms in 2007.
	  
	  

Figure 9: Relative Labor and Capital Productivity
Y/L

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
1998

CSY
firm data

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Y/K

1.4

CSY
firm data
firm data real capital

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Note: The top panel plots the weighted average of the revenue per worker of state-owned firms
relative to that of private firms in each two-digit industry. The dotted line uses two-digit industrylevel data from China Statistical Yearbooks, while the solid line uses the firm-level data. The
dotted and solid lines in the bottom panel plot the weighted average of the revenue per unit of book
value of fixed assets net of depreciation of state-owned firms relative to that of private firms in
each two-digit industry. The dotted line uses two-digit industry-level data from the China
Statistical Yearbooks, while the solid line uses firm-level data. The dashed line plots the weighted
average of the revenue per unit of real capital of state-owned firms relative to that of private firms
in each two-digit industry, where real capital is defined in Section 3.3.

	  
	  

Figure 10: Labor Share
0.5
State Owned Firms
Privatized Firms
Private Firms

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Notes: Sample is the balanced panel of industrial firms from 1998 to 2007. The solid, dashed and
dotted lines plot the labor share of state-owned firms, privatized firms and private firms,
respectively, in the balanced panel.

	  
	  

Figure 11: Distribution of Firms by TFP

0

Density of Employment

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

State Owned Firms

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

32

Privatized State Owned Firms

.25

1/32

1998

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

2007

1/32

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

8

16

32

TFP (Private Firms = 1)

Notes: Sample is the balanced panel from 1998 to 2007. TFP is normalized by mean of surviving
private firms in each year. State-owned firms are state-owned in 1998 and 2007. Privatized firms
are state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007.
	  
	  

Figure 12: TFP by Size in 1998
.9

State Owned Firms

.8

1998

.2

TFP (Private Firms = 1)

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

2007

1

10

25

50

75

90

99

90

99

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

Privatized State Owned Firms

1

10

25

50

75

Size Percentile in 1998

Notes: Sample is the balanced panel in 1998 and 2007. TFP in each percentile is normalized by
median TFP of surviving private firms in the percentile in each year. State-owned firms are stateowned in 1998 and 2007. Privatized firms are state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007.
Size in 1998 is defined as value added.
	  
	  

Figure 13: Fraction of State-Owned Firms by "Legal Person" Ownership Share
0.5
legal person share >= 25%
legal person share >= 50%
legal person share >= 75%

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

year

Notes: The solid, dotted and dashed lines plot the number of state-owned firms with legal person
share above or equal to 25%, 50% and 75% as a share of the number of all state-owned firms,
respectively.

	  
	  

Table 1: Firms and Employment by Ownership
# Firms

Employment

Exit by 2007

38.1

15,077

State-Owned in 2007

7.6

12,679

Private in 2007

5.0

3,196

Exit by 2007

58.2

11,871

Private in 2007

28.1

8,422

Entrant

4.2

2,475

State-Owned in 1998

7.6

9,308

Entrant

199.4

30,767

State-Owned in 1998

5.0

2,512

Private in 1998

28.1

11,549

State-Owned in 1998

Private in 1998

State-Owned in 2007

Private in 2007

Note: Number of firms and employment is in thousands. Entrants in 2007 are the firms established
between 1999 and 2007 (inclusive).

	  
	  

Table 2: Average Annual Exit Rate
1991-1995

1998-2007

State-Owned

0.9 %

13.2 %

Private

13.2 %

12.0 %

	  
	  

Table 3: Firm Characteristics by Ownership, 1998
(Weighted Mean Relative to Surviving Private Firms)
VA

VA/Worker

VA/Capital

State-Owned in 1998
Exit by 2007

-0.556
(0.132)

-1.072
(-0.058)

-1.350
(0.076)

Privatized by 2007

0.223
(0.095)

-0.504
(0.046)

-0.929
(0.076)

State-Owned in 2007

0.935
(0.167)

-0.447
(0.063)

-1.081
(0.119)

-0.651
(0.043)

-0.275
(0.026)

0.038
(0.026)

Private in 1998
Exit by 2007

Note: VA is log value added, VA/Worker is log value added per worker, and VA/Capital is log
value added per capital. Omitted category in each column is private firms in 1998 that survived until
2007. All observations are weighted by employment. Exit by 2007 are firms that exit between
1999 and 2007 (inclusive). Privatized by 2007 are firms that are state-owned in 1998 and privatized
between 1999 and 2007 (inclusive). State-owned in 2007 are firms that are state-owned in 1998 and
2007. Standard errors are in parentheses.

	  
	  

Table 4: Firm Characteristics by Ownership, 2007
(Weighted Mean Relative to Surviving Private Firms)
VA

VA/Worker

VA/Capital

State-Owned in 2007
Entrant

0.484
(0.184)

0.058
(0.117)

-0.402
(0.091)

State-Owned in 1998

0.438
(0.175)

-0.344
(0.129)

-0.775
(0.137)

Entrant

-1.004
(0.042)

-0.128
(0.028)

0.384
(0.028)

State-Owned in 1998

-0.038
(0.087)

-0.256
(0.039)

-0.580
(0.054)

Private in 2007

Note: VA is log value added, VA/Worker is log value added per worker, and VA/Capital is log
value added per capita. Omitted category is surviving private firms in 2007 (that also existed in
1998). All observations are weighted by employment. Entrants are firms established after 1998.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

	  
	  

Table 5: Value added Share of State-Owned Firms in Strategic Sectors

Mining of Coal
Extraction of Petroleum
Processing of Petroleum
Chemical
Ferrous Metals
Non-Ferrous Metals
Transport Equipment
Communication Equipment
Electric and Heat Power

1998

2007

82
100
88
51
79
54
65
42
86

66
97
63
24
46
34
49
8
88

	  
	  

Table 6:

TFP Growth and Market Entry

Dependent Variable: TFP Growth State-Owned Firms

(1)
Private Entry Rate

(3)

0.737
(0.251)

State Entry Rate

3.613
(1.019)

Δ State Herfindahl
R-squared

(2)

-0.160
(0.0711)
0.213

0.282

0.137

Dependent Variable = TFP Growth Privatized Firms
Private Entry Rate

0.874
(0.236)

State Entry Rate

3.419
(0.947)

Δ State Herfindahl
R-squared

-0.183
(0.0671)
0.307

0.296

0.189

Dependent Variable = TFP Growth Private Firms
Private Entry Rate

1.284
(0.337)

State Entry Rate

1.587
(1.707)

Δ State Herfindahl
R-squared

-0.0266
(0.110)
0.312

0.026

0.002

Note: Each observation is a two-digit industry (N=34). Dependent variables is average annual TFP growth rate of
median firm of each type in the balanced panel from 1998 to 2007. State-owned Firms are state-owned in 1998 and 2007.
Privatized Firms are stated owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007. Private firms are privately owned in 1998 and
2007. Private Entry Rate is number of new private firms/total private firms in each year; State Entry Rate is number of
new state-owned firms/total state-owned firms; and Δ State Herfindahl is the average change in Herfindahl index for
state-owned firms in the balanced panel. Standard errors clustered by industry in parentheses.

	  
	  

Table 7: Productivity Gains from "Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small"

Open Economy

Closed Economy

No Surplus
Labor

Surplus
Labor

No Surplus
Labor

1.6

3.2

0.0

0.9

Exit

0.3

-0.5

0.4

0.0

Privatization

1.4

3.7

-0.4

0.9

10.0

18.4

-3.5

0.9

Surviving State Firms

6.1

13.2

-4.6

-0.9

New Firms

5.3

7.2

0.5

1.6

11.4

21.0

-3.0

1.9

Let Go of the Small

Grasp the Large

Grasp the Large +
Let Go of the Small

Surplus
Labor

Note: This table reports the percentage increase of 2007 aggregate output in each counterfactual
relative to that in the benchmark case. Columns 1 to 2 and 3 to 4 report the results in the open and
closed economy, respectively.

	  
	  

