                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               PRECAUTIONARY STRATEGIES AND HOUSEHOLD SAVING

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                          Eduardo Cavallo
                                              Ilan Noy

                                        Working Paper 21019
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21019


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




Research support from the Inter-American Development Bank and the Dockson Chair in Economics
and International Relations at USC is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21019.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman, Eduardo Cavallo, and Ilan Noy. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Precautionary Strategies and Household Saving
Joshua Aizenman, Eduardo Cavallo, and Ilan Noy
NBER Working Paper No. 21019
March 2015
JEL No. E21,E26,F36

                                             ABSTRACT

Why do people save? A strand of the literature has emphasized the role of ‘precautionary’ motives;
i.e., private agents save in order to mitigate unexpected future income shocks. An implication is that in
countries faced with more macroeconomic volatility and risk, private saving should be higher. From the
observable data, however, we find a negative correlation between risk and private saving in cross-country
comparisons, particularly in developing countries. We provide a plausible explanation for the disconnect
between precautionary-saving theory and the empirical evidence that is based on a model with a richer
account for the various modes of ‘precautionary’ behavior by private agents, in cases where institutions
are weaker and labor informality is prevalent. In such environments, household saving decisions are
intertwined with firms’ investment decisions. As a result, the interaction between saving behavior,
broadly construed, and aggregate risk and uncertainty, may be more complex than is frequently assumed.


Joshua Aizenman                                     Ilan Noy
Economics and SIR                                   School of Economics and Finance
USC                                                 Victoria Business School of Wellington
University Park                                     P. O. Box 600
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                          Wellington, New Zealand
and NBER                                            and University of Hawaii
aizenman@usc.edu                                    noy@hawaii.edu

Eduardo Cavallo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave NW
Room SE-1064
Washington, DC 20005
cavalloe@iadb.org
1.       Introduction

Why do people save? This basic question, and its follow-up about the magnitude of saving, has
occupied economists for decades. The quest for answers opened multiple avenues of research.
One influential strand of this literature has emphasized the role of ‘precautionary’ motives; i.e.,
private agents save in order to mitigate unexpected future income shocks (Skinner, 1998; Zeldes,
1989; and Hansen and Sargent, 2010).2 An implication of the emphasis on precautionary motives
is that in countries faced with more macroeconomic volatility and risk, private saving rates
should be higher (ceteris paribus). Recently, for example, Gurio (2012) demonstrated that in a
real business cycle framework, an increase in perceived future risk leads to more precautionary
saving, and also a shift to saving in safer assets. Nakamura et al. (2013) follow a similar
argument, and find that the persistence of negative income shocks leads households to increase
saving.3

It is, however, commonly observed that saving rates in Latin America are low, and more
specifically are significantly lower than in East Asia, even though Latin America’s macro-
economies are generally much more volatile. A careful examination of the available data,
undertaken below, indeed confirms that casual observation. Instead of a positive correlation
between volatility and private saving rates, we find a negative correlation in cross-country
comparisons. In the second part of the paper, we provide a plausible explanation for the
disconnect between ‘precautionary saving’ theory and the empirical evidence that is based on a
model with a richer account for the various modes of ‘precautionary’ behavior by private agents,
particularly in developing economies.

Common features of developing countries are the under-development of the financial system,
weaker institutional frameworks, relatively high volatility of macroeconomic aggregates, and the
absence or shallowness of safety nets mitigating households’ exposure to risk. These factors have
profound implications for the functioning of firms and the choices made by households. The


2
  Other strands emphasize, for example, individual-specific determinants of saving behavior. See Cronqvist and
Siegel (2015) for a recent summary of this literature an investigation of the genetic determinant of the saving
decision.
3
  Fogli and Perri (2015) find an indirect evidence for this effect, by identifying the positive correlation between risk
measures (volatility) and the accumulation of net foreign assets (a measure positively correlated with saving
behavior).

                                                            2
institutional environment in which firms operate in developing countries induces informality in
labor markets. This informality, together with a difficulty in establishing collateral, prevents
entrepreneurs from accessing formal credit. Thus, entrepreneurs wishing to operate businesses
resort to self-financing, as this is the only feasible option available to them.

Given these structural barriers imposed on the informal sector, firms operating informally
typically focus mostly on small-scale, unskilled labor-intensive activities (Pratap and Quintin,
2008). Informal firms tend to be smaller, less productive, and younger than formal ones (La
Porta and Shleifer, 2008).4

Both self-financing and small-scale link the firm to a household’s saving and investment
decisions, implying that the saving decisions of the household are intertwined with its investment
decisions. This in turn suggests that the neo-classical discussion on precautionary saving that
disconnects firms from households and investment from saving is too narrow to account for the
various modes of precautionary behavior of agents and households.

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the link between saving and risk for countries
characterized by limited institutional depth, vibrant informal sectors, political and economic
instability, and endogenous international mobility of the labor force. We focus on the linkages
between the self-financed informal firms and household dynamics. In section 2 we establish the
empirical relationship between volatility and private saving. In section 3 we describe an
overlapping generation model, where the family network is intertwined with the production
process, leading to the endogenous formation of informal businesses, and the consequent saving
and investment decisions of the household. Section 4 concludes with a discussion of future
extensions.

2.       The empirics of private saving and macroeconomic volatility

Is private saving higher in countries subject to greater volatility? The operationalization of both
variables presents conceptual and practical challenges. At the macro level, aggregate private
saving is typically defined as the sum of household and firm saving. Household saving is the

4
  The industrial organization that induces the large fraction of informality in developing countries has been studied
in models that recognize the impact of capital market imperfection and segmentation, high costs of contract
enforcement, barriers to entry into the formal sector, and other impediments (Loayza, 1996; La Porta and Shleifer,
2008; D’Erasmo and Boedo, 2012).

                                                          3
portion of disposable income that is not devoted to current consumption. And firm saving is
defined as cash flows –net revenues plus depreciation— minus dividends; in other words,
“retained earnings”.5 In practice the two subcomponents of private saving cannot be separately
identified in the data, particularly in developing countries. This is so because the presence of
large informal sectors (which are more prevalent in developing countries) blurs the boundaries
between households and firms; i.e., many households operate as unregistered firms. It is
therefore not surprising that large cross-country panel datasets of national saving (e.g. the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook) do not report the two subcomponents of private saving. Therefore, in
what follows we will mostly refer to private saving rates, without differentiating between
household and firms. However, for a smaller subsample, we will use data on Household saving
rates from a recent paper by Bebczuk and Cavallo (2014). 6

Aizenman and Marion (1999) argue that volatility and uncertainty are different phenomena.
“Volatility” refers to the tendency of a variable to fluctuate, while “uncertainty” is present only
when those fluctuations are unpredictable. In practice, volatility is widely used as a measure of
uncertainty and risk. We want to capture the recurrent incidence of negative macroeconomic
shocks that is likely to lead to higher perceived macroeconomic risk, particularly in developing
countries; this is captured by the realized volatility measures over significant periods of time.

In order to assess the cross-country relationship between private saving rates and macroeconomic
risk, we estimate variants of the following basic regression:

    (1)    ,               ,∙     ,      ,


Where     ,    is the private saving rate (private saving as a % of GDP) in country i at decade t;                ,∙   is
a proxy of macroeconomic risk (for the contemporaneous or previous decade);                       ,   is a vector of
control variables such as real income per capita, and             ,   is an error term. Data on private saving
rates are from the World Economic Outlook; alternatively, we use the household saving rate
from Bebczuk and Cavallo (2014). Risk is measured as the variance of per capita real GDP


5
  Business saving is sometimes referred to as corporate saving, retained earnings, undistributed cash flows, and the
accumulated stock of saving as internal funds, or own funds.
6
  In a recent paper, Bebczuk and Cavallo (2014) compile all the available data from international and national
sources and put together a dataset of private savings along with the two subcomponents. The resulting set is an
unbalanced panel that covers 64 countries with annual data spanning the 1990-2012 period.

                                                          4
growth rate, calculated over a decade. In some specifications, we lag the macroeconomic risk
proxy one period because the precautionary saving motives may operate with a lag.

We start with annual data of private saving rates for 162 countries in the period 1980-20077 and
other macro-economic controls for the same countries over the period 1970-2007. In the case of
private saving rates, for each country we average the annual observations over three non-
overlapping decades (1980s, 1990s and 2000s)8 such that t=decade. For macroeconomic risk, we
compute for each country the standard deviation of annual real GDP per capita growth over the
decade. Therefore, we transform the annual observations for each country into decadal averages.9
The resulting sample comprises a maximum of 396 country/decade observations. More details
about the data sources and some descriptive statistics of the data are provided in Appendix
Tables 1 and 2.

Results for the benchmark regressions are provided in Table 1. The coefficient estimate β in
equation (1) is consistently negative and statistically significant in the reported regressions.10 To
obtain a visual understanding of the results, and to ensure that they are not driven by outliers,
consider figure 1, which plots the partial correlation between               ,   and   ,    (partial in the sense
that we control for income per capita           ,   ) drawn from the regression results shown in column
(1) in Table 1. Country codes are included to give the reader a sense of where different countries
stand; the number next to the three digit country code indexes the decade (i.e., 1 = 1980s; 2 =
1990s and 3 = 2000s). The plot shows a negative correlation between private saving and real
GDP per capita volatility that does not appear to be driven by outliers.11




7
  We obtained data up to 2013, but we exclude the post 2008 period to avoid biasing the averages by the impact of
the global financial crisis.
8
  The averages in the 2000s are taken over the period 2000-2007.
9
  After we transform the data to decadal average, we check for outliers; we drop all the observations that are ± 3
standard deviations from the median of the relevant distribution (25 observations); in addition we dropped 7
observations that were very close to (but within) the 3 standard deviation threshold.
10
   In unreported regressions, in the cases when the coefficient estimate is not negative, it is always statistically
insignificant.
11
   In fact, if we remove the observations with the highest volatility (i.e., KGZ3, LTU3, and LVA3, AGO 3), the
slope of the fitted line will be steeper.

                                                          5
Figure 1: Partial Correlation – Private Saving and Realized Past Volatility




The correlation is not only statistically significant, it is also economically relevant. Based on the
estimated coefficient β, we calculate that a country that is at the 75th percentile of the distribution
of volatility saves on average about 1 percentage point less than a country with median volatility.
To put these number into context: if in Argentina volatility (standard deviation of real GDP
growth = 5.4%) were to fall to the level observed in Mexico (standard deviation of real GDP
growth = 3.6%), then private saving rates in Argentina would be predicted to be 1 percentage
point (of GDP) higher –this is a significant figure for a country where private saving rates have
averaged less than 20 percent of GDP over the three decades—.

The rest of Table 1 includes several iterations of this benchmark specification, using alternative
sets of control variables (and therefore also different sample sizes). Column (2) uses the
contemporaneous measure of risk instead of the lagged measure; column (3) adds the real GDP
per capita growth rate over the period (which is consistently found to be positively correlated
with private saving rates in cross country regressions); column (4) adds in a measure of
competition in the banking sector (motivated by the model described in the next section); and

                                                   6
columns (5)-(7) add proxies for institutional aspects that may affect private saving (again
motivated by our model). The proxies we use here are measuring government stability,
corruption, and law and order. Several other alternative institutional measures are included in
further results available in Appendix Table 4. Our focus, the estimated coefficients for the risk
measures, remain remarkably consistently measured (and statistically significant) in all these
different alterations of the model; even though the sample size changes materially.

We find the same basic relationship between saving rates and risk when, in figure 2, instead of
using private saving rates from WEO we use the household saving rates available for a smaller
set of countries from Bebczuk and Cavallo (2014). Figure 2 shows the results from column (1) in
Table 2, and the rest of the results using household saving as the dependent variable are available
in Table 2 as well. Again, we show several iterations including risk at different lags, and the
inclusion of bank competition/concentration and several institutional measures (the role of
additional institutional measures is estimated and described in Appendix Table 5). Once again,
the results with respect to the measure of risk are very consistent (even though the sample size is
very significantly smaller).

Figure 2: Partial Correlation – Household Saving and Realized Past Volatility




                                                 7
Figure 3 includes the same findings using the private saving information from the WEO, but
limiting the sample to developing countries and transition economies. The full results for this
estimation is provided in column (1) of Table 3. The results reported in columns (ii) and (iii) in
Table 3 are focusing on different sub-samples of the complete dataset, using the private saving as
dependent variable. Equivalent results for household saving are available in Appendix Table 3.
We note that one suggestive finding is that the identified negative correlation between risk and
saving (both private and household) appears mostly to be found in the developing and transition
countries sample. The high-income country sample does not show a similar negative correlation
(the coefficient is positive and statistically insignificant). This finding corresponds with our
theoretical argument, enumerated in the next section, that focuses on the characteristics of
developing countries and the reasons why risk would be negatively, and counter intuitively,
correlated with saving in high-risk, institutionally-weaker economies.

Finally, the last three columns of Table 3 report the results for different combination of fixed
effects on the entire sample: (iii) country fixed effects; (iv) time fixed effects; and (v) country
and time fixed effects. As expected, results including country fixed effects are more imprecisely
estimated due to limited within variation in the short panel;12 however, the negative correlation is
still present in all the regressions.




12
  We average the annual data over decades; therefore at most there are three observations per country in the
panel. Therefore, there is very limited within country variation in the data.

                                                       8
Figure 3: Partial Correlation – Private Saving and Realized Volatility in Developing Countries




In summary, we find that on average private agents save less in countries that are subject to
higher macroeconomic risk. This basic result is robust across samples and specifications. This is
a priori surprising because theory predicts that higher levels of risk should encourage private
saving for precautionary motives; therefore higher realized volatility should lead to higher
average saving rates. However, when financial markets are incomplete, safety nets are shallow,
and institutional safeguards are weak, then private agents may choose other saving options. In
the next section, we describe a simple model that helps to reconcile the theory with this empirical
counter-intuitive regularity.

3.     Informality with macro and individual shocks

Greater political instability and the absence of formal protected saving channels lead households
to rely on substitutes to formal savings. Hoarding gold, jewelry and family heirloom works as an
informal precautionary buffer. Real estate, land and similar durable assets are popular means of
saving in countries with protection of land ownership. In countries with limited protection,
saving in offshore locations with better protection is used frequently as a substitute for local
saving; but offshore access is typically limited to the well-off. An alternative is for households to
self-fund informal firms. These strategies may play important roles in the lives of households

                                                  9
with no access to a well-functioning financial system, a prevalent condition in developing
countries.

Similarly, non-specialized or widely transferable skills (i.e. mechanical skills, nurses, IT skills)
provide an alternative by allowing agents to adjust to shocks by moving across sectors, regions
and countries at times of adverse shocks. Higher educational attainment may reduce the cost of
future learning, providing for more agile precautionary adjustments, and increasing the option
value associated with mobility in bad times. Therefore, in countries that are subject to higher
volatility, agents may prefer to protect themselves by building human capital skills.

In this section, we outline a model that will articulate more formally the role of these channels in
explaining development and household production. We outline a stylized overlapping generation
model focusing on the impact of financial market imperfections on informality, dynasty’s
education and income decisions in the presence of macro uncertainty. The model extends the
Galor and Zeira (1993) framework (see Basu, 1997, for an overview of the model and related
literature).

We assume a two period life span for each member of the household, where consumption - c,
and bequest to the household’s children - q, take place in adulthood, the second and last period of
life. Each generation lives for two periods. In the first period, youth, children have the
opportunity to enter the labor force as unskilled workers, earning in both periods of their life the

low unskilled wage, wu . Alternatively, they may acquire in period I human capital at expense h,

thereby becoming skilled workers in period II, having the capacity to run and mange a family
business, referred to also as the family firm. The cost h covers the expenses of formal education,
or informal education via learning by doing, or an apprenticeship. Their investment in human
capital is funded and determined by their parents, aiming at maximizing a utility that depends
both on parental consumption, and parental bequest to their children.

In the second period, adulthood, unskilled workers will keep earning the low unskilled wage, wu .

The educated workers are employed as skilled workers, running the family firm. They either
take on an existing family business (replacing their parent), or start a ‘greenfield’ family firm.
The second period is also the time when children are raised, bequest and children’s education
decisions are made.
                                                  10
Households’ utility u is a Cobb Douglas aggregator with consumption and bequest weights of 
and 1 - , respectively. To simplify the analysis, we assume that consumption takes place only
in adulthood:
   (1)    u  c  q 1 ,

The productivity of the family firm reflects the status as either an established/formal or a
greenfield/informal firm, denoted by a  , and the macro shock,  m .

Specifically, parents that operated an established family firm may transfer intangible capital to
the family firm run by their educated descendents. Henceforth we index these households by
  e (e for established). This intangible capital reflects the advantage associated with an
established family firm - clientele, reputation, legal status etc. - increasing the firm’s productivity
at a rate of a above the productivity of a ‘greenfield,’ new firm ( a  0 ). Thus, history matters by
determining the direct bequest - q, and the family firm’s productivity. Parents working as
unskilled workers in adulthood may invest in the human capital of their children, enabling them
to operate a ‘greenfield’ family firm, indexed by   g .

At this stage, we ignore the possibility of simultaneous investment in human and physical
capital, and other forms of market imperfections. In the Appendix we study the impact of adding
investment in tangible capital, and the presence of borrowing constraint due to limited
pledgeability of capital as collateral. The Appendix shows that these added features do not
impact the qualitative results of our model.

The benchmark model assumes that households’ skilled adults are endowed with one unit of
specific capital, the output of which is

   (2) a (1   m ),


where a denotes the firm’s productivity:


     A             ' greenfield' family firm   for    g
     
a                                                              ;
      A(1  a)                                             e
                     established family firm for


                                                      11
The term  m is the macro shocks:  m   in booms, or  m   in recessions, 0    1 . To

simplify, we assume that macro shocks are independently distributed over time, with equal
probabilities of recessions and booms.

The Cobb-Douglas utility implies that a household’s second period income, y, is divided
between consumption, c, and bequest, q:

(3)        c   y; q  (1   ) y , and U   y ,     (1   )1 .

The household’s income reflects the education choices, being y u ( y s ) if the children work as

unskilled (skilled) workers, respectively:

(4)                yu  (q  wu )(1  r )  wu


              (q  h)(1  r )  ax (1   m ) if q  h
              
(4’)     ys                                           .
              (q  h)(1  i )  a (1   ) if q  h
                                 x       m



The household’s education decisions can be reduced to maximize the second period expected
income. If the household self-finances the education [i.e., if q > h], the second period income
from the bequest net of h would be ( q  h )(1  r ) . If the household funds the education by
borrowing q – h, the second period income would drop by the debt service, ( q  h )(1  i ) .
Thereby, the household would educate their children only if

         (q  wu )(1  r )  wu  ax  (h  q)(1  i)         for h  q
(5)                                                                       .
         (q  wu )(1  r )  wu  ax  (q  h)(1  r )        for h  q

We focus on the case where the unskilled wage is low, and the financial system is
underdeveloped to such a degree that investment in human capital pays for a household that can
self-finance it. Yet, the poorest households would find the financial spread too prohibitive;
thereby their children would be unskilled. This would be the case when
A  h(1  i )  wu (2  r )  A  h(1  r ) .




                                                         12
Figure 4 plots the association between the children’s bequest and their expected income in
adulthood, as reflected by equations (4) and (4’). The solid line, Y(u), plots the expected
unskilled household income as a function of its bequest. The dotted line, Y(s, greenfield) plots
the expected income of a skilled household engaging in greenfield investment, where the parents
were unskilled, hence the productivity of the resultant firm is A. The broken line, Y(s,
established) plots the expected income of a skilled household running their household established
firm, where the parents were skilled workers running the family firm, with productivity A(1 + a).

The slope of the Y(s, ..) line is 1  i in the range where the education expense is co-funded by
borrowing (where q < h), and 1  r if the education is self-funded.




Figure 4: bequest and expected adulthood income




Maximizing the expected income implies that unskilled households contemplating greenfield
investment would fund it only if the bequest exceeds the threshold qu ; whereas households with
established firms would fund their children’s education and keep the family firm if the bequest
exceeds the threshold qs. The gap between the two thresholds reflects the ‘head start’ advantage
of established firms.




                                                 13
We denote by q1 the expected bequest in adulthood of a household with parental bequest q. The
bequest dynamics can be inferred by using equations (1)-(5). For households that invest in
human capital, equations (3) and (5) imply that:

           q1  (1   )[ax (1   m )  (q  h)(1  i )]        for h  q
(6)                                                                           .
           q1  (1   )[ax (1   m )  (q  h)(1  r )]        for h  q

For households supplying the unskilled labor, the bequest dynamics is:

(7)     q1  (1   )[(q  wu )(1  r )  wu ] .

Equations (6) and (7) allow us to characterize the dynamics of the system.

Case 1: No Uncertainty; no Productivity Advantage

To simplify, we focus first on the benchmark case where there is no macro uncertainty,   0 ,
and there is no productivity advantage to ‘established’ firms, a = 0. Unskilled households would
be equally indifferent to investing in their children versus staying unskilled if the two options are
associated with the same expected future income: A  (q  h)(1  i )  wu (2  r ) . This equality

defined a bequest threshold of qu, below which children will be unskilled workers,

           A  wu (2  r )
qu  h                    . The threshold bequest level qu increases with the cost of external
               1 i
financing i, with the education cost h, and the with opportunity cost of education, the unskilled
wage.

We assume that dq1 / dq  (1   )(1  r )  1 , as is the case when the marginal propensity to

bequest across generations is below 1; and that dq1 / dq  (1   )(1  i )  1 , as is the case when
the borrowing interest rate is large, so that marginal investment financed externally reduces the
bequest by more than one. In these circumstances, the dynamic bequest lines may cross the 45
degree ray 3 times, at points ql , q* , and qh , as is depicted by Figure 5. Henceforth we will
focus on this case, as it provides a rich benchmark associated with multiple equilibria, where the
dynamics of households are determined by their initial income. The cases where the dynamic




                                                             14
bequest curve has a unique intersection with the 45 degree ray can be analyzed as limiting cases
of this framework.

Figure 5: Bequest dynamics, no macroeconomic uncertainty




The dynamic evolution of relatively poor households, q < qu , summarized by equation (7), is
depicted by the dotted curve intersecting the 45 degree ray at ql. This intercept is the long run
equilibrium of the poorer households - their initial low wealth propagates low wage, an unskilled
equilibrium for their dynasty. For h > q > qu, the bequest is high enough to induce households to
educate their children, co-funded by external borrowing. The intertemporal bequest dynamics of
these households are portrayed by the bold curve, intersecting the 45 degree ray at q = q*. For
relatively affluent households, q > h, thereby the human capital investment is self-financed, and
the marginal propensity to bequest across generations is dq1 / dq  (1   )(1  r ) . The bequest
dynamics of these households is depicted by the third, bold segment, intersecting the 45 degree
ray at q = qh.

The key message of Galor and Zeira (1993) is summarized by figure 5: differential bequests
across otherwise identical households may lead to divergent long run outcomes, where the long
run equilibrium is characterized by a bipolar distribution of unskilled poor households
converging to q = ql , and skilled relatively affluent ones converging to q = qh. In the absence of
uncertainty, households whose bequest exceeds q* will educate their children, converging
overtime to the high bequest equilibrium, where q = qh. In contrast, households whose bequest


                                                 15
is below q* will converge overtime to the low bequest equilibrium, where q = ql. Point q* is an
unstable equilibrium. In the absence of macro shocks, households below q* (above q*) will
converge to the low bequest, unskilled equilibrium at ql (high bequest, skilled equilibrium at qh),
respectively.

In the context of the model, the bequests are the saving of the households over that period.
Therefore, if the private saving rate in a period is above a threshold, overtime the saving rate of
will converge to a relatively high steady state equilibrium. Instead, if the saving rate is below the
threshold, then the saving rate will converge overtime to a lower steady state equilibrium.

Case 2: Productivity Advantage for Established Firms

The above analysis focused on the case of a = 0, which is also the situation facing ‘unskilled
households’ – households where parents were employed as unskilled labor, thereby investing h
in their children would result in a greenfield investment. Suppose now that a > 0, thereby,
established firms have a productivity advantage. Similar analysis applies for the established
households, where past investment in the family firm provides productivity bonus a, thus
a x  A(1  a) . We review this case with the help of Figure 6, where the lower three segments
curve describes the bequest dynamics of the unskilled households, depicted earlier in Figure 5.
Applying (6) and (7), a bonus a shifts upwards the second and the third segments of the dynamic
bequest curves of the ‘established’ households above that of the unskilled households, from the
bold segments in Figure 3 to the lighter dotted segments. Thus, the threshold q* shifts for the
‘established’ households leftwards to q’. The children of ‘established’ households, for q above
q’, will keep educating their children, converging to the ‘relative affluent,’ skilled long run
equilibrium at point qe. In contrast, the children of unskilled households, for bequest q in the
range q’ < q < qu, will end up unskilled, and their dynasty will converge to a long run
equilibrium of relative low saving at point ql.

Applying (6), we infer that an unstable equilibrium is the solution for
q  (1   )[a x  (q  h)(1  i )] , the value of which differs between the skilled and the unskilled
households:



                                                   16
                    (1   )[h(1  i)  A(1  a)]                  (1   )[h(1  i)  A]
(8)          q'                                  ; and     q* 
                          (1   )(1  i)  1                        (1   )(1  i)  1

Higher productivity of the household firm and lower financial spread reduce q’ and q*, thereby
increasing the range of ‘specialized’ skilled households, and the mass of the households that will
converge to the high bequest, skilled equilibrium.13

Adding the productivity advantage of ‘established’ household also changes the dynamics of
‘unskilled’ households, as educating their kids would switch the household status from
‘greenfield’ to an ‘established’ one. Thereby, for q > qu, the bequest of their educated children
at their adulthood, q+1, will be determined along the dotted and lighter mid segment (the one
intersecting the 45 degree ray at q = q’), as the grandchildren of the ‘uneducated’ households
will be born to already ‘established’ households. This in turn implies that all households whose
bequest is above qu will converge to a ‘relative affluent’ equilibrium, qe. History matters:
established households, whose bequest q is on the ‘bold line’ (i.e., q’< q < qu), will converge to
the high bequest, relative affluent long run equilibrium. Equal bequest q by the unskilled parents
will not be enough to support investment in human capital, and these households will converge
to the unskilled, low bequest, unskilled long run equilibrium, where q = ql.

Figure 6: Established versus ‘greenfield’ household bequest dynamics




13
     Lower financing costs i will increase the range of specialized skilled household as long as (1   )ax  h , as
will tend to be the case for relatively productive firms.


                                                            17
In summary, adding a productivity advantage for established firms does not change the key
message of Galor and Zeira (1993): differential bequests across otherwise identical households
may lead to divergent long run outcomes. The main difference though is that the long run
equilibrium is characterized by a multipolar distribution; and in this case, the same bequest (i.e.,
saving) could lead to different long-run equilibriums.

Case 3: Macro Shocks

The above analysis sets the ground for dealing with macro shocks. So far, we covered the case
where the dynamic bequest curves focused on the association of the bequest provided by the
parents in period I, q, and the expected bequest provided by their children in adulthood in period
II, q+1, to the grandkids of the grandparents giving the bequest in period I. We focus now on the
impact of the realized macro shocks taking place in period II on the actual bequest determined in
period II, drawing now the association between the bequest in period I, and the actual bequest in
period II, determined after the realization of the macro shock in period II.

Consider first the impact of a recession shock impacting the economy at time +1 (period II of the
generation born in period I),  m   . Equation (6) implies that the recession shock shifts the

second and the third segment downwards by A . The impact of the shift is reported in Figure 7.
The 3 bold segments are the benchmark, reporting the dynamic adjustment of the ‘established’
household in the absence of macro shocks, which coincides also with the expected dynamic
adjustment. Households with a bequest exceeding q’ will converge over time to the relatively

                                                 18
affluent ‘established’ equilibrium associated with bequest qh, whereas households with bequest
below q’ will converge overtime to the unskilled, low saving equilibrium with bequest ql. The
adverse macro shock shifts the two upper segments of the bequest curve q downwards, to the
                                                                        +
dotted lines. Consequently, the critical value of the bequest level dividing the households into
the long-run unskilled, and the skilled equilibria shifts rightwards, from q’ to q”. Households
whose bequest q is in the bold segment defined by q’ < q < q” will have converged to the skilled,
high bequest equilibrium in the absence of the recession shock. Following the recession shock,
these households will converge to the unskilled, low bequest and low income equilibrium, where
q = ql. If macro shocks are persistent, the recessionary shock may induce large costs, pushing
the mass of households in the bold segment towards to the ‘low saving’ equilibrium.

Figure 7: adverse macro shocks and the dynamics of the ‘greenfield’ households




A similar analysis applies for the ‘unskilled’ households. In terms of Figure 6, the recession
shock shifts the two segments associated with investment in human capital
downwards/rightwards, resulting in higher values of the equilibrium thresholds qs , q’ , qu , and
q*. The recession shock implies the rise of ‘recession children,’ in households that flipped their
status from skilled, converging towards higher income, to unskilled, converging towards low
saving.


                                                19
In short, the impact of recurrent negative shocks is to move the relevant thresholds to the right;
meaning that for any given bequest (i.e., saving over the period) it is more likely that a household
will end up in the low saving equilibrium. This will push a larger mass of individuals to the low
saving equilibrium; thereby resulting in a lower aggregate private saving rate in the economy.
Therefore, a key insight of this model is that higher volatility may lead to lower aggregate saving
rates. This is not at odds with precautionary saving theory; it simply expands the theory to
encompass other modes of ‘precautionary’ behavior by private agents.

Case 4: Migration and Remittances

In bad times, deeper family networking allows selected members to move to other countries or
provinces, sending back home remittances, while the extended household compensates for their
absence by reallocation of chores at the level of in-household and informal firm production. This
mechanism provides precautionary insurance, at times when the informal family firm may face
losses stemming from a recessionary decline in demand and prices. Furthermore, the higher
saving may allow further self-investment in the family firm. One may view this as a family level
financial intermediation; activities that tend to be under reported as they are done within the
extended household production. The macroeconomic importance of this channel was highlighted
by the IDB (2011) report. It provides information about the growth and persistence of remittance
flows to Latin American and Caribbean the 2000s.14 Frequently, educated and experienced
workers have access to better outside options, buffering the household with remittance income.

We describe now the way an outside option of temporary immigration may impact the effect of
the recession shock. For simplicity, assume that each family has two children. The firm’s output
(2) takes place if both siblings are employed, dropping to a (1   m ) if only one runs the family

firm.15 Specifically, suppose that each of the two siblings in a household that invested in their


14
     Remittances flows to LAC increased from US$ 28 billion in 2003, peaking at US$ 65 billion in 2008, dropping to
US$ 56 billion in 2009, and recovering more than half of the drop within two years, reaching US$ 61 billion in
2011.
15
     For example, let us denote the household effort in the family firm by L, and normalize the effort supplied by all
household members to 1. Thereby, the household firm produces a (1   m )        1 with a full household effort,
dropping to    a (1   m ) 0.5 if only half of the household’s effort is devoted to the firm. This may be the case in

                                                            20
human capital can also provide remittances of wo by working as a guest worker. Assume also
that in good times, both siblings are better off running the family business, but in recessions, they
would benefit by sending one of them to exploit the outside option. This would be the case for
the ‘established household’ if A(1  a)(1   )  A(1  a)(1   )  wo .

In these circumstances, the established family firm would be run and maintained by one of the
siblings; the other would support the household by remittances. Exploiting the outside option
mitigates the recessionary shock, increasing the household income in bad times by
wo  A(1   )(1  a)(1   ) , shifting upwards the dotted segments in Figure 7, mitigating the

adverse consequences of the recession. Large enough wo and  would reduce the mass of the
households in the bold section, households that otherwise would be pushed from skilled status
towards low saving.

4.      Concluding Remarks

We explored what we view as a fundamental puzzle in our understanding of the motivations for
saving as they manifest in countries characterized by institutional and regulatory environments
and constraints that are frequently found in the developing world. In particular, we have focused
on the observed but counter-intuitive negative correlation between volatility and private sector
saving. The standard view hypothesizes a positive correlation, in that private actors living in
countries with a more volatile macro-economy or higher aggregate risk are expected to engage in
more precautionary behavior and save more. In fact, we observe that the statistical association is
reversed, and we find lower private saving rates observed in more volatile places.

We suggest a theoretical model that incorporates the limiting institutional environment that
characterizes middle- and low-income countries, and explore the implications of these
constraints to private sector saving behavior. The private sector is modeled as an interaction of
consuming households with family-owned informal firms who themselves attempt to maximize
their lifetime income (including a bequest motive).




a divided household, if during a recession half of the household immigrates and works as a guest worker, thereby
  0.5  0.71 .
                                                        21
Two important issues merit further consideration. First, our theoretical and empirical analysis
assumed that the degree of aggregate risk is not itself dependent on the private sector’s saving
choices. Low-skilled intensive production, for example, might be more exposed to terms-of-trade
shocks, so the implied saving and precautionary saving and investment decisions of
household/firms do have an impact on aggregate volatility and future risk. There are, therefore,
good reasons to motivate a more complete investigation of the feedback mechanisms between
the two aggregates that this paper focused on.

Second, we expect that some of the considerations outlined above will change in more open
economies. Our model assumed some form of international labor mobility (in the last section),
but we did not examine the implications of more open capital markets. Further capital market
openness may ameliorate some of the programs inherent in the shallow credit markets of lower
income countries, but may also generate further sources of volatility that needs to be accounted
for. To summarize, our central message is that the interaction between saving behavior, broadly
construed, and aggregate risk and uncertainty, may be more complex than is frequently assumed,
and we aimed to demonstrate that using both the observed empirical regularities and a formal
model.




                                                 22
References

Aizenman, J., and Marion, N. 1999. Volatility and Investment: Interpreting Evidence from
Developing Countries. Economica 66(262):157-79.

Basu, K. 1997. Analytical Development Economics: The Less Developed Economy Revisited.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bebczuk, R., and E. Cavallo. 2014. Is Business Saving Really None of Our Business? IDB
Working Paper No. 523. Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Busso M., M. V. Fazio, and S. Levy. 2012. (In)Formal and (Un)Productive: The Productivity
Costs of Excessive Informality in Mexico. IDB Working Paper No. 341. Inter-American
Development Bank, Washington, DC.
Cronqvist, H., and S. Siegel. 2015. The Origins of Savings Behavior. Journal of Political
Economy 123(1): 123-169.
D’Erasmo P., and H. J. M. Boedo. 2012. Financial Structure, Informality and Development.
Journal of Monetary Economics 59(3): 286–302.
Fogli, A., and F. Perri. 2015. Macroeconomic Volatility and External Imbalances. Journal of
Monetary Economics. Forthcoming.
Galor, O., and Y. Zeira. 1993. Income Distribution and Macroeconomics. Review of Economic
Studies 60: 35-52.
Gourio, F. 2012. Disaster Risk and Business Cycles. American Economic Review, 102(6): 2734-
66.
Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent. 2010. Wanting Robustness in Macroeconomics. Handbook of
Monetary Economics 3: 1097-57.
Inter-American Development Bank. 2011. Remittances to Latin America and the Caribbean in
2011. Multilateral Investment Fund, Washington, DC.
La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer. 2008. The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39(2): 275-363.
Loayza, N. 1996. The Economics of the Informal Sector: A Simple Model and Some Empirical
Evidence from Latin America. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 45: 129-
162.
Maloney, W. 2004. Informality Revisited. World Development 32: 1159–1178.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, R. Barro, and J. Ursúa. 2013. Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical
Model of Consumption Disasters. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(3): 35-74
Perry, G. E., W. F. Maloney, O.S. Arias, P. Fajnzylber, A.D. Mason, and J. Saavedra-Chanduvi.
2007. Informality: Exit and Exclusion. World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                               23
Pratap, S., and E. Quintin. 2006. The Informal Sector in Developing Countries: Output, Assets
and Employment. Research Paper UNU-WIDER No. 2006/130. United Nations University,
Helsinki.

Skinner, J. 1988. Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption and Precautionary Savings. Journal of
Monetary Economics, 22(2), 237-255.

Zeldes, S. P. 1989. Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Certainty
Equivalence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2): 275-298.




                                              24
                                                               Table 1: Private Saving and Risk
                                                       Dependent variable is Private Saving over GDP
Regressor                                 (i)               (ii)            (iii)          (iv)        (v)                                    (vi)                (vii)
                                       ‐0.51***                          ‐0.65***        ‐0.42**    ‐0.43***                                ‐0.42**             ‐0.45***
Risk (t‐1)
                                        (0.00)                             (0.00)         (0.01)     (0.01)                                  (0.01)              (0.01)
                                                          ‐0.37**
Risk (t)
                                                           (0.05)
                                                                          0.97***
RGDP per cap growth (t)
                                                                           (0.00)
                                                                                        ‐0.07***
Bank Concentration (t)
                                                                                          (0.01)
                                                                                                     0.65**
Government Stability (t)
                                                                                                     (0.02)
                                                                                                                                              0.26
Corruption (t)
                                                                                                                                             (0.56)
                                                                                                                                                               1.42***
Law and Order (t)
                                                                                                                                                                (0.00)
                                      0.17***              0.17***             0.14***             0.14***             0.12***             0.12***               0.02
Real GDP per capita (t)
                                       (0.00)               (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.01)              (0.64)
                                      16.44***             15.75***            15.59***            21.50***            12.31***            16.29***            12.92***
Constant
                                       (0.00)               (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)

Observations                              335                 382                 335                 210                 278                 278                  278
R‐squared                                 0.13                0.09                0.22                0.15                0.12                0.10                 0.14
Thi s ta bl e reports res ul ts rel a ti ng a vera ge pri va te s a vi ng ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. Al l regres s i ons control for Rea l GDP per ca pi ta (l evel ).
Dependi ng on the s peci fi ca ti ons , the regres s i ons a l s o control for rea l GDP per ca pi ta (growth ra te), i ndex of ba nki ng s ector concentra ti on,
proxi es of i ns ti tuti ona l qua l i ty from ICRG. The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 peri od; however a nnua l da ta wa s tra ns formed i nto deca da l
a vera ges . Method of es ti ma ti on i s Pool ed OLS. Al l s peci fi ca ti ons a re es ti ma ted wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors (p va l ues i n pa renthes i s ). *, **,
*** i ndi ca te s i gni fi ca nce a t the 10%, 5% a nd 1% l evel s , res pecti vel y.




                                                                                     25
                                                           Table 2: Household Saving and Risk
                                                    Dependent variable is Household Saving over GDP
Regressor                                 (i)             (ii)           (iii)         (iv)         (v)                                      (vi)                (vii)
                                        ‐0.38                           ‐0.46        ‐0.45**      ‐0.43*                                    ‐0.39               ‐0.49*
Risk (t‐1)
                                        (0.10)                          (0.13)        (0.01)      (0.08)                                    (0.14)              (0.05)
                                                        ‐0.29*
Risk (t)
                                                         (0.10)
                                                                         0.19
RGDP per cap growth (t)
                                                                        (0.56)
                                                                                      ‐0.04
Bank Concentration (t)
                                                                                      (0.32)
                                                                                                  ‐0.80*
Government Stability (t)
                                                                                                  (0.06)
                                                                                                                                             0.71
Corruption (t)
                                                                                                                                            (0.23)
                                                                                                                                                                1.10**
Law and Order (t)
                                                                                                                                                                (0.02)
                                        ‐0.02                0.00               ‐0.02               0.00                ‐0.03               ‐0.07*             ‐0.10**
Real GDP per capita (t)
                                        (0.56)              (0.93)              (0.54)             (0.91)              (0.43)               (0.09)              (0.05)
                                       9.47***             8.26***             9.28***            10.89***            16.37***             7.81***             6.32***
Constant
                                        (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)              (0.00)

Observations                              94                 103                  94                  79                  88                   88                  88
R‐squared                                0.03                0.02                0.04                0.10                0.06                 0.05                0.07
Thi s ta bl e reports res ul ts rel a ti ng a vera ge hous ehol d s a vi ng ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. Al l regres i ons control for Rea l GDP per ca pi ta l
(l evel ). Dependi ng on the s peci fi ca ti ons , the regres s i ons a l s o control for rea l GDP per ca pi ta (growth ra te), i ndex of ba nki ng s ector
concentra ti on, proxi es of i ns i tuti ona l qua l i ty from ICRG. The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 peri od; however a nnua l da ta wa s tra ns formed i nto
deca da l a vera ges . Method of es ti ma ti on i s Pool ed OLS. Al l s peci fi ca ti ons a re es ti ma ted wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors (p va l ues i n pa renthes i s ).
*, **, *** i ndi ca te s i gni fi ca nce a t the 10%, 5% a nd 1% l evel s , res pecti vel y.




                                                                                     26
                   Table 3: Private Saving and Risk, alternative specifications
                        Dependent variable is Private Saving over GDP
Regressor                      (i)            (ii)            (iii)         (iv)          (v)
                            ‐0.50***         0.42            ‐0.22       ‐0.52***        ‐0.16
Risk (t‐1)
                             (0.00)         (0.44)          (0.25)         (0.00)       (0.37)
                            0.39***        ‐0.17***         ‐0.20*        0.17***      ‐0.38***
Real GDP per capita (t)
                             (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.06)         (0.00)       (0.00)
                            15.32***       24.81***       27.46***       16.33***     36.51***
Constant
                             (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.00)
                        Developing & Advanced
Sample                                                  All Countries All Countries All Countries
                          Transition     Economies
Country Fixed Effects          NO             NO              YES           NO            YES
Time Fixed Effects             NO             NO              NO            YES           YES

Observations                             259                  76                 335                335                 335
R‐squared                                0.06                0.17                0.82               0.13                0.83
Thi s ta bl e reports res ul ts rel a ti ng a vera ge pri va te s a vi ng ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. The regres s i ons
control for rea l GDP per ca pi ta l (l evel ). Col umn (i ) corres ponds to the s ubs a mpl e of devel opi ng a nd
tra ns i ti on economi es ; col umn (i i ) corres ponds to the s ubs a mpl e of a dva nced economi es ; Col umn (i i i ) i s the
regres s i on wi th country fi xed effects ; col umn (i v) i s the regres s i on wi th ti me fi xed effects ; a nd col umn (v) i s
the regres s i on wi th country a nd ti me fi xed effects . The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 peri od; however a nnua l
da ta wa s tra ns formed i nto deca da l a vera ges . Method of es ti ma ti on i s Pool ed OLS, i ncl udi ng dummi es for FE.
Al l s peci fi ca ti ons a re es ti ma ted wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors (p va l ues i n pa renthes i s ). *, **, *** i ndi ca te
s i gni fi ca nce a t the 10%, 5% a nd 1% l evel s , res pecti vel y.




                                                                       27
Appendix

      I.       Theory

This appendix extends the model outlined in Section 2. First, we allow for investment in
physical capital, K. Next, we modify the assumptions governing financial intermediation,
focusing on the case where borrowers face a credit ceiling determined by the pledgeability of
capital.

A1.        Investment in physical capital

Consider the case where the household firm production function, (2) in the paper, is modified by
adding capital, K:

(A1) a (1   m ) K

The timing of investment is similar to the benchmark model: the parents are investing today in
the human and physical capital of their children. In their adulthood, the parental investment will
allow the children to operate the family firm. For simplicity, we assume that physical capital
depreciates fully at the end of each production period, while the intangible firm specific capital
does not. We maintain all the other assumptions. The income of the household investing in the
family firm, (4’), is modified to:

                (q  h  K )(1  r )  a x (1   m ) if q  h  K
                
(A2)       ys                                                     .
                (q  h  K )(1  i )  a (1   ) if q  h  K
                                        x        m



The modified expected bequest dynamics are:

                   q1  (1   )[a x (1   m ) K  (q  h  K )(1  i )]   for   hK  q
(A3)                                                                                         .
                   q1  (1   )[a x (1   m )  (q  h  K )(1  r )]     for   hK  q

For the household supplying the unskilled labor, the bequest dynamics remain

(A4)       q1  (1   )[(q  wu )(1  r )  wu ] .




                                                           28
The household that invests in the family firm chooses the physical capital K by maximizing the
expected next period household income. With Cobb Douglas preferences, this is also akin to
maximizing the expected future bequest, the right hand side of (A3), resulting in the following
first order conditions:

                  ax
            K                    for    hK  q
                2(1  i )
(A5)                                                                .
                  ax
            K                    for    hK  q
                2(1  r )

Applying them to (A3) the bequest dynamic equations can be reduced to


           q1  (1   )[
                             a x 2 (1   m )  (q  h)(1  i)]       for   hK  q
                                 2(1  i )
(A3’)                                                                                   .
           q1
                            a 2 (1   m )  (q  h)(1  r )]
                  (1   )[ x                                          for   hK  q
                                 2(1  r )

Note that the bequest dynamics (A3’) are almost identical to the ones in section 2, replacing the

firms output in (7), a x (1   m ) , with the firm’s output net of physical capital cost,
                                                                                             ax 2 (1   m )
                                                                                                 2(1  i )

or
     ax 2 (1   m ) (the first is the case for external financing, the second is the case for internal
        2(1  r )
financing). Consequently, the discussion of Section 2 remains applicable with endogenous fiscal
capital.

A2.        Collateral constraints

We conclude the appendix extending the analysis to the case where the supply of credit is subject
to collateral constraints. Specifically, assume that the legal system provides creditors with
limited protection in the form of a collateral constraint - a fraction  ,   1 of future output is
pledgeable. Thereby, the supply of credit at cost i is subject to the constraint that future
repayment will not exceed a fraction  of the expected firm’s output


(A6)       (h  K  q)(1  i)  a K .


                                                              29
We maintain all the other assumptions. For a high enough bequest, or for a high enough  , the
collateral constraint is not binding, and the analysis above holds. In terms of Figure 4, the first
and the last segments of the intertemporal bequest curve are not impacted by the collateral
contestant. If the collateral constraint is not binding at the low bequest levels, inducing
households to switch from ‘unskilled’ to ‘skilled’ workers running the family firm, than the
presence of the collateral constraint does not change the above analysis.

Consider now that the collateral constraint binds at the bequest threshold associated with the
switch from unskilled to skilled households (qu or qs in terms of Figure 3). As long as the
collateral constraint binds, the constraint defines the stock of capital as an implicit quadratic
function of the bequest and of other parameters:

(A7) (h  K  q)(1  i)  a K .

Solving the quadratic equation, we find that

                a           a 
                                         2          
(A8)    K  0.5                    4(q  h)  .
               1  i          1  i              
                                                   

The dynamics of the bequest in the range where the collateral constraint binds are given by

(A9) q1  (1   )[ a  (1   m ) K  ( K  h  q )(1  i )]   for   ( h  K  q )(1  i )  a  (1   m ) K .


Applying (A7) and (A8) to (A9), collecting terms, we infer that the intertemporal bequest
dynamics, q1  f (q) , are given by

(A10)


                            a                  a 
                                                        2      
q1  (1)(1)a (1m)0.5                    4(q h)         for (h K q)(1i) a (1m) K
                            1i                  1i        
                                                              




                                                          30
Thereby, as long as the collateral constraint binds, the second segment of the dynamic bequest is
upward sloping and concave: q1 'q  0;             q1 "q  0 . For a bequest high enough to relax the
constraint, the bequest curve becomes linear.

Applying the above, we conclude that for a high enough collateral rate,  , the constraint is not
binding, and the bequest curves are identical to the ones depicted in Figures 3 and 4, piecewise-
linear. For a low enough  , once the constraint is binding, the mid-segment is concave, as is
depicted by the bold curve in Figure 5, where Kr is the demand for capital at interest rate r,
corresponding to the case of self-funded capital. Depending on the parameters’ values, the last
segment may also start at q below h + K, as is depicted by the dotted segments.

Subject to this modification, the logic of the discussion in Section 2 continues to hold, and
adding collateral constraints does not impact the qualitative results of our analysis.16




16
     Once binding, the collateral constraint may impact the quantitative results – a tighter constraint (a lower    ) will
increase the bequest associated with switching from unskilled to skilled households [higher qs and qu in Figure 3],

and will tend to increase the values of q’ and q*.



                                                             31
Figure A1: collateral constraints and the bequest dynamics.

    II.          Data and Tables

Appendix Table 1: Data Sources

       Variable                                                 Description                                                     Source
    Private Saving       Percentage units of GDP                                                                      WEO Database 2014
  Household Saving       Percentage units of GDP                                                                      Bebczuk and Cavallo (2014)

          Risk           Standard deviation of yearly real GDP per capita growth rate                                 WDI Database

   GDP per capita        Constant 2000 USD                                                                            WDI Database

        Bank             Assets of three largest commercial banks as a share of total commercial banking
                                                                                                                      Bankscope
    concentration        assets.
                         An assessment of the government’s ability to carry out its declared program(s), and its
     Government          ability to stay in office. The risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents
                                                                                                                      ICRG: TABLE 3B
       Stability         (Government Unity, Legislative Strength & Popular Support). A score of 12 points
                         equates to very low risk and a score of 0 points to very high risk.
                         An assessment of the socioeconomic pressures at work in society that could constrain
   Socioeconomic         government action or fuel social dissatisfaction. The risk rating assigned is the sum of
                                                                                                                      ICRG: TABLE 3B
     Conditions          three subcomponents (Unemployment, Consumer Confidence & Poverty), A score of
                         12 points equates to very low risk and a score of 0 points to very high risk.
                         An assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment that are not covered by
                         other political, economic and financial risk components. The risk rating assigned is the
  Investment Profile     sum of three subcomponents (Contract Viability/Expropiation, Profits Repatriation &          ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         Payment Delays). A score of 12 points equates to very low risk and a score of 0 points
                         to very high risk.
                         An assessment of political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact on
                         governance. The risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents (Civil
   Internal Conflict                                                                                                  ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         War/Coup Threat, Terrorism/Political Violence & Civil Disorder). A score of 12 points
                         equates to very low risk and a score of 0 points to very high risk.
                         The external conflict measure is an assessment both of the risk to the incumbent
                         government from foreign action, ranging from non‐violent external pressure
                         (diplomatic pressures, withholding of aid, trade restrictions, territorial disputes,
   External Conflict     sanctions, etc) to violent external pressure (cross‐border conflicts to all‐out war). The    ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents (War, Cross‐Border Conflict &
                         Foreign Pressures). A score of 12 points equates to very low risk and a score of 0
                         points to very high risk.
      Corruption         An assessment of corruption within the political system.                                     ICRG: TABLE 3B

                         Lower risk ratings indicate a greater degree of military participation in politics and a
  Military in Politics                                                                                                ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         higher level of political risk.
                         Religious tensions may stem from the domination of society and/or governance by a
                         single religious group that seeks to replace civil law by religious law and to exclude
  Religion in Politics   other religions from the political and/or social process; the desire of a single religious   ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         group to dominate governance; the suppression of religious freedom; the desire of a
                         religious group to express its own identity, separate from the country as a whole.
                         Law and Order are assessed separately, with each sub‐component comprising zero to
                         three points. The Law sub‐component is an assessment of the strength and
   Law and Order                                                                                                      ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         impartiality of the legal system, while the Order sub‐component is an assessment of
                         popular observance of the law.
                         An assessment of the degree of tension within a country attributable to racial,
   Ethnic Tensions       nationality, or language divisions. Lower ratings are given to countries where racial        ICRG: TABLE 3B
                         and nationality tensions are high.
     Democratic
                         Measures how responsive is the government to its people.                                     ICRG: TABLE 3B
    Accountability
                         High points are given to countries where the bureaucracy has the strength and
     Bureaucracy
                         expertise to govern without drastic changes in policy or interruptions in government         ICRG: TABLE 3B
       Quality
                         services.


                                                                        32
WDI: World Development Indicators, World Bank.
WEO: World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund.
ICRG: International Country Risk Guide Published by The PRS Group.




                                                     Appendix Table 2: Sample Summary Statistics

                                           mean                min                p25               p50                p75                max                 sd                 N
Private Saving                             15.8                ‐6.4               10.9              16.4               21.2               38.5                7.8               382
Household Saving                            7.6                ‐4.0                4.7               7.1               10.2               23.9                5.0               103
Risk                                        3.5                 0.5                1.7               2.9                4.6               16.0                2.4               388
Real GDP per capita                         8.2                 0.1                0.7               2.6               10.3               64.0               11.9               388
RGDP per cap Growth                         1.7                ‐9.9                0.1               1.8                3.2               13.9                2.8               388
Government Stability                        7.6                 2.6                6.6               7.6                8.8               11.2                1.7               306
Corruption                                  3.1                 0.0                2.2               3.0                4.0                6.0                1.3               306
Law and Order                               3.7                 0.8                2.5               3.7                5.0                6.0                1.4               306
Socieconomic conditions                      5.7                0.4               4.4                5.6                6.9               10.7                1.9               306
Investment Profile                           7.2                2.1               5.8                6.9                8.4               11.8                2.1               306
Internal Conflict                            8.8                0.4               7.4                9.3               10.7               12.0                2.4               306
External Conflict                            9.7                1.5               8.9               10.2               11.1               12.0                1.9               306
Military in Politics                         3.8                0.0               2.4                4.0                5.2                6.0                1.7               306
Religion in Politics                         4.6                0.1               4.0                5.0                5.5                6.0                1.3               306
Ethnic Conflict                              3.9                0.0               3.0                4.0                5.0                6.0                1.3               306
Democratic Accountability                    3.8                0.2               2.7                4.0                5.0                6.0                1.5               306
Bureoucracy Quality                          2.2                0.0               1.2                2.0                3.0                4.0                1.1               306
Thi s ta bl e pres ents des cri pti ve s ta ti s ti cs for our cros s country pa nel da ta s et s pa nni ng from 1980‐2007. Annua l da ta wa s tra ns formed i nto deca da l a vera ges .
Pri va te a nd Hous ehol d Sa vi ng a re expres s ed a s percenta ge uni ts of GDP. Ri s k i s ca l cul a ted a s the s ta nda rd devi a ti on of rea l GDP growth over the deca de.
Appendi x ta bl e 1 s umma ri zes the va ri a bl es defi ni ti ons a nd s ources .




                                                                                           33
            Appendix Table 3: Household Saving and Risk, alternative specifications
                        Dependent variable is Household Saving over GDP
Regressor                      (i)           (ii)         (iii)          (iv)          (v)
                              ‐0.13         ‐0.67         0.06          ‐0.24         0.05
Risk (t‐1)
                             (0.60)         (0.38)       (0.65)        (0.31)        (0.61)
                            ‐0.47**       ‐0.17***       ‐0.21*         ‐0.03         0.11
Real GDP per capita (t)
                             (0.02)         (0.00)       (0.10)        (0.51)        (0.50)
                            9.31***       15.48***      13.75**       10.28***        0.89
Constant
                             (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.02)        (0.00)        (0.90)
                          Developing & Advanced
Sample                                               All Countries All Countries All Countries
                           Transition   Economies
Country Fixed Effects          NO            NO           YES            NO           YES
Time Fixed Effects             NO            NO           NO             YES          YES

Observations                              44                  50                 94                  94                 94
R‐squared                                0.10                0.16               0.91                0.15               0.92
Thi s ta bl e reports res ul ts rel a ti ng a vera ge hous ehol d s a vi ng ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. The regres s i ons
control for rea l GDP per ca pi ta l (l evel ). Col umn (i ) corres ponds to the s ubs a mpl e of devel opi ng a nd
tra ns i ti on economi es ; col umn (i i ) corres ponds to the s ubs a mpl e of a dva nced economi es ; Col umn (i i i ) i s the
regres s i on wi th country fi xed effects ; col umn (i v) i s the regres s i on wi th ti me fi xed effects ; a nd col umn (v) i s
the regres s i on wi th country a nd ti me fi xed effects . The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 peri od; however a nnua l
da ta wa s tra ns formed i nto deca da l a vera ges . Method of es ti ma ti on i s Pool ed OLS, i ncl udi ng dummi es for FE.
Al l s peci fi ca ti ons a re es ti ma ted wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors (p va l ues i n pa renthes i s ). *, **, *** i ndi ca te
s i gni fi ca nce a t the 10%, 5% a nd 1% l evel s , res pecti vel y.




                                                                    34
                                                             Appendix Table 4: Private Saving and Risk, additional controls
                                                                   Dependent variable is Private Saving over GDP
Regressor                                (i)               (ii)          (iii)          (iv)           (v)            (vi)                                  (vii)              (viii)              (ix)
                                      ‐0.40**           ‐0.44***      ‐0.44***        ‐0.42**       ‐0.38**         ‐0.44**                               ‐0.43**            ‐0.40**              ‐0.26
Risk (t‐1)
                                       (0.02)            (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.02)          (0.01)                                (0.01)             (0.02)              (0.12)
Socieconomic                          1.10***
conditions (t)                         (0.00)
                                                          0.47**
Investment Profile (t)
                                                          (0.04)
                                                                              0.44*
Internal Conflict (t)
                                                                              (0.05)
                                                                                                  0.31
External Conflict (t)
                                                                                                 (0.25)
                                                                                                                   1.25***
Military in Politics (t)
                                                                                                                    (0.00)
                                                                                                                                        ‐0.47
Religion in Politics (t)
                                                                                                                                        (0.21)
                                                                                                                                                           0.53*
Ethnic Conflict (t)
                                                                                                                                                           (0.09)
Democratic                                                                                                                                                                     0.53
Accountability (t)                                                                                                                                                            (0.20)
                                                                                                                                                                                                3.10***
Bureoucracy Quality (t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.00)
                                       0.02             0.10***              0.10**            0.13***              0.03              0.16***            0.12***             0.11**               ‐0.06
Real GDP per capita (t)
                                      (0.60)             (0.01)              (0.02)             (0.00)             (0.43)              (0.00)             (0.00)             (0.02)              (0.19)
                                     11.57***           13.98***            13.55***           14.02***           13.10***            18.95***           15.10***           15.15***            11.16***
Constant
                                      (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)

Observations                            278                278                 278                278                278                 278                278                278                 278
R‐squared                               0.14               0.12                0.12               0.11               0.16                0.11               0.11               0.11                0.20
Thi s ta ble reports res ults rela ting a vera ge priva te s a vi ng ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. The regress i ons control for rea l GDP per ca pita l (level). Depending on the s peci fi ca ti on,
the regres s i ons control for a l terna ti ve proxi es of ins tituti ona l qua li ty from ICRG. The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 peri od; however a nnua l da ta wa s tra ns formed into deca da l
a vera ges . Method of es tima ti on i s Pooled OLS. Al l s peci fi ca ti ons a re es ti ma ted wi th robust s ta nda rd errors (p va l ues in pa renthes is ). *, **, *** i ndica te s igni fi ca nce a t the
10%, 5% a nd 1% levels , res pectivel y.




                                                                                                    35
                                                       Appendix Table 5: Household Saving and Risk, additional controls
                                                               Dependent variable is Household Saving over GDP
Regressor                               (i)              (ii)         (iii)           (iv)          (v)           (vi)                                  (vii)              (viii)            (ix)
                                      ‐0.44*            ‐0.33        ‐0.43*          ‐0.42*       ‐0.45*        ‐0.47**                                ‐0.40              ‐0.42             ‐0.34
Risk (t‐1)
                                      (0.08)            (0.15)       (0.08)          (0.09)       (0.06)         (0.02)                                (0.12)             (0.10)           (0.18)
Socieconomic                           0.27
conditions (t)                        (0.51)
                                                       ‐0.74***
Investment Profile (t)
                                                        (0.01)
                                                                            ‐0.02
Internal Conflict (t)
                                                                            (0.96)
                                                                                               ‐0.24
External Conflict (t)
                                                                                               (0.66)
                                                                                                                   0.28
Military in Politics (t)
                                                                                                                  (0.63)
                                                                                                                                    ‐1.66**
Religion in Politics (t)
                                                                                                                                     (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                        0.48
Ethnic Conflict (t)
                                                                                                                                                       (0.40)
Democratic                                                                                                                                                                ‐0.13
Accountability (t)                                                                                                                                                        (0.84)
                                                                                                                                                                                          2.21**
Bureoucracy Quality (t)
                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.01)
                                      ‐0.06              0.01               ‐0.03             ‐0.03              ‐0.05               0.02               ‐0.04             ‐0.03           ‐0.14**
Real GDP per capita (t)
                                      (0.26)            (0.81)             (0.42)             (0.47)             (0.28)             (0.71)             (0.24)            (0.67)            (0.02)
                                     8.53***           15.09***            9.98**            12.27**            8.84***            17.47***            7.76**           10.30***          4.77**
Constant
                                      (0.00)            (0.00)             (0.01)             (0.04)             (0.00)             (0.00)             (0.02)            (0.00)            (0.05)

Observations                            88                 88                 88                 88                 88                 88                 88                88               88
R‐squared                              0.04               0.11               0.04               0.04               0.04               0.13               0.04              0.04             0.09
This ta bl e reports res ul ts rela ti ng average hous ehol d s a ving ra tes to ma croeconomi c ri s k. The regres s ions control for rea l GDP per ca pi ta l (l evel ). Dependi ng on the
s pecifi ca ti on, the regres s ions control for a lterna tive proxi es of i ns ti tuti onal qua li ty from ICRG. The pa nel s pa ns the 1980‐2007 period; however a nnual data wa s
trans formed into decadal a vera ges . Method of es ti mati on i s Pool ed OLS. All s peci fica ti ons are es ti ma ted wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors (p val ues i n pa renthes i s ). *, **, ***
indi ca te s i gnifi ca nce at the 10%, 5% and 1% l evel s , res pecti vely.




                                                                                                 36
