                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EFFECTS OF PEER COUNSELING TO SUPPORT BREASTFEEDING:
  ASSESSING THE EXTERNAL VALIDITY OF A RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                         Onur Altindag
                                        Theodore J. Joyce
                                         Julie A. Reeder

                                       Working Paper 21013
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21013


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2015




This work represents the opinions of the authors and not the State of Oregon WIC Program. We want
to thank Samir Mustafic from the Oregon WIC Program for expert programming. Work was supported
by grant R03 HD072991-01 from the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development
to the Research Foundation of the City University of New York. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Onur Altindag, Theodore J. Joyce, and Julie A. Reeder. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Peer Counseling to Support Breastfeeding: Assessing the External Validity of a
Randomized Field Experiment
Onur Altindag, Theodore J. Joyce, and Julie A. Reeder
NBER Working Paper No. 21013
March 2015
JEL No. I12,I18

                                            ABSTRACT

In an effort to improve breastfeeding, the Oregon WIC Program tested whether a relatively low-cost
telephone peer counseling initiative to support breastfeeding could increase the initiation and duration
of exclusive breastfeeding among its participants. They conducted a large randomized field experiment
(RFE) with over 1900 women from four WIC agencies in the state. In this study we use data from
the RFE along with administrative data from the rest of the state to assess whether the results from
the RFE can be extended to other agencies in the state. We find small or non-existent effects of peer
counseling in the non-experimental settings, which suggest that the experimental estimates may reflect
Hawthorne effects. We present evidence of selection into RFE in that exclusive breastfeeding among
the controls is significantly greater than among women who were offered but declined to participate
in the RFE as well as from women in the rest of the state who had no access to peer counseling. We
conclude that despite the strong internal validity of the RFE, extending the program to other agencies
in the state would have a limited impact at best on exclusive breastfeeding.


Onur Altindag                                      Julie A. Reeder
NBER                                               Oregon WIC Program
5 Hanover Square, 1602                             800 NE Oregon Street
NY, NY 10004                                       Suite 865
raltindag@gradcenter.cuny.edu                      Portland, OR 97232-2187
                                                   julie.a.reeder@state.or.us
Theodore J. Joyce
NBER
5 Hanover Square, 16th Floor
Suite 1602
New York, NY 10004-2630
theodore.joyce@baruch.cuny.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02120248
                                    Abstract

A long-standing tension within the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants and Children or WIC is promotion of breastfeeding while making
available free infant formula. The WIC program purchases over half of all infant
formula sold in the US and unsurprisingly, breastfeeding initiation and duration is
substantially lower among WIC participants than their eligible non-participants.
In an effort to improve breastfeeding, the Oregon WIC Program tested whether
a relatively low-cost telephone peer counseling initiative to support breastfeeding
could increase the initiation and duration of exclusive breastfeeding among its
participants. They conducted a large randomized field experiment (RFE) with
over 1900 women from four WIC agencies in the state. They found significant
increases in exclusive breastfeeding among Spanish- but not English-speaking
clients. In this study we use data from the RFE along with administrative data
from the rest of the state to assess whether the results from the RFE can be
extended to other agencies in the state. We use randomization as an instru-
ment to estimate the effect of treatment on the treated and we compare these
to non-experimental estimates of the effect of peer counseling from the same or
similar WIC agencies as the RFE. We find small or non-existent effects of peer
counseling in the non-experimental settings, which suggest that the experimental
estimates may reflect Hawthorne effects. We present evidence of selection into
RFE in that exclusive breastfeeding among the controls is significantly greater
than among women who were offered but declined to participate in the RFE as
well as from women in the rest of the state who had no access to peer counseling.
We conclude that despite the strong internal validity of the RFE, extending the
program to other agencies in the state would have a limited impact at best on
exclusive breastfeeding.




                                        2
1       Introduction
The enormous growth in randomized field experiments (RFEs) in the social sciences over the
past 10 years has reignited a vigorous debate as to their utility to inform policy.1 A primary
criticism is that the generalizability of even well-designed RFEs with strong internal validity
is limited by the narrowness of the questions and the specific circumstances of the studies.
This concern is longstanding, but the renewed debate has pushed researchers involved in
RFEs to discuss in more detail the generalizability of their results.2


    In this study, we explore the external validity of the results from a large RFE of peer
counseling to promote breastfeeding among women in Oregon enrolled in the Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC). Specifically, we ask whether
the results of a peer counseling RFE conducted at 4 WIC agencies would obtain in the other
30 agencies within the state. The question has meaningful policy implications as the U.S.
Surgeon General has proposed making peer counseling to support breastfeeding a core WIC
service. The motivation for expanding peer counseling emanates from a long-standing ten-
sion within WIC, which promotes breastfeeding while making available free infant formula.
WIC, for example, purchases over 57 percent of all infant formula sold in the US (Oliveira
et al., 2010). Not surprisingly, breastfeeding initiation and duration is substantially lower
among WIC participants than their eligible non-participants (Jacknowitz et al., 2007). Clos-
ing this gap is core to WIC’s mission given numerous reports that exclusive breastfeeding
improves infant and maternal health.3


    To promote breastfeeding among WIC participants, the United States Department of Agri-
    1
      See for example Campbell et al. (1963); Rodrik (2008); Banerjee and Duflo (2008); Angrist and Pischke
(2008); Deaton (2010); Imbens (2010); Ravallion (2012).
    2
      As Campbell et al. (1963) wrote over 60 years ago, “While internal validity is the sine qua non, and while
the question of external validity, like the question of inductive inference, is never completely answerable, the
selection of designs strong in both types of validity is obviously ideal.”(page 5). See also Kramer and Shapiro
(1984) and Rothwell (2005) for discussion in the medical literature and Heckman and Smith (1995) and Teele
(2014) for discussions in the social sciences.
    3
      See for example Kramer et al. (2001); Kramer and Kakuma (2004); Bachrach et al. (2003); Ip et al.
(2009); Eidelman et al. (2012).


                                                       3
cultures Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) initiated the promotion of peer counseling in 2004
(McLaughlin et al., 2004). The essential idea is that peers, in this case women who have
been on WIC and have successfully breastfed, provide support and guidance for women who
intend to or are trying to breastfeed. However, evidence on the effectiveness of peer coun-
seling is mixed. Numerous observational studies have reported increases in breastfeeding
initiation and duration associated with peer counseling programs for WIC clients.4 How-
ever, a systematic literature review of peer counseling initiatives has characterized many of
these observational studies as of moderate to poor quality (Ingram et al., 2010). The most
convincing evidence as to the effectiveness of peer counseling among low-income women
has come from three well-executed randomized control trials (RCTs) in the United States
(Chapman et al., 2004; Anderson et al., 2005; Bonuck et al., 2005). Yet the intensity of the
intervention in each of the three RCTs far exceeds what is currently offered in most local
WIC agencies, which raises doubts as to the scalability of such support (Reeder et al., 2014).


  To test whether peer counseling could prove effective if delivered in a less resource intensive
manner, researchers from the Oregon WIC program undertook the largest randomized field
experiment (RFE) to date in the US. The objective was to assess whether a telephone peer
counseling program among WIC clients could increase the initiation and duration of exclu-
sive breastfeeding (Reeder et al., 2014). One thousand, nine hundred and forty-eight WIC
clients in four WIC agencies were randomly assigned among three study arms and stratified
by whether they spoke English or Spanish. Researchers found that non-exclusive breastfeed-
ing for at least 3 months increased by 8 percentage points among English-speaking women
and 17 percentage points among Spanish-speaking participants while exclusive breastfeeding
of the same duration increased by 8 percentage points, but only among the Spanish-speakers.


  In this study, we extend Oregons RFE of peer counseling in several ways. First, Reeder
et al. (2014) estimated the effect of being assigned to the treatment group or the intention-
   4
    See for example Grummer-Strawn and Mei (2004); Gross et al. (2009); Yun et al. (2010); Schafer et al.
(1998); Shaw and Kaczorowski (1999); Bolton et al. (2009); Gill et al. (2007); Olson et al. (2010).



                                                   4
to-treat (ITT). However, 6 percent of women in the treatment group never respond to any
calls by the peer counselors and 29 percent of English-speaking clients never interacted with
a peer counselor in the postpartum period. Thus, we use the randomization indicator as an
instrument to estimate the effect of treatment on the treated (TOT). The TOT results pro-
vide the most comparable estimates to those from non-experimental settings that compare
women who received peer counseling relative to those who declined. A second extension of
the analysis by Reeder et al. (2014) is a test for heterogeneous treatment effects based on a
recent approach to endogeneous stratification (Abadie et al., 2013).


 As a third extension, we explore the external validity of the results from Oregons peer coun-
seling RFE aided by a unique set of circumstances. Specifically, we have breastfeeding data
on those who chose not to participate in the RFE as well as data on WIC clients in counties
without peer counseling. Moreover, the same peer counseling program implemented in the
experimental agencies was also offered in two other agencies over the same time period as the
RFE but without randomization. Finally, three of the four experimental agencies continued
to offer peer counseling to WIC clients without randomization for three years after the RFE
was over. Thus, we estimate the effect of peer counseling on breastfeeding with observational
data in the same and similar sites as the RFE and compare it to the instrumented estimates
of the treatment on the treated (TOT) from the experimental sample. Importantly, data
for the RFE were collected by the state-wide administrative system in same manner as data
from the non-experimental settings, an important feature of a within-study design (Heckman
and Smith, 1995).


 To preview key findings, we uncover numerous sources of selection and possible Hawthorne
effects that limit generalizability of the RFE. For example, English-speaking participants
randomized into the control group had significantly higher rates of exclusive breastfeeding
than women from the same counties who chose not to participate—evidence of positive
selection into the study. Moreover, both English- and Spanish-speaking women in the control
group had higher rates of exclusive breastfeeding than women in the rest of the state who had

                                             5
no access to peer counseling. Second, we show that non-experimental estimates of treatment
effects are statistically zero or substantially weaker than treatment effects obtained from the
RFE. The diminished effect appears unrelated to self-selection into peer counseling, which
suggests that the supervision of peer counselors and the attention paid to WIC participants in
an experimental setting may be difficult to sustain in the routine provision of peer counseling
services. We conclude that a relatively low-cost telephone peer counseling program broadly
applied would have a limited impact at best if offered as a standard service of WIC.



2     Background

2.1    Peer Counseling

In the typical model a peer counselor meets with the expectant mother during pregnancy,
and then up to six months or a year after birth. The goal is to promote exclusive breast-
feeding for at least six months, which the literature suggests is necessary to reap the full
benefits of breastfeeding (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012). Several observational
studies evaluated the effect of peer counseling among WIC clients in agencies with and
without a peer counseling program. Each reported gains in breastfeeding initiation in local
WIC agencies with peer counseling but sample sizes were small and research designs weak
(Grummer-Strawn and Mei, 2004; Schafer et al., 1998; Shaw and Kaczorowski, 1999; Gill
et al., 2007; Bolton et al., 2009). Larger studies of WIC clients—18,789 in Maryland and
29,881 from Missouri—were able to adjust estimated program effects with a sizeable number
of covariates (Gross et al., 2009; Yun et al., 2010). However, in both studies there were
important differences by race and ethnicity between those exposed and unexposed to peer
counseling, and estimates of program effects were sensitive to adjustment. In the strongest
observational study, researchers used as the comparison group WIC clients who requested
peer counseling but were denied because of a lack of counselors (Olson et al., 2010). Peer
counseling was associated with a 7.4 percentage point increase in non-exclusive breastfeeding
for at least 6 months relative to the mean of 10.4 percent among those in the comparison


                                              6
group.


  Three high-quality RCTs of peer counseling among low-income women in the U.S. reported
significant gains in breastfeeding initiation and duration (Chapman et al., 2004; Anderson
et al., 2005; Bonuck et al., 2005). Each involved prenatal and postpartum home and hospital
visitation as well as telephone follow-up as needed. In one study, professional lactation con-
sultants were used instead of peer counselors (Bonuck et al., 2005). They reported significant
differences in non-exclusive breastfeeding up to six months postpartum, but no difference in
exclusive breastfeeding of any duration. In another RCT, new mothers received at least one
daily visit by a peer counselor while in the hospital and at least three home visits postpar-
tum (Chapman et al., 2004). They found no differences in exclusive breastfeeding at any
point postpartum but women in the treatment group were less likely not to breastfeed at
one and three months relative to the controls. In a follow-up study to test whether more
intensive counseling might improve exclusive breastfeeding, women in the treatment groups
were offered three prenatal and nine postpartum visits in addition to daily hospital visits
by a peer counselor (Anderson et al., 2005). After three months, the risk of non-exclusive
breastfeeding was higher among the controls than among those in the intervention group
(RR=1.30, p > .05).5


  Common characteristics of the three RCTs are sample size, between 50-200 women in
each experimental arm of the study, and their large Hispanic populations. Although most
appeared powered to detect differences in breastfeeding initiation and duration, only one
   5
    There have been numerous high-quality RCTs of peer counseling (PC) for breastfeeding conducted
outside the US. Researchers in England used telephone or hospital visitation to reach clients but reported no
impact of PC on initiation or duration of breastfeeding (Graffy et al., 2004). A peer counseling intervention
similar to the RCT in our study was conducted in Canada in the late 1990s (MacArthur et al., 2009). New
and expectant mothers were contacted by telephone within 48 hours of delivery and for as many times in the
next three months as seemed necessary. The authors reported impressive gains in exclusive breastfeeding at
12 weeks: 56% of women in the treatment group exclusively breastfed as compared to 40.3% among controls.
However the women in the study included upper and middle-income women with substantial education. The
generalizability to a low-income population is not clear. More generally, a recent review of prenatal peer
support for breastfeeding concluded that universal PC support was not effective, but that PC targeted at
women who are considering breastfeeding did increase breastfeeding initiation rates (Ingram et al., 2010).



                                                     7
had sufficient power to detect less than large differences in exclusive breastfeeding (Anderson
et al., 2005). A second characteristic of almost all RCTs is the provision of in-home and in-
hospital visits in both the prenatal and postpartum periods. For example, Anderson et al.
(2005) reports increases in exclusive breastfeeding as a result of three prenatal and daily
hospital visits, followed by nine post-partum visits. The support provided by the current
peer counseling programs funded by the USDA does not come close to the level of service
provided in the three RCTs. Scaling up the peer support provided in the RCTs to the
national level would appear unrealistic in the current fiscal environment.


2.2    Oregon’s Experiment

An important motivation for the RFE conducted in Oregon was to assess whether a rela-
tively low-cost peer counseling program in which support was provided almost exclusively
by telephone could achieve substantial gains in breastfeeding. As detailed in Reeder et al.
(2014), the intention-to-treat (ITT) results were mixed. The probability that women as-
signed to the treatment group breastfed non-exclusively for at least 3 months was 22 percent
greater than women in the control group and 30 percent greater among Spanish speakers.
Non-exclusive breastfeeding for at least 6 months increased by 14 percentage points among
Spanish-speaking women in the treatment group relative to an overall non-exclusive breast-
feeding prevalence of 45% among Spanish-speaking controls.


  Peer counseling was also associated with decreases in any and exclusive breastfeeding ces-
sation, but these gains also were limited to Spanish-speakers only. The findings for Spanish-
speaking WIC participants are broadly consistent with the three RCTs in the US that also
evaluated peer counseling interventions. In two of the RCTs 80 percent of participants were
Hispanic with approximately half designating Spanish as their preferred language and at
least 70 percent participated in WIC (Chapman et al., 2004; Bonuck et al., 2005). The third
RCT had a smaller proportion of Hispanics (Anderson et al., 2005). In the Oregon RFE
as well as the other three RCTs not all women in the treatment group take-up the peer


                                              8
counseling or use peer counselors to the same degree. Thus, the effect of peer counseling on
women who partake of treatment is unclear due to the obvious selection involved with com-
pliance. In this study we extend the results from the Oregon RFE by using randomization
as an instrument to estimate the effect of peer counseling among women who interact with
the counselors. To the extent that randomization satisfies the exclusion restriction and given
one-sided compliance, we can interpret the instrumented estimates as the effect of treatment
                          6
on the treated (TOT).         We then compare the TOT estimate from the RFE to estimates of
average treatment effects obtained in the non-experimental setting.



3       Empirical Framework

3.1     Data

The study is based on two samples of WIC clients in Oregon during the period of July 2005
through June 2010. The analysis is anchored by the results from the RFE conducted at four
WIC agencies between July 2005-June 2007. There are 34 local WIC agencies in Oregon
that, with few exceptions, are organized at the county level.7 A description of the RFE and
the intention-to-treat (ITT) results are reported in Reeder et al. (2014). The second sample,
henceforth the non-experimental sample, consists of all WIC clients not in the RFE from
June 2005 to July of 2010. All data pertaining to the characteristics of women on WIC and
their breastfeeding outcomes are entered by staff at WIC agencies to the State’s centralized
Information System Tracker database, TWIST.


3.1.1    Sample 1: The Randomized Field Experiment

Nineteen hundred and forty-eight English or Spanish speaking women attending a new preg-
nant appointment for WIC between July 2005 and July 2007 at one of the four WIC agencies
    6
     With one-sided compliance there are no “always takers” (Angrist et al., 1996; Angrist and Pischke,
2008). There were no always takers in the Oregon RFE as peer counselors were only in contact with those
in the treatment group.
   7
     Oregon has 36 counties. Several rural counties are serviced by one local WIC agency.



                                                  9
in the State consented to be in the study. The four agencies were the counties of Hood River,
Jackson, Umatilla and Washington. The counties served by each agency are show in blue
in Figure 1. Sixty-four women miscarried or moved out of the state leaving 1,884 women
that were assigned to one of the three study arms. Women were stratified between English
and Spanish speakers and then randomized in the three treatment arms. The control group
received standard WIC Program breastfeeding promotion and support but did not have any
contact with a peer counselor. The low-frequency treatment group was eligible to receive
four planned, peer-initiated contacts: the first after the initial prenatal assignment; the sec-
ond two weeks before the expected due date; the third within one-week postpartum; and the
fourth approximately 2 weeks postpartum. The high-frequency treatment group was eligible
to receive eight planned peer-initiated contacts. The first four contacts were the same as the
low-frequency group with the additional four occurring at months 1-4 postpartum. There
were no meaningful differences in the breastfeeding outcomes between women in the low
and high intensity groups so following Reeder et al. (2014), we have combined them in the
analyses that follow.


  The peer counselors were current or former WIC clients within the past five years. They
had to have breastfed an infant for at least 6 months, have sufficient literacy in English or
Spanish to complete the paper work, and be able to commit at least 10 hours a week to
counseling. All peer counselors received a state-provided three-day training grounded in the
USDA’s Loving Support curriculum at the central administrative office in Portland. After-
wards, the peer counselors returned to their respective WIC agencies for further orientation
and training.8 .




3.1.2      Sample 2: Non-Experimental Data on Peer Counseling

The same peer counseling program as in the RFE was offered in two WIC agencies located
in Marion and Deschutes counties from 2005-2010. Marion and Deschutes counties are the
  8
      See Reeder et al. (2014) for more details regarding the RFE.


                                                     10
5th and 7th most populous counties in the state (Figure 1). Jackson and Washington coun-
ties in the RFE are ranked 6th and 2nd , respectively. Women attending their new pregnant
appointment at the WIC agencies in Marion and Deschutes were offered the opportunity to
receive the same high-frequency peer counseling support as offered to women in the RFE.
The important difference from the RFE was that any WIC client who desired peer counseling
was enrolled. Of the 12,348 women enrolled in WIC in Marion and Deschutes between July
2005 and July 2010, 1,774 (14.2%) requested peer counseling support.


  Another group of WIC clients were also offered peer counseling in a non-experimental
setting. Three of the four agencies that participated in the RFE, Jackson, Umatilla and
Washington continued to offer peer counseling to women enrolling in WIC at their new
pregnancy visit from the end of the RFE in July of 2007 through July, 2010. Thus, 3,577
WIC clients out of 13,094 eligible women (27.3%) were enrolled in a voluntary peer counsel-
ing program between July 2007 and June 2010. Lastly, we have data on 24,857 WIC clients
from the agencies in Oregon that did not offer or provide peer counseling for breastfeeding
between July 2007 and July 2010.




3.1.3   Outcomes and Covariates

We focus on exclusive breastfeeding at one, three and six months postpartum. At each
certification visit up to two years, mothers were asked how they were feeding their baby.
Duration of exclusive breastfeeding was derived from the first time that the mother reported
to WIC that she had stopped breastfeeding or introduced formula and the timing of each.
Exclusive breastfeeding duration was recorded in weekly intervals for the first month and
then at intervals of 5, 9, 13, 18, 22, 26, 31, 35, 39, 43, 47, 52 weeks and more than 52 weeks.


  We focus on exclusive breastfeeding because the explicit goal of the peer counseling initia-
tive was to increase the prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding for at least six months. The



                                              11
health benefits of breastfeeding have been related to exclusive breastfeeding and not just any
breastfeeding (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012). In addition, exclusive breastfeeding
is reported more completely than non-exclusive breastfeeding. The duration of non-exclusive
breastfeeding cannot be determined until a woman stops breastfeeding completely. As a
result, non-exclusive breastfeeding duration was missing for women who reported breast-
feeding at their last WIC re-certification visit but then left WIC before their next sched-
uled re-certification appointment. Exclusive breastfeeding duration tends to end earlier in
the postpartum period and thus, is measured more completely. In the Oregon RFE, non-
exclusive breastfeeding was missing in 19 percent of cases whereas exclusive breastfeeding
was missing for only 8 percent (Reeder et al., 2014).


  The administrative data system, TWIST, also has information on a WIC client’s age,
educational attainment, family income, marital status, race/ethnicity, spoken language as
well as month of enrollment in WIC.


3.2     Analysis

3.2.1   Analysis of the RFE

We first present ITT estimates of offers of peer counseling on dichotomous indicators of
exclusive breastfeeding at least one, three and six months in the RFE.


                                 BFi = β0 + β1 Zi + Xi0 θ + εi                             (1)

where BFi a breastfeeding outcome for person i, Z is a dummy variable and equals 1 if the
woman is assigned to the peer counseling treatment group, X is a vector of baseline controls
(age, age squared, race/ethnicity, education, marital status, the month of pregnancy when
certified for WIC, natural logarithm of monthly income and WIC agency indicators), and
ε denotes the random component. Based on a linear probability model, the estimated co-
efficient, β1 , provides an unbiased estimate of the intention-to-treat (ITT). All analyses are
stratified by whether the counseling was conducted in English or Spanish.

                                              12
  One way in which we extend the work of Reeder et al. (2014) is by estimating the effect
of peer counseling among women who actually received support. We define treatment as
women who received at least one peer counseling call in the postpartum period. As such,
71 percent of English-speaking women and 89 percent of Spanish-speaking women assigned
to the peer counseling group actually received treatment. Because interactions with a peer
counselor is a choice, we instrument the receipt of peer counseling with the randomization
indicator. The first stage is as follows:


                                    Ti = π0 + π1 Zi + Xi0 Γ + υi                                  (2)

where T equals one if the woman received any postpartum PC service and zero otherwise
where π1 captures the effect of assignment to treatment group on receiving peer counseling
service. We use the predicted value from equation (2), Tbi to estimate the following second
stage:


                                   BFi = γ0 + γ1 Tbi + Xi0 ξ + ηi                                 (3)

where the coefficient, γ1 , is the estimate of TOT. Given one-sided compliance, this represents
the effect of peer counseling among women who interacted with counselors (Bloom, 1984;
Angrist and Pischke, 2008).9


  Another extension of Reeder et al. (2014) is a test of heterogeneous treatment effects.
A common approach is to interact the assignment to treatment indicator Z with baseline
characteristics. Such a tactic is somewhat ad hoc and can lead to specification searches. A
recent alternative uses the entire set of pre-treatment covariates to predict outcomes among
the control group (Abadie et al., 2013). The estimated parameters from this regression are
applied to the entire sample in the RFE and treatment effects are estimated within different
quantiles of the predicted outcome. To avoid over-fitting we use the repeated split sample
  9
    One-sided compliance means women in the control group had no access to peer counseling. In lexicon
of Angrist et al. (1996), there were no always takers.


                                                 13
(RSS) algorithm suggested by the authors.10




3.2.2    External Validity

We begin the assessment of external validity11 by generating bounds on the treatment effects
following Manski (1999, 2013). We first assume no knowledge of the treatment effects for
the unobserved counterfactuals (Manski, 1999).12 . We then narrow the bounds by imposing
various restrictions (Manski, 2013). Although the range of treatment effects remains rela-
tively wide, they provide a transparent set of goal posts with which to compare estimates of
treatment effects from subsequent exercises.


  In the next part of the study we use WIC administrative data for women not-involved in
the RFE. Following the within-study literature, we compare the breastfeeding outcomes of
the randomized out controls to women who were offered but chose not to participate in the
RFE (LaLonde, 1986; Smith and Todd, 2005). Specifically,


                                      BFi = ρ0 + ρ1 Ci + Xi0 Ψ + ηi                                         (4)

where Ci equals one if the woman was in the control group of the RFE and zero if she did
not participate. The coefficient, ρ1 , captures differences in breastfeeding outcomes between
  10
      A Stata version of the algorithm by Jeremy Ferwerds is available at https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/
bocode/s457801.html (last accessed December 31, 2014).
   11
      External validity concerns inferences about the extent to which a causal relationship holds over variation
in persons, settings, treatments and outcomes (Shadish et al., 2002). The broadness of the definition explains
why convincing demonstrations of external validity have proven elusive. One approach to improving the
generalizability of results from RFEs is more experiments addressing similar questions but in different settings
(Banerjee and Duflo, 2008; Imbens, 2010). Even with multiple experiments, however, selective participation
by subjects, heterogeneous treatment effects, randomization bias and general equilibrium effects remain
challenges to external validity (Heckman and Smith, 1995; Rodrik, 2008; Deaton, 2010). The recent focus
on external validity has motivated approaches to testing for heterogeneous treatment effects across multiple
sites (Crump et al., 2008), but the generalizability of a single RFE remains more art than science (Woolcock,
2013).
   12
      Let E[Y1 |D = 0] be the expected exclusive breastfeeding outcome of being offered peer counseling on
those in the treatment group had they been assigned to the controls and let E[Y0 |D = 1] be the expected
outcome of the controls had they been assigned to the treatment group. The no information bounds assume
E[Y1 |D = 0] = 1 and E[Y0 |D = 1] = 0 for the upper bound and the reverse for the lower bound.


                                                      14
the controls and non-participants in the absence of treatment. The sign and statistical sig-
nificance of, ρ1 , provides evidence on selection into the RFE. We extend this exercise to the
other WIC agencies that were not part of the RFE. We compare the probability of exclusive
breastfeeding between the controls from the RFE and women who either had no access to
peer counseling or who chose not to use the service when available.


  In last section we use equation (1) to estimate the effects of peer counseling on breastfeed-
ing outcomes in a non-experimental setting. We rely on statistical controls rather than the
randomization to mitigate selection bias. Comparing these to the experimental estimates
provides several possible insights. For instance, by estimating non-experimental effects in
the same agencies as the RFE, we largely hold differences in staff or the population of WIC
clients constant. Therefore, if we find that the non-experimental estimates are smaller than
those from the RFE, it would point to adverse selection among those who choose the peer
counseling, but it would also be consistent with Hawthorne effects as the effort and scrutiny
applied during the RFE was not sustainable afterwards. Similarly, if the non-experimental
effects are larger than those from the RFE, then women choosing to work with peer coun-
selors are favorably selected in terms of breastfeeding and this dominates any Hawthorne
effects. Moreover, comparison of experimental and non-experimental results across different
agencies provides additional insight. If as we show below, the non-experimental treatment
effect estimated in all the agencies are less than the experimental TOT effects, then the
omitted variable bias may be working in one direction (Pritchett and Sandefur, 2014). This
would be an important consideration when deciding to scale up the program.


  We estimate all equations by ordinary least squares and we adjust the standard errors for
general forms of heteroscedasticity. For the models in which women were not randomized,
we weight regressions by propensity scores.13 Our results are robust to the use of logistic
  13                                                                                                      pi
       We weight the treated group—those receiving peer counseling—by 1 and the comparison group by
                                                                                                        1 − pi
where pi is the estimated probability of receiving peer counseling for individual i. This provides an estimate
of the TOT (Imbens and Wooldridge, 2008).



                                                     15
regression instead of OLS and weighted as compared to unweighted regressions.



4      Results
We present the results in two parts. In the first part, we analyze effects of peer counseling
on exclusive breastfeeding based on the RFE in Oregon. In the second part we explore the
potential generalizability of the findings.


4.1      Results from the RFE

The estimates from the RFE for English- and Spanish-speaking clients are shown in Table
1. We show coefficients for exclusive breastfeeding at one, three and six months postpar-
tum adjusted for covariates.14 The first column shows the ITT estimates. These reveal
no effect of the offer of peer counseling on exclusive breastfeeding among English speakers
at any point postpartum (Table 1, column 1). For instance, women assigned to the treat-
ment group were three percentage points more likely to exclusive breastfeeding at one month
postpartum but the coefficient is statistically insignificant. There is no effect at three of six
months postpartum. This is not true for Spanish speakers (Table 1, column 4). The offer of
peer counseling increases exclusive breastfeeding at one, three and six months postpartum
by between seven and 10 percentage points. These are meaningful increases relative to the
prevalence of breastfeeding among the controls.


    Weighted least squares estimates (WLS) of the effect of actually receiving peer counseling
on exclusive breastfeeding is shown for English and Spanish speakers in columns (2) and
(5), respectively. Estimates for English speakers differ markedly from the ITT estimates at
one and three months postpartum. Exclusive breastfeeding is nine to 10 percentage points
greater among the English speakers who actually received peer counseling support relative to
both the treated and controls who did not receive counseling. The first stage in column (3)
  14
   The unadjusted coefficients differ little. See Reeder et al. (2014) for a comparison of the adjusted and
unadjusted ITT effects.


                                                    16
indicates that after adjusting for the covariates, the probability of receiving peer counseling
in the treatment group is 0.76. The differences between the ITT and WLS estimates therefore
suggests that English-speaking women in the treatment group who received peer counseling
were positively selected toward breastfeeding. However, when we correct for selection by
using the randomization indicator as an instrument, we find no effect of peer counseling on
exclusive breastfeeding (Table 1, column 3).


  As with the ITT results, the pattern for Spanish-speaking clients differs importantly from
those for English-speaking clients. In brief, the ITT, WLS and TOT estimates of peer coun-
seling are essentially the same at each point postpartum. For example, at three months
postpartum, the ITT, OLS and TOT estimated effects are between 10 and 11 percentages
points, an increase of roughly 20 percent relative to the control mean of 51 percent. The con-
sistency across estimates is perhaps unsurprising given that 90 percent of Spanish-speaking
women in the treatment group actually received peer counseling in the prenatal and post-
partum period as shown in the first stage in column (6).15




4.2     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

In Table 2 we show results using endogenous stratification to describe differences in the
estimated treatment effects across terciles of predicted breastfeeding within each language
group. There is no effect of being assigned to the treatment group among English-speaking
clients for any tercile, which is consistent with the ITT and TOT results in Table 1. However,
among Spanish-speaking clients the largest effects of peer counseling occur among women
from the lower and middle terciles; these women are 11 to 12 percentage points more likely
to exclusively breastfeed for at least one month if assigned to the treatment group than their
counterparts among the controls.
  15
    This differs slightly from the 89 percent of Spanish-speaking women in the treatment group who received
treatment as reported previously because the 90 percent pertains only to women with non-missing data on
exclusive breastfeeding.



                                                    17
  In summary, our findings extend the ITT estimates in Reeder et al. (2014). There is
evidence of selection bias in the WLS estimates of the TOT among English-speaking clients.
This is potentially important because implementation of a peer counseling program would
involve self-selection. The consistent results among Spanish-speaking women across differ-
ent estimates are also of interest for they suggest a strong willingness to participate with
impressive gains. Moreover, Spanish-speaking clients with a lower predicted propensity to
exclusively breastfeed appear to benefit the most from peer counseling.


4.3     External Validity

4.3.1   Partial Identification

Manski (2013) argues that analysts fail to appreciate the incredible uncertainty inherent
in point estimates of treatment effects. Even with randomized field experiments and with
the assumption of homogenous treatment effects, generalizability may be limited. The non-
random selection of sites in which an experiment is conducted as well as non-random selection
by participants into the study can render external validity questionable. In this section, we
focus on the selection issue to show a range of possible treatment effects that may hold state-
wide under various restrictions. Table 3 documents the average treatment effect bounds
under different assumptions about the range of unobserved counterfactual treatment effects
of exclusive breastfeeding. For example, panel (1) shows treatment effect bounds assuming
no knowledge of treatment effects for the unobserved counterfactuals. The bounds have a
length of one and are clearly uninformative. We narrow the bounds by using the minimum
and maximum rate of exclusive breastfeeding in the 28 WIC agencies in Oregon that had no
peer counseling program as the two counterfactuals. As shown in panel (2), bounds contract
by more than a half but are still quite wide. For instance, the lowest rate of exclusive
breastfeeding at three months among Spanish-speaking WIC participants in agencies without
peer counseling is 0.12 and the highest rate is 0.55. Using these instead of rates of zero and
one yield treatment effect bounds of -0.15 and 0.30 (panel 2). Lastly we assume that peer


                                              18
counseling has no negative effects on exclusive breastfeeding, which creates a lower bound of
zero. We combine that restriction with the min-max counterfactuals to generate the bounds
in panel (3). For Spanish-speakers, the bounds have a length of approximately 30 percentage
points and are wide enough to contain the 95 percent confidence intervals around the point
estimates of the treatment effects for Spanish speakers from the RFE at one and three months
postpartum in Table 1. The bounds are considerably narrower for English-speaking clients
because the point estimates of the treatment effects are much less as is the spread between
the high and low rates of exclusive breastfeeding among WIC agencies.


4.3.2    Participation Selection

In Oregons RFE, all eligible WIC participants who presented at a “new pregnant” appoint-
ment were asked if they would be willing to participate in a study to determine the effec-
tiveness of a telephone peer counseling program to support exclusive breastfeeding.16 Under
the assumption of homogeneous treatment effects, results from the RFE would generalize
to non-participants even with non-random selection into the study. However, homogeneous
treatment effects is a strong assumption. If we relax that assumption, and if women who
chose to participate differ from those who declined, then results may not apply to the larger
population of non-participants. As a first step in understanding potential differences be-
tween participants and non-participants of the RFE, we compare baseline characteristics of
RFE participants to four groups17 of WIC clients as shown in Table 4. For each sample, we
report the differences in means with respect to the RFE participants and report the result of
a t-test based on the difference for each covariate. Sample sizes, however, greatly vary across
samples thus we also report the standardized differences. Unlike the t-test, the standardized
  16
     Eligibility was extremely broad. Any WIC participant who indicated that she was interested in breast-
feeding or undecided was considered eligible. Oregon has the highest rate of breastfeeding initiation in the
country among women on WIC at over 91 percent (Polhamus et al., 2011). Essentially, all women attending
a new pregnant visit were eligible.
  17
     Women on WIC who were offered participation in the RFE but declined; WIC clients from agencies in
the rest of the state in which there was no peer counseling available; women from agencies that participated
in the RFE but for the period after the RFE (2007-2010) in which peer counseling was available to anyone
without randomization, and women from the WIC agencies in Marion and Deschutes counties in which peer
counseling was available over the entire period, 2005-2010.



                                                    19
differences are insensitive to sample size (Imbens and Wooldridge, 2008).


  There are no glaring differences between the RFE participants and non-participants in
age, maternal education, family income, and marital status. Standardized differences are
less than 0.25 in all cases, a threshold above which estimates may become sensitive to the
specification. The lack of difference in these covariates is not surprising given that all women
are pregnant and meet the eligibility criteria for WIC.


  As a further check on balance across the four samples, we plot the distribution of propen-
sity scores for each group relative to those in the RFE. As a point of comparison, we show
propensity scores for those assigned to the treatment and control group in the RFE (Figures
2a and 2b). As expected, overlap is impressive. However, the overlap is also notable between
participants and non-participants in the RFE (Figures 2c and 2d) as well as between women
in the other three groups (Figures 2e-2j).


  Despite the apparent balance along observables, our set of covariates is limited and non-
random sorting into the RFE as well as difference across WIC agencies remains a concern.
As a further examination, we estimate equation (4) comparing the breastfeeding outcomes
of the RFE controls to those of women who were offered participation and declined as well
as to women from agencies with no peer counseling services. The results from this exercise
reveal a clear pattern of selection into the RFE among English speakers (Table 5, Panel A).
Women in the control group are between 5 and 7 percentage points more likely to exclusively
breastfeed relative to women who declined participation in the RFE. A similar pattern ap-
pears when we contrast controls with women on WIC in the rest of the state who had no
access to peer counseling, although the magnitude is more muted (Table 5, panel B). There
are also large differences in exclusive breastfeeding between English-speaking controls and
women in the post-RFE agencies who received no peer counseling (Panel C) and women
form the Marion and Deschutes agencies who also declined peer counseling (Table 5, Panel
D).

                                              20
  The pattern of selection into the RFE is less consistent among Spanish-speaking women
in WIC. Controls in the RFE are no more likely to exclusively breastfeed at one and three
months postpartum than are non-participants but they are 6-7 percentage more likely to
exclusively breastfeed when compared to their counterparts in the rest of the state (Table
5, Panels A and B). Similarly, there are no differences in exclusive breastfeeding between
the RFE controls and their counterparts in the post-RFE period, but large differences when
compared to Spanish-speaking clients in Marion and Deschutes (Table 5, Panels C and D).


4.3.3   Non-experimental estimates of peer counseling

In this last section we examine the association between the use of peer counseling and exclu-
sive breastfeeding in the two non-experimental settings. We present adjusted and unadjusted
estimates of the TOT for each breastfeeding outcome. We use weighted least squares to mit-
igate potential selection bias. Consider results from the three agencies involved in the RFE
in the post-RFE period (Table 6, Panel A). The adjusted estimates of peer counseling for the
English speaking participants are all less than three percentage points for each breastfeeding
outcome. Although statistically significant they are clinically small and similar in magnitude
to the TOT estimates for English-speaking women in RFE (Table 1). The adjusted estimates
for Spanish-speaking participants are between three and four percentage points, roughly 40
percent smaller than the unadjusted estimates and approximately 60 percent smaller than
the TOT estimates from the RFE (Table 6, Panel A).


  Estimates from the two agencies not involved in the RFE are even smaller than those
in RFE agencies and are not statistically significant (Table 6, Panel B). Based on the
non-experimental estimates, one would conclude that effects of peer counseling on exclu-
sive breastfeeding ranged from small and positive to nonexistent among both English and
Spanish-speaking women.




                                             21
4.4    Discussion

The pattern of results from Tables 1-6 suggests the following. First, there is little experimen-
tal or non-experimental evidence that a primarily telephone peer counseling program among
English-speaking women on WIC increased exclusive breastfeeding in a clinically meaningful
manner. Moreover, there is a clear pattern of selection bias among English-speaking women
on WIC who volunteered for the RFE. The RFE controls were more likely to exclusively
breastfeed relative to women who chose not to participate in the RFE. But there was also
selection bias among women assigned to the treatment group. English-speaking women in
the RFE who interacted with peer counselors were more likely to exclusively breastfeed than
those in the treatment and control groups who did not receive counseling. In other words,
compliance was not random even among those assigned to the treatment arm.


  The pattern among Spanish-speaking women on WIC is different. First, estimates from the
RFE indicate that the telephone peer counseling program increased exclusive breastfeeding
at one, three and six months postpartum. In addition, almost 90 percent of Spanish-speaking
women in the treatment group received counseling, which rendered the ITT and TOT es-
timates indistinguishable. There was also no pattern of selection bias into the RFE as the
Spanish-speaking controls were not more likely to exclusively breastfeed than were non-
participants. Lastly, the estimated effects of peer counseling in post-RFE were qualitatively
similar although approximately 60 percent less in magnitude than those in the RFE. There
was no obvious evidence of selection bias as exclusive breastfeeding among women who chose
not to use counseling in the post-RFE period did not differ from that of the RFE controls.
If we assume that selection bias is not a good explanation for the diminished impact of
peer counseling in the non-experimental period, then how best to explain it? One consid-
eration is Hawthorne effects. Peer counselors in the RFE were under much more scrutiny
than those in the post-RFE period. Counselors were required to maintain logs of each in-
teraction with clients and reports were sent twice monthly to researchers at the local and
state WIC offices (Reeder et al., 2008). After the RFE, reporting by peer counselors was


                                              22
less formal in these same agencies as was also the case in the Marion and Deschutes agencies.


    Why might Spanish-speaking clients in the RFE have been more receptive to peer counsel-
ing that their English-speaking counterparts? We can only speculate, but if Spanish-speaking
is a proxy for relatively recent immigration and perhaps social isolation, then support by a
native-speaking counselor may have been more valued by these clients relative to English-
speaking women with greater access to networks of support within their community. As
Reeder et al. (2014) note, Spanish-speaking clients responded more readily to peer coun-
selors’ calls than did English-speaking clients. Moreover, Spanish-speaking women on WIC
were more likely to exclusively breastfeed than were their English-speaking peers who self-
identify as Hispanic.18



5      Conclusion
Oregon’s RFE of a telephone peer counseling program to support exclusive breastfeeding
among women on WIC was the largest such intervention to date in the US. The study came
at an important junction as the U.S. Surgeon General has called for making peer counseling
to support breastfeeding available to all women on WIC. Our analysis of Oregons RFE and its
generalizability suggest caution before scaling up the program. Internally valid and clinically
meaningful effects were limited to Spanish-speaking clients. However, we found only a weak
association between peer counseling and increased rates of exclusive breastfeeding in the
non-experimental settings even when provided in the same agencies that had successfully
implemented the RFE. We suspect that the attenuation reflects the heightened attention to
the work of peer counselors in the RFE that is difficult to maintain outside the experimental
context. Oregon is not representative of the US demographically and it is a national leader
  18
    The Oregon WIC program discontinued its telephone-based peer counseling program based on findings
from the RFE. In its place Oregon has created a new model centered on in-person, group prenatal sessions
where women explore not just the benefits of breastfeeding but strengthen their own intrinsic motivators,
support networks, and self-advocacy skills. Enrollment in the program remains a voluntary option for new
pregnant participants. In order to provide the intensity of services needed to increase long term exclusive
breastfeeding, local agency caseload requirements were lowered from 30% of pregnant participants required
during the RFE to 17% of pregnant participants.

                                                    23
in breastfeeding initiation. This limits generalizability of the RFE. But even within State,
the external validity of the results from the RFE appears limited.




                                            24
References
Abadie, A., M. M. Chingos, and M. R. West (2013): “Endogenous stratification in
  randomized experiments,” NBER Working Paper No. 19742.

American Academy of Pediatrics, A. (2012): “Breastfeeding and the use of human
  milk,” Policy statement, Pediatrics, 129, e827–41.

Anderson, A. K., G. Damio, S. Young, D. J. Chapman, and R. Pérez-Escamilla
  (2005): “A randomized trial assessing the efficacy of peer counseling on exclusive breast-
  feeding in a predominantly Latina low-income community,” Archives of Pediatrics & Ado-
  lescent Medicine, 159, 836–841.

Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996): “Identification of causal
  effects using instrumental variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91,
  444–455.

Angrist, J. D. and J. S. Pischke (2008): Mostly harmless econometrics: an empiricist’s
  companion, Princeton University Press.

Bachrach, V. R. G., E. Schwarz, and L. R. Bachrach (2003): “Breastfeeding and
  the risk of hospitalization for respiratory disease in infancy: a meta-analysis,” Archives of
  Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 157, 237–243.

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2008): “The experimental approach to development
  economics,” NBER Working Paper No. 14467.

Bloom, H. S. (1984): “Accounting for no-shows in experimental evaluation designs,” Eval-
  uation Review, 8, 225–246.

Bolton, T. A., T. Chow, P. A. Benton, and B. H. Olson (2009): “Characteristics
  associated with longer breastfeeding duration: an analysis of a peer counseling support
  program,” Journal of Human Lactation, 25, 18–27.


                                              25
Bonuck, K. A., M. Trombley, K. Freeman, and D. McKee (2005): “Randomized,
  controlled trial of a prenatal and postnatal lactation consultant intervention on duration
  and intensity of breastfeeding up to 12 months,” Pediatrics, 116, 1413–1426.

Campbell, D. T., J. C. Stanley, and N. L. Gage (1963): Experimental and quasi-
  experimental designs for research, Houghton Mifflin Boston.

Chapman, D. J., G. Damio, S. Young, and R. Perez-Escamilla (2004): “Effective-
  ness of breastfeeding peer counseling in a low-income, predominantly Latina population: a
  randomized controlled trial,” Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 158, 897–902.

Crump, R. K., V. J. Hotz, G. W. Imbens, and O. A. Mitnik (2008): “Nonparametric
  tests for treatment effect heterogeneity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 389–
  405.

Deaton, A. (2010): “Instruments, randomization, and learning about development,” Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature, 424–455.

Eidelman, A. I., R. J. Schanler, M. Johnston, S. Landers, L. Noble, K. Szucs,
  L. Viehmann, et al. (2012): “Breastfeeding and the use of human milk,” Pediatrics,
  129, e827–e841.

Gill, S. L., E. Reifsnider, and J. F. Lucke (2007): “Effects of support on the initiation
  and duration of breastfeeding,” Western Journal of Nursing Research, 29, 708–723.

Graffy, J., J. Taylor, A. Williams, and S. Eldridge (2004): “Randomised con-
  trolled trial of support from volunteer counsellors for mothers considering breast feeding,”
  BMJ, 328, 26.

Gross, S. M., A. K. Resnik, C. Cross-Barnet, J. P. Nanda, M. Augustyn, and
  D. M. Paige (2009): “The differential impact of WIC peer counseling programs on
  breastfeeding initiation across the state of Maryland,” Journal of Human Lactation, 25,
  435–443.


                                             26
Grummer-Strawn, L. M. and Z. Mei (2004): “Does breastfeeding protect against pedi-
  atric overweight? Analysis of longitudinal data from the Centers for Disease Control and
  Prevention Pediatric Nutrition Surveillance System,” Pediatrics, 113, e81–e86.

Heckman, J. J. and J. A. Smith (1995): “Assessing the case for social experiments,”
  The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 85–110.

Imbens, G. (2010): “Better LATE Than Nothing: Some Comments on Deaton (2009) and
  Heckman and Urzua (2009),” Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 399–423.

Imbens, G. M. and J. M. Wooldridge (2008): “Recent developments in the economet-
  rics of program evaluation,” NBER Working Paper No. 14251.

Ingram, L., C. MacArthur, K. Khan, J. J. Deeks, and K. Jolly (2010): “Effect
  of antenatal peer support on breastfeeding initiation: a systematic review,” Canadian
  Medical Association Journal, 182, 1739–1746.

Ip, S., M. Chung, G. Raman, T. A. Trikalinos, and J. Lau (2009): “A summary
  of the agency for healthcare research and quality’s evidence report on breastfeeding in
  developed countries,” Breastfeeding Medicine, 4, S–17.

Jacknowitz, A., D. Novillo, and L. Tiehen (2007): “Special supplemental nutrition
  program for women, infants, and children and infant feeding practices,” Pediatrics, 119,
  281–289.

Kramer, M. S., B. Chalmers, E. D. Hodnett, Z. Sevkovskaya, I. Dzikovich,
  S. Shapiro, J.-P. Collet, I. Vanilovich, I. Mezen, T. Ducruet, et al. (2001):
  “Promotion of Breastfeeding Intervention Trial (PROBIT): a randomized trial in the Re-
  public of Belarus,” JAMA, 285, 413–420.

Kramer, M. S. and R. Kakuma (2004): “The optimal duration of exclusive breastfeed-
  ing,” in Protecting Infants Through Human Milk, Springer, 63–77.




                                            27
Kramer, M. S. and S. H. Shapiro (1984): “Scientific challenges in the application of
  randomized trials,” JAMA, 252, 2739–2745.

LaLonde, R. J. (1986): “Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with
  experimental data,” The American Economic Review, 604–620.

MacArthur, C., K. Jolly, L. Ingram, N. Freemantle, C.-L. Dennis, R. Ham-
  burger, J. Brown, J. Chambers, and K. Khan (2009): “Antenatal peer support
  workers and initiation of breast feeding: cluster randomised controlled trial,” BMJ, 338.

Manski, C. F. (1999): Identification problems in the social sciences, Harvard University
  Press.

——— (2013): Public policy in an uncertain world: analysis and decisions, Harvard Univer-
  sity Press.

McLaughlin, J. E., N. R. Burstein, F. Tao, and F. M. K (2004): “Breastfeed-
  ing intervention design study-final evaluation design and analysis plan,” Report WIC-04-
  BFDSN, US Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, Office of Analysis,
  Nutrition and Evaluation.

Oliveira, V., E. Frazão, and D. M. Smallwood (2010): “Rising infant formula costs
  to the WIC program: recent trends in rebates and wholesale prices,” Report No. 59384,
  United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Olson, B. H., S. J. Haider, L. Vangjel, T. A. Bolton, and J. G. Gold (2010): “A
  quasi-experimental evaluation of a breastfeeding support program for low income women
  in Michigan,” Maternal and Child Health Journal, 14, 86–93.

Polhamus, B., K. Dalenius, H. Mackintosh, B. Smith, and G.-S. L (2011): “Pe-
  diatric nutrition surveillance report,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.




                                            28
Pritchett, L. and J. Sandefur (2014): “Context matters for size: why external validity
  claims and development practice do not mix,” Journal of Globalization and Development,
  4, 161–197.

Ravallion, M. (2012): “Fighting poverty one experiment at a time: a review of Abhijit
  Banerjee and Esther Duflo’s poor economics: a radical rethinking of the way to fight global
  poverty,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 103–114.

Reeder, J., K. Sibley, D. Arnold, and S. Euteneier (2008): “Effect of a telephone-
  based peer counseling program on duration and exclusivity of breastfeeding among Oregon
  WIC clients,” Oregon WIC Program Final Report: Portland, Oregon.

Reeder, J. A., T. Joyce, K. Sibley, D. Arnold, and O. Altindag (2014): “Tele-
  phone peer counseling of breastfeeding among WIC participants: a randomized controlled
  trial,” Pediatrics, 134, e700–e709.

Rodrik, D. (2008): “The new development economics: we shall experiment, but how shall
  we learn?” HKS Working Paper No. RWP08-055.

Rothwell, P. M. (2005): “External validity of randomised controlled trials:to whom do
  the results of this trial apply?,” The Lancet, 365, 82–93.

Schafer, E., M. K. Vogel, S. Viegas, and C. Hausafus (1998): “Volunteer peer
  counselors increase breastfeeding duration among rural low-income women,” Birth, 25,
  101–106.

Shadish, W. R., T. D. Cook, and D. T. Campbell (2002): Experimental and quasi-
  experimental designs for generalized causal inference, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.

Shaw, E. and J. Kaczorowski (1999): “The effect of a peer counseling program on
  breastfeeding initiation and longevity in a low-income rural population,” Journal of Human
  Lactation, 15, 19–25.




                                             29
Smith, J. A. and P. E. Todd (2005): “Does matching overcome LaLonde’s critique of
  nonexperimental estimators?” Journal of Econometrics, 125, 305–353.

Teele, D. L. (2014): Field experiments and their critics: essays on the uses and abuses of
  experimentation in the social sciences, Yale University Press.

Woolcock, M. (2013): “Using case studies to explore the external validity of complexde-
  velopment interventions,” Evaluation, 19, 229–248.

Yun, S., Q. Liu, K. Mertzlufft, C. Kruse, M. White, P. Fuller, and B.-P. Zhu
  (2010): “Evaluation of the Missouri WIC (Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
  Women, Infants, and Children) breast-feeding peer counselling programme,” Public Health
  Nutrition, 13, 229–237.




                                             30
Figure 1: Counties in Oregon with and without Peer Counseling for Breastfeeding, 2005-2007




                   Clatsop
                                 Columbia




                                                                                                                                    Umatilla                   Wallowa
                Tillamook     Washington         Multnomah      Hood River
                                                                                                              Morrow
                                                                                                Gilliam
                                                                                                                                               Union
                             Yamhill                                               Sherman
                                                    Clackamas
                                                                         Wasco


                         Polk           Marion

                                                                                                    Wheeler                                            Baker
              Lincoln
                                                                             Jefferson
                        Benton                   Linn                                                                       Grant



                                                                                                Crook

                                          Lane
                                                                       Deschutes




                                   Douglas
       Coos                                                                                                                                             Malheur

                                                                                                                        Harney


                                                             Klamath                     Lake


   Curry
                                       Jackson
                 Josephine




 Legend
           No peer counseling




                                                                                                                                                                  .
           RCT of peer counseling
           Non-RCT peer counseling                                                                            0        20       40              80 Miles
                                           Figures 2a-2d. Propensity Score Distribution by Sample

                                                                                                              Figure 2b. Propensity Scores by RFE Treatment Status
                        Figure 2a. Propensity Score by RFE Treatment Status                                                     English-speakers
                                         Spanish-speakers
          15




                                                                                          8
                                                                                          6
          10




                                                                                       Density
Density




                                                                                        4
          5




                                                                                          2
          0




                                                                                          0
               .5                  .6           .7                 .8             .9                     .4            .5            .6              .7                .8
                                          Propensity Score                                                                      Propensity Score
                                        Controls              Treated                                                          Controls            Treated



               Figure 2c. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs Non-participants                  Figure 2d. Propensity Score of RFE Participants vs. Non-participants
                                        Spanish-speakers                                                                      English-speakers
          8




                                                                                                 8
          6




                                                                                                 6
                                                                                          Density
Density
  4




                                                                                           4
          2




                                                                                                 2
          0




                                                                                                 0




                    0         .1           .2            .3             .4        .5                 0                 .1             .2                  .3                .4
                                          Propensity Score                                                                      Propensity Score

                              RFE Non-participants             RFE Participants                                      RFE Non-participants           RFE Participants
                                               Figures 2e-2h. Propensity Score Distributions by Sample

                   Figure 2e. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs. Rest of State                      Figure 2f. Propensity Score of RFE Participants v Rest of State
                                           Spanish-speakers                                                                       English-speakers




                                                                                                40
          8




                                                                                                30
          6
Density




                                                                                             Density
                                                                                               20
 4




                                                                                                10
          2
          0




                                                                                                0
               0                          .1                        .2               .3                0                      .05                       .1                   .15
                                               Propensity Score                                                                     Propensity Score

                                      Rest of State               RFE Participants                                       Rest of State                 RFE Participants



                    Figure 2g. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs. Post-RFE                          Figure 2h. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs Post-RFE
                                          Spanish-speakers                                                                       English-speakers
          15




                                                                                                20
                                                                                                15
          10
Density




                                                                                             Density
                                                                                               10
          5




                                                                                                5
          0




                                                                                                0




                   .05           .1             .15            .2            .25        .3             0               .05                .1                  .15            .2
                                               Propensity Score                                                                     Propensity Score

                                        Post-RFE              RFE Participants                                               Post-RFE              RFE participants
                                       Figures 2i-2j. Propensity Score Distributions by Sample

          Figure 2i. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs. Marion-Deschutes        Figure 2j. Propensity Scores of RFE Participants vs. Marion-Deschutes
                                    Spanish-speakers                                                                English-speakers




                                                                                     8
   4




                                                                                     6
   3
Density




                                                                                  Density
                                                                                    4
 2




                                                                                     2
   1
   0




                                                                                     0
          0               .2                .4                .6             .8             0         .1            .2            .3               .4          .5
                                      Propensity Score                                                              Propensity Score

                               Marion-Des            RFE Partiticipants                                      Marion-Des                RFE Participants
                 Table 1. Effect of Peer Counseling on Exclusive Breastfeeding from Oregon RFE by Duration and Language, 2005 - 2007


                                                  English Speaking WIC Clients                                       Spanish Speaking WIC Clients
  Exclusive breastfeeding               ITT                  OLS                    TOT                    ITT                    OLS                    TOT
  for at least                           (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)

  One month                            0.029                0.115**                0.039                  0.091*                  0.103**                0.100*
                                       (0.04)               (0.03)                 (0.05)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)

  R2                                   0.067                0.079                  0.073                   0.060                  0.063                  0.063
  Control group mean                   0.534                0.495                  0.495                   0.518                  0.511                  0.511



  Three months                         0.011                0.095**                0.014                  0.104**                 0.114**                0.115**
                                       (0.03)               (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)

  R2                                   0.066                0.075                  0.069                   0.071                  0.074                  0.074
  Control group mean                   0.346                0.312                  0.312                   0.402                  0.390                  0.390



  Six months                           -0.026               0.019                  -0.035                 0.073*                  0.089*                 0.081*
                                       (0.03)               (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.03)                 (0.04)

  R2                                   0.043                0.043                  0.038                   0.057                  0.060                  0.060
  Control group mean                   0.227                0.204                  0.204                   0.315                  0.298                  0.298


  First Stage                                                                      0.763**                                                               0.903**
                                                                                   (0.02)                                                                (0.01)

  Number of observations                                       889                                                                 815


Note: This table reports the intent-to-treat (ITT), ordinary least squares (OLS) and treatment on the treated (TOT) estimates of the effects of peer counseling on
exclusive breastfeeding for at least one, three and six months. The endogenous variable in columns (3) and (6) is the receipt of peer counseling, and the instrument is
a randomization indicator for the treatment group. All regressions control for mother’s age, age-squared, race/ethnicity, education, marital status, the month pregnancy
when certified for WIC, the natural logarithm of family income, WIC agency fixed effects plus indicator variables for missing month pregnancy and family income.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels are indicated by * < .05, ** < .01.
                           Table 2. Intention-to-Treat Effects of Peer Counseling by Terciles of Predicted Exclusive Breastfeeding


                                                     English Speaking WIC Clients                                     Spanish Speaking WIC Clients
     Exclusive breastfeeding              1 Month              3 Months              6 Months              1 Month               3 Months              6 Months
     for at least                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                    (5)                   (6)



     Lower tercile                         0.001                -0.025                 -0.047                0.119+                0.089                 0.074
                                           (0.06)               (0.05)                 (0.04)                (0.07)                (0.06)                (0.06)

     Middle tercile                        0.047                 0.041                 0.008                 0.113*                0.104*                0.060
                                           (0.05)                (0.05)                (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.05)                (0.05)

     Upper tercile                         0.025                 0.053                 -0.015                -0.022                0.040                 0.023
                                           (0.06)                (0.05)                (0.05)                (0.06)                (0.07)                (0.06)

     Number of observations                                       889                                                               815



Note: This table reports the intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates of the effects of peer counseling by terciles of predicted exclusive breastfeeding. Estimated with repeated
split sample (RSS) estimator as shown in Abadie et al. (2014). Variables that are used to predict the terciles are mother’s age, education, marital status and the natural
logarithm of family income. The number of repeated split sample repetitions is 500. Standard errors are in parentheses and based on 500 bootstrap samples. Significance
levels are indicated by + < .1, * < .05.
                                    Table 3. Bounds of Treatment Effects of Peer Counseling by Identifying Restrictions


        Exclusive breastfeeding                               1 Month                              3 Months                              6 Months
        for at least

                                                      Lower             Upper              Lower              Upper             Lower               Upper

        No information bounds


              English Speakers                        -0.45              0.55              -0.44               0.56              -0.47              0.53
        (1)
              Spanish Speakers                        -0.45              0.55              -0.46               0.54              -0.49              0.51


        Min, Max


              English Speakers                        -0.10              0.20              -0.10               0.19              -0.08              0.10
        (2)
              Spanish Speakers                        -0.17              0.31              -0.15               0.30              -0.09              0.22


        No Negative Effects & Min, Max


              English Speakers                         0.00              0.20               0.00               0.19              0.00               0.10
        (3)
              Spanish Speakers                         0.00              0.31               0.00               0.30              0.00               0.22



Note: This table reports the average treatment effect bounds under different assumptions about the range of unobserved counterfactual treatment effects of exclusive
breastfeeding. Panel (1) impose no restrictions on the possible treatment effects. In panel (2), the lower and upper bounds of the counterfactual treatment levels are
restricted to the minimum and maximum rates of exclusive breastfeeding in the 28 WIC agencies that did not provide peer counseling services. Panel (3) imposes the
same bound restrictions as panel (2) and additionally assumes that peer counseling could not result in negative treatment effects.
Table 4. Characteristics of Oregon WIC participants in Experimental and Non-Experimental Samples, 2005-2010


                                                        English Speaking WIC Clients

                       RFE       Non Participants         Rest of State           Post RFE          Marion & Deschutes
                                              Norm.                  Norm.                  Norm.                     Norm.
                      Mean        Diff.       Diff.      Diff.       Diff.      Diff.       Diff.      Diff.          Diff.

Age                    25.9        0.86**      0.11       1.06**      0.14       0.91**      0.12       1.08**         0.14

Education
< High school          0.27        0.04**      0.07       0.05**      0.09      0.02         0.03      0.04*           0.06
≥ High school          0.71       -0.02       -0.03      -0.03+      -0.04     -0.02        -0.03     -0.04*          -0.06
  Unknown              0.03       -0.03**     -0.09      -0.03**     -0.09     <0.01         0.01     <0.01           <0.01

Marital Status
 Single                0.46        0.05*       0.06     <0.01        <0.01       0.01        0.01      -0.02          -0.03
 Married / Partner     0.51        0.01        0.01      0.06**       0.08       0.01        0.01       0.06**         0.08
 Unknown               0.03       -0.06**     -0.17     -0.06**      -0.18      -0.02*      -0.06      -0.03**        -0.11

Family Income          1319        167**       0.12       186**       0.13        92**       0.07       152**          0.11

N                      889             4522                  19351                   9303                      9771


                                                        Spanish Speaking WIC Clients

                       RFE       Non Participants         Rest of State           Post RFE          Marion & Deschutes
                                              Norm.                  Norm.                  Norm.                     Norm.
                      Mean        Diff.       Diff.      Diff.       Diff.      Diff.       Diff.      Diff.          Diff.

Age                    28.9        1.20**      0.15       1.87**      0.22       0.79**      0.09       0.97**         0.12

Education
< High school          0.57       0.01         0.02      -0.02       -0.03      0.04*        0.06       0.09**         0.12
≥ High school          0.38      <0.01        <0.01       0.05**      0.07     -0.04*       -0.06      -0.11**        -0.15
  Unknown              0.05      -0.01        -0.04      -0.03**     -0.08     <0.01         0.01       0.02*          0.07

Marital Status
  Single               0.20        0.02        0.03     <0.01        <0.01      -0.04*      -0.06      -0.01          -0.02
  Married / Partner    0.77        0.06**      0.10      0.06**       0.09       0.07**      0.11       0.04*          0.07
  Unknown              0.03       -0.08**     -0.21     -0.06**      -0.17      -0.03**     -0.11      -0.03**        -0.10

Family Income          1559        178**       0.15       181**       0.15        59+        0.05       185**          0.15

N                      815             2272                   5506                   3791                      2577


Note: This table reports the average background characteristics of WIC clients in randomized field experiment (RFE) and
contrast them with the WIC clients from different samples. The column “Diff.” shows the difference in means for each
of the other samples relative to the RFE. The column “Norm. Diff” shows the normalized differences. Non-participants
are women from the same WIC agencies as those in the RFE who were offered participation in the study but declined.
Women in the rest of the state are from the 28 other WIC agenices in the state that did not provide peer counseling services.
The Post-RFE sample are WIC clients from three of the four experimental agencies that continued to offer peer counseling
services after the RFE was completed. Marion and Deschutes are two other WIC agencies that offered peer counseling
services to interested women from 2005-2010. Any difference smaller than 0.01 in absolute value is indicated with <0.01.
Significance levels are indicated by + < .1, * < .05 , * < .01.
        Table 5. Differences in Exclusive Breastfeeding Between Experimental Controls and Non-participants
                                      by Duration, Language and WIC Agencies


                                    English Speaking WIC Clients                         Spanish Speaking WIC Clients

Exclusive                     1 Month          3 Months          6 Months          1 Month          3 Months          6 Months
breastfeeding for

RFE Non-Participants (A)

      Difference                0.07*             0.05+             0.06*           <0.01              0.01             0.06+
                               (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)           (0.03)

      Mean Outcome              0.47              0.30             0.17              0.52              0.39             0.26

      N                                           4831                                                2523

Rest of State (B)

      Difference                0.05              0.03              0.04+            0.06+             0.07*            0.10**
                               (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)           (0.03)

      Mean Outcome              0.49              0.32             0.19              0.46              0.33             0.22

      N                                          19660                                                5757

Post RFE Non-Participants (C)

      Difference                0.10**            0.07*             0.06*            0.01              0.02             0.04
                               (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)           (0.03)

      Mean Outcome              0.44              0.28             0.17              0.50              0.38             0.28

      N                                           7295                                                2782

Marion & Deschutes (D)

      Difference                0.10**            0.04              0.04             0.11**            0.08**           0.08**
                               (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)           (0.03)

      Mean Outcome              0.43              0.30             0.19              0.42              0.32             0.23

      N                                           8637                                                2527


Note: This table reports the differences in exclusive breastfeeding between the control group from Oregon’s randomized
field experiment (RFE) and peer counseling non-participants from different samples. The reported differences are estimated
with linear regression weighted by the inverse probability score of being in the experimental control group. Weights are 1 for
                                                   pi
women in the experimental control group and 1−p       i
                                                        for those in the comparison group where pi detones the propensity score
for WIC client i. The propensity scores are estimated with logistic regression using age, age squared, the natural logarithm
of family income plus indicators for education and marital status as predictors. Comparison groups are as follows. Panel
(A): women from the same WIC agencies as those in the RFE who were offered participation in the study but declined;
panel (B): WIC clients in the rest of the state from the 28 other WIC agenices that did not provide peer counseling services;
panel (C): Non-participants WIC clients from three of the four experimental agencies that continued to offer peer counseling
services after the RFE was completed; panel (D): Non-participant WIC clients from Marion-Deschutes that offered peer
counseling services to interested women from 2005-2010. Any difference smaller than 0.01 in absolute value is indicated
with <0.01. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels are indicated by + < .1, *
< .05 , * < .01.
                 Table 6. Non-experimental Estimates of Peer Counseling on Exclusive Breastfeeding
                                    by Duration, Language and WIC Agencies


                                   English Speaking WIC Clients                       Spanish Speaking WIC Clients

Exclusive                    1 Month          3 Months         6 Months         1 Month          3 Months         6 Months
breastfeeding for

Post RFE Agencies (A)

      Unadjusted               0.04**           0.03*             0.01            0.05**           0.07**            0.05**
                              (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)

      Adjusted                 0.03*            0.03**            0.02*           0.03+            0.04**            0.04*
                              (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)

      Mean Outcome             0.44             0.27             0.17             0.48             0.35             0.25

      N                                         9303                                               3791

Marion & Deschutes (B)

      Unadjusted               0.02            <0.01             -0.00           -0.01             0.02              0.03
                              (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)

      Adjusted                 0.03**           0.02              0.01           <0.01             0.03              0.04
                              (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)

      Mean Outcome             0.42             0.28             0.17             0.41             0.32             0.24

      N                                         9771                                               2577


Note: This table reports the differences in exclusive breastfeeding between the clients who received peer counseling rela-
tive those who did not. The reported differences are estimated with linear regression weighted by the inverse probability
                                                                                           pi
receiving peer counseling. Weights are 1 for women who received peer counseling and 1−p       i
                                                                                                for those who did not where
pi detones the propensity score for WIC client i. The propensity scores are estimated with logistic regression using age,
age squared, the natural logarithm of family income plus indicators for education and marital status as predictors. Re-
gression samples are as follows. Panel (A): WIC clients from three of the four experimental agencies that continued to
offer peer counseling services after the RFE was completed; panel (B): Two WIC agencies that offered peer counseling
services to interested women from 2005-2010. Any difference smaller than 0.01 in absolute value is indicated with <0.01.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels are indicated by + < .1, * < .05 , *
< .01.
