NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IN-STATE EQUITY BIAS OF STATE PENSION PLANS
Jeffrey R. Brown
Joshua M. Pollet
Scott J. Weisbenner
Working Paper 21020
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21020
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015




This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) through grant #10-M-98363-1-01
to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We are grateful to seminar and conference
participants at the Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, China International Conference
in Finance, European Finance Association Conference, Finance Down Under Conference, Luxembourg
Asset Management Summit, MSU Federal Credit Union Conference on Financial Institutions and
Investments, University of Illinois, University of Oregon, University of Toronto, and Western Finance
Association Meetings, and Frank de Jong, Zoran Ivković, Denis Sosyura, Juan Sotes-Paladino, and
Jay Wang for useful comments and suggestions. We also thank Ed Bender and the Institute on Money
in State Politics for access to data on state campaign contributions, Clark Bensen of Polidata for access
to historical state election data, Diego Garcia and Oyvind Norli for their data on state name counts
in firm 10-k filings, and the University of Illinois Campus Research Board for additional financial
support. An earlier version of this paper was entitled “The Investment Behavior of State Pension Plans.”
Disclosure: Brown is a Trustee for TIAA and has also received compensation as a speaker, author,
or consultant from a number of financial institutions that are involved in retirement plan design. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21020.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Joshua M. Pollet, and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The In-State Equity Bias of State Pension Plans
Jeffrey R. Brown, Joshua M. Pollet, and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 21020
March 2015
JEL No. G11,G23,H75
ABSTRACT
This paper provides evidence on the investment behavior of 27 state pension plans that manage their
own equity portfolios. Even though these state plans typically hold broadly diversified portfolios,
they substantially over-weight the equity of companies that are headquartered in-state. The overweighting of within-state stocks by these plans is three times larger than that of other institutional
investors. We explore three possible reasons for this in-state bias: familiarity bias, information-based
investing, and political considerations. While there is a substantial preference for in-state stocks, there
is no similar tilt toward holding stocks from neighboring states or out-of-state stocks in the state’s
primary industry. States generate excess returns through their in-state investment activities, particularly
among smaller stocks in the state’s primary industry. We also find that state pension plans are more
likely to hold a within-state stock if the headquarters of the firm is located in a county that gave a high
fraction of its campaign contributions to the current governor. These politically-motivated holdings
yield excess returns for the pension fund.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
Joshua M. Pollet
College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
4039 BIF
515 E. Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
pollet@illinois.edu

Scott J. Weisbenner
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbenn@illinois.edu

1. Introduction
By nearly any measure, state and local pension plans are important institutions in the U.S.
economy. Public defined benefit plans held assets of over $3.7 trillion in 2014 1 (Federal
Reserve, 2014). With more than a third of these assets held in corporate stocks, public pensions
account for approximately 6 percent of the ownership of the U.S. stock market. 2 In terms of
participants, the U.S. Census Bureau reports that there were nearly 20 million members in state
and local retirement plans in 2012, with over 9 million receiving benefit payments. 3 Because the
responsibility for funding these defined benefit (DB) plans lies with the sponsoring government,
taxpayers that are not employed in the public sector also have a stake in how these pension plans
are managed. Thus, the investment decisions of these pension systems are of substantial interest
to state employees as well as the general public.
Although most state and local plans outsource their asset management activities to
outside money management companies, many of the larger state plans internally manage their
own equity portfolios. This raises natural questions about how well these states manage their
equity portfolios. This is of particular concern because public pensions operate in a more
politically-charged environment than private pensions. In this paper, we reconstruct the detailed
equity portfolios of the 27 state pension plans that, for at least part of our sample period,
managed their own U.S equity investments. We analyze these equity portfolios for in-state
investment bias and, given the evidence of a substantial bias, we examine explanations for and
the consequences of over-weighting in-state stocks.
1

Federal Reserve, Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States: Flows and Outstandings, Third Quarter 2014,
Table L.118, line 21 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/current/z1.pdf).
2
According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2012 Annual Survey of Public Pensions, total state and local government
holdings of corporate stocks amounted to $1.11 trillion of total 2012 assets of $3.05 trillion
(http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk). For comparison, total
U.S. stock market capitalization was $18.67 trillion in 2012 (https://www.quandl.com/c/economics/stock-marketcapitalization-by-country).
3
https://www.census.gov/govs/retire/.

1

We construct the individual equity portfolios of these plans, an exercise made possible
due to the legal requirement that “institutional investment managers who exercise investment
discretion over $100 million or more in Section 13(f) securities must report their holdings on
Form 13F with the SEC.” 4 Effectively, this means that all public pension funds that manage
their own stock investments worth in aggregate at least $100 million must file a detailed 13F
report with the SEC that includes for each asset the name, CUSIP number, number of shares, and
value of all securities held on the last day of the reporting period. The 13F data can be
aggregated to create the entire equity portfolio held by these state funds on each quarterly
reporting date, and these aggregate amounts can be compared with independent sources of data
on equity holdings of these plans to provide assurance that we are accurately measuring the
plan’s equity holdings. With this unique data, we can then explore how these states manage their
own U.S. equity portfolios.
Like most pension plans, states that manage their own portfolios tend to hold a broadlydiversified portfolio of stocks. Relative to the value weighted index of all U.S. equities, these
state-managed plans overweight large stocks (i.e., constituents of the S&P 500 index). Given
these holdings, it is not surprising that their performance tends to be highly correlated with broad
market indices.
A more in-depth analysis reveals strong evidence that these plans over-weight the stocks
of companies that are headquartered in the state. The size of this in-state bias is both
economically and statistically significant: on average, in-state stocks represent 9.7 percent of
these states’ pension portfolios, versus a 5.6 percent weighting that would occur if the state plan
was invested to mimic the overall value-weighted market portfolio – leading to a within-state

4

http://www.sec.gov/answers/form13f.htm.

2

bias of 76%. This tilt toward within-state stocks is three times larger than the 24% within-state
bias that Baik, Kang, and Kim (2010) found for institutional money managers in general. 5
The evidence of in-state bias is particularly interesting given the intuition of standard
portfolio theory in the presence of risky income from other sources. This theory suggests that,
all else equal, state governments should optimally under-weight in-state stocks rather than overweight them, because each state’s economic activity, tax revenue, and the income of state
residents is more positively correlated with the performance of in-state stocks compared to other
stocks. For example, if the economy of California is highly correlated with the performance of
the high-tech industry, then standard tax or consumption smoothing models would lead
California to under-weight tech stocks in order to ensure that the pension does not lose value at
precisely the same time that California is experiencing economic difficulties or fiscal pressures.
To over-weight in-state stocks is analogous to an individual investing in the stock of her own
employer. Doing so increases the correlation between labor income and stock performance.
This decision would increase, rather than decrease, the overall portfolio risk. Indeed, we find,
controlling for year and state effects, that the return on the stock investments in a state pension
plan is strongly correlated with growth in state tax revenue during the next year.
Given the intuition that counsels against an in-state bias, and the potential costs of this
lack of diversification, why might states still choose to use this approach? We explore three
reasons. The first is familiarity bias, or put simply, the tendency for people and institutions to
invest in what they know (Huberman, 2001). 6 A key feature of familiarity bias is that it is not

5

Their sample includes mutual fund managers, independent investment advisers, insurance companies, banks, and
public and private pension fund managers. They find that within-state holdings are 8.2 percent of institutional
portfolios, which is 24% larger than the 6.6% they would hold if they mirrored the market.
6
Other examples of familiarity bias include the home bias puzzle, i.e., the tendency of citizens of countries to overinvest in stocks from their own country (e.g., French and Poterba, 1991), as well as Bernartzi’s (2001) finding that
401(k) participants in general overweight their investment in employer stock but companies with high ownership of

3

information-based, i.e., investing in the familiar does not lead to excess returns. If local
investing induces a positive correlation between the state’s economy and its pension fund
performance while delivering no excess returns, then the citizens of the state would experience a
welfare loss as a result of this in-state investment bias because of the extra risk involved (i.e.,
when the pension fund is performing poorly, state tax revenue is also in decline).
A second possible reason for the in-state bias is that the officials making the investment
decisions have an information advantage with regard to in-state stocks. Evidence of an
information advantage for local investors has been found in many other contexts, including
institutional money managers (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 2001, and Baik, Kang, and Kim,
2010), individual investors (e.g., Ivković and Weisbenner, 2005), equity analysts (e.g., Malloy,
2005, and Bae, Stulz, and Tan, 2008), and “block” acquirers of corporate shares (Kang and Kim,
2008). There are two distinctions between the “familiarity” explanation and the “information”
explanation. First, and most importantly, the latter implies excess returns while the former does
not. Second, familiarity based on geography or industry should be associated with greater
holdings of stocks located in nearby states as well as greater holdings of out-of-state stocks in a
state’s dominant industry.
A third possible explanation is that state pension plan investment allocations are affected
by political considerations. The first two explanations are typically distinguished on the basis of
whether the returns on local (or in this case, in-state) investments outperform non-local
investments. The relevance of the third explanation is evaluated by examining the link between
investment decisions and various measures of political activity (e.g. voting patterns and
campaign contribution data for the most recent gubernatorial election cycle). It is worth noting
employer stock in their 401(k) plan do not outperform companies with lower concentrations of ownership in
employer stock.

4

that these three explanations are not mutually exclusive, and all three could contribute to the
overweighting of within-state stocks.
Our evidence is supportive of an information-based explanation and is not consistent with
broad-based familiarity tied to geography or industry. For example, although state pension fund
managers invest disproportionately in the within-state stocks in the state’s primary industry (e.g.,
energy for Texas, finance for New York, business equipment/computers for California), they do
not favor out-of-state stocks in this same dominant home-state industry. In addition, the
performance results suggest that information advantages stop at the borders of the state.
To test for the presence of information-based investing, we initially analyze the subset of
the state pension plans’ portfolio where we might expect within-state investors to have an
informational advantage over non-local investors. Following Ivković and Weisbenner (2005),
we examine the return to investments in small stocks that are not constituents of the S&P 500
index (and thus do not have the same level of national attention). We pay particular attention to
the stocks of small firms that are members of the state’s primary industry. We find that state
pension fund managers deliver excess returns (as measured by the alpha) by investing in small,
in-state stocks, especially those that are in the state’s largest industry. Indeed, we find that
among non-S&P 500 firms in a state’s largest industry (as measured by the industry’s share of
total market capitalization among all in-state firms), state pension fund investment managers are
able to outperform the out-of-state small firms in the same industry by 6.5% per year (controlling
for the underlying risk of the investments in a four-factor model).
Another test of information-based investing is a comparison of the performance of stocks
held and those not held by the pension fund. We find that the within-state stocks pension plans
hold outperform the within-state stocks they do not hold by 3.0% per year; this differential

5

increases to 5.0% per year when we focus on within-state stocks held versus not held that are in
the state’s largest industry. Moreover, we find that among the stocks of small firms in the state’s
largest industry, the stocks that the pension fund holds outperform those that it chooses not to
hold by 8.3 percentage points per year. Consistent with the information advantage of state
pension plans stopping at the state boundary, no significant return difference exists between outof-state firms that the plan invests in versus those it does not. The evidence indicates that some
portion of the active management by state pension plans results in stock selection with an
information advantage.
While the evidence is consistent with there being an information-based rationale for
overweighting in-state stocks, we also find evidence suggesting the relevance of political factors.
We obtain gubernatorial campaign contribution data from the Institute on Money in State Politics
and gubernatorial election data from Polidata. These datasets allow us to link county-level
campaign contributions and electoral outcomes to the county where a firm is headquartered. The
evidence indicates that state pension plans are more likely to hold a within-state firm in its
portfolio if the county where the firm is located gave a high fraction of its campaign
contributions in the last election to the current governor. Interestingly, the performance of instate investments is strongest for stocks in the counties that gave the current governor the highest
fraction of their financial support during the preceding election cycle, with these potentially
politically connected holdings earning risk-adjusted returns that are 5.7% higher on an annual
basis than the stocks from the counties that were less generous to the governor. Although we are
unable, due to data limitations, to further identify the channel through which political
connections influence state pension plans, our results are consistent with the importance of
networking in fund management (as found in Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008)) and research

6

on political contributions/connections and stock returns (e.g., Cooper, Gulen, and Ovtchinnikov
(2010)).
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the prior literatures on state pension
plans and their investment behavior as well as the literature in finance about local investing.
Section 3 documents the U.S. equity holdings of state pension plans that decide to manage their
own stock investments and the evidence of a strong in-state bias. Implications of the within-state
bias are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes and offers extensions.

2. Prior Literatures on State Pension Plan Investment Behavior and Local Investing
2.1 State Pension Plan Investment Behavior
Despite the importance of state and local plans, the empirical literature analyzing their
investment behavior is rather small. This fact is explained largely by data limitations. Early
papers relied primarily on the PenData data, which was derived from a survey of state and local
pension plans conducted on an irregular basis from the late 1980s through the late 1990s. Useem
and Mitchell (2000) provided evidence that governance policies – most notably independent
performance evaluations – influenced asset allocation at broad levels, such as the mix of equity
and fixed income investments, the share of non-U.S. assets, and whether a plan contracts
externally for asset management. Coronado, Engen, and Knight (2003) showed that public
pension plans earned a lower rate of return than private plans in 1998, but the authors were
unable to determine whether this under-performance was reflected different allocations across
broad asset classes or inferior investment selection abilities within an asset class. Munnell &
Sunden (2001) discuss that in the early 1980s, some public plans sacrificed returns for “social

7

considerations,” but that plan managers became increasingly sophisticated and (at the time of
their study) performed on par with their private sector counterparts.
More recent studies have used other data sources. Munnell, Haverstick, Soto, and Aubry
(2008) use data from the Census of Governments to obtain an understanding of the broader
universe of public plans, including more than 2,000 locally-administered plans. The authors
were able to analyze broad trends in overall equity allocation, but did not have detailed
information on equity holdings. Similarly, Pennacchi and Rastad (2011) analyzed portfolio
allocations of 125 state pension funds from 2000 to 2009 using data from Wilshire Associates,
and found that plans chose greater asset-liability portfolio risk following periods of relatively
poor investment performance.
Even though each of these studies provided useful insights on asset allocation, none of
the authors had data on the specific securities held by public plans. Thus, the authors were
unable to investigate the existence or extent of any in-state portfolio bias. The key advantage of
our data is the specific information about the decision of a pension plan to hold a particular
stock. This level of detail enables us to not only document in-state investment bias, but also
differentiate among competing explanations for it. Analysis at the security level allows us to
control for differing riskiness across various potential stock investments and enables us to link
characteristics of the firm and the location of the firm’s headquarters to whether the state pension
fund decides to hold that firm’s stock.
Only one other study has been able to examine the in-state bias and performance of
public pensions using detailed portfolio data. Hochberg and Rauh (2013) study limited partner
private equity holdings of public pensions and find over-weighting of in-state investments. They
find that public pensions over-weight in-state private equity by approximately10 percent of the

8

private equity portfolio, or about half of one percent of the overall state pension portfolio. 7 An
important distinction of our study from theirs is that we focus on publicly-traded stocks, not
private equity. This distinction is important for at least two reasons. First, according to Wilshire
Consulting (2014), holdings of domestic public equity by state plans in the U.S. were more than
three times larger than holdings of private equity, comprising 28.1 percent of the portfolio,
versus 9.2 percent for private equity (with this difference in portfolio share being larger in earlier
years). Second, because holdings of public equity are plausibly more transparent to the public
than are holdings of private equity, there may be different incentives and different opportunities
for tilting the investment portfolios. Indeed, as we will discuss in more detail below, Hochberg
and Rauh (2013) find evidence of underperformance of state plans in within-state private-equity
investments, whereas we document over-performance in within-state public-equity holdings.

2.2 Local Investing
A growing literature in finance documents that many different types of investors seem to
tilt their portfolio holdings toward local investments and, further, make better stock picks or
recommendations concerning firms that are geographically proximate. The interpretation of this
finding is that investors located closer to a potential investment may have more information
concerning that investment than more distant investors.
Coval and Moskowitz (1999) examine the holdings of U.S. mutual fund managers and
find a local bias in their holdings. Coval and Moskowitz (2001) further find that mutual fund
managers’ local investments (defined as investments in firms located within 100 kilometers of
the manager) outperform their non-local investments by 2.65% per year. However, since mutual
7

According to Wilshire Associates (2014), private equity comprised about 5.6% of the overall portfolio of state
pensions in 2008, which is near the end of the sample analyzed by Hochberg and Rauh. We note that the share of
state portfolios in private equity has increased, and the share in public equities has decreased, since that time.

9

fund managers may target a particular benchmark index, the extent to which they can tilt their
portfolio toward local stocks appears to be limited – the bias in aggregated mutual fund holdings
is only 13% (mutual fund managers invest 7% in local stocks; if they all simply invested in the
stock market, the percent of local holdings would be 6.2%).
Baik, Kang, and Kim (2010) extend the work of Coval and Moskowitz by examining the
portfolio decisions of all institutional money managers (that is, all institutions that file a Form
13F with the SEC disclosing their U.S. equity holdings). Besides mutual fund managers, this
includes investment advisors, insurance companies, banks, and the small number of pension
plans and endowments that manage their own money. They find that these institutional investors
tilt their holdings to local stocks, with a local bias of 24% (their definition of a local investment
is the holding of a firm headquartered within the same state as the fund manager, which makes
their result on local bias directly comparable to our analysis of in-state bias). In general,
institutional money managers invest 8.2% of their portfolio in within-state stocks (while their
market weight is 6.6%). Again, there appears to be some information in the local holdings of
institutional investors because these holdings earn excess returns, particularly for those entities
classified as investment advisors.
Equity analysts and corporate acquirers also seem to exploit a local informational
advantage. Malloy (2005) finds that geographically-proximate analysts issue more accurate
forecasts and update their forecasts more frequently. Bae, Stulz, and Tan (2008) document local
analysts’ information advantage in a non-U.S. setting. Kang and Kim (2008) find that local
acquirers of a “block” of corporate shares engage in more monitoring than do more distant
acquirers, with the more local target earning a higher return on the announcement of the
acquisition and having better post-acquisition operating performance.

10

Finally, individual investors exhibit a strong local bias in both their 401(k) plan through
investments in employer stock (Benartzi, 2001) and through their direct stock holdings outside of
their retirement plan (Ivković and Weisbenner, 2005). Indeed, the local bias among individual
investors is substantially larger than that for institutions: the typical individual holds one-third of
their stock portfolio in local stocks, whereas if they instead invested in the overall market, the
fraction of local stocks would be just over one-tenth. Benartzi (2001) finds no information
advantage, i.e., there is no difference in the future performance of stocks with low or high
company stock allocations in the firm’s 401(k) plan. However, Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)
find that outside their retirement plan, individuals’ local stock holdings outperform their nonlocal stock holdings, 8 but only for the subset of stocks not in the S&P 500. For the nationallyknown S&P 500 stocks, the authors find that being “local” confers no informational advantage.
Thus, a local tilt in portfolio holdings, although slight in many cases, has been
documented across several different types of market participants with many of them earning
some “return to their locality.” State pensions are of particular interest because, unlike other
institutional investors, they have to take into account both background risk (how is the
performance of holdings in the pension fund related to the state’s tax revenue growth), as well as
political considerations when making their investment decisions.

3. What U.S. Stocks Do State Pension Plans Hold?
3.1 Overview of Portfolio-Holdings Data
In order to construct the equity portfolio holdings for the states that self-manage their
portfolios, we obtain data on plan-level holdings of publicly traded stocks from the SEC form
8

While Massa and Simonov (2006) document a similar result for investors in Sweden, Seasholes and Zhu (2010)
challenge this conclusion.

11

13F filings. Institutional investment managers with more than $100 million under management
in domestic equities are required to file the 13F report. Investment managers disclose their
holdings on a quarterly basis. 9
Most states have multiple public plans: a 2007 Wilshire Associates research report on the
financial status of state pension plans in 2007 includes 125 state plans in the U.S. The vast
majority of these plans contract with outside firms for their investment management. Because
these outside investment managers are required only to report their total holdings of each
security, and specifically are not required to identify the clients for whom they are holding the
assets, it is not possible to evaluate the detailed security holdings by state plans with these
outside investment managers. We are able to identify 27 state pension plans that filed 13F forms
at least once between the first quarter of 1980 and the third quarter of 2008. In table 1 we show
the state plans that are included in our data, the first and last quarters that they appear in our
sample (we collected holdings data each quarter through the third quarter of 2008), and the total
number of quarters in which they appear in the sample. A few of these states, such as Colorado
and Michigan, invest the assets of multiple state pension systems together as one, so these 27
state pension plans are represented by 20 separate investment funds.
We can compare the characteristics of these plans to the ones not in our sample using
data from the 2007 Wilshire report on the financial status of state pension plans. Table 2 reports
that 21 plans managed their own U.S. equity holdings at the end of 2007 (representing 17
separate investment funds). Although this represents only one sixth of the 125 state plans in the

9

There is some confusion in the academic literature over the filing requirements for form 13F. For example,
Badrinath and Wahal (2002) suggest that the filing of a 13F is voluntary for public pension plans. Our discussions
with the relevant SEC staff, however, suggest that state pensions with more than $100 million in 13F assets are, in
fact, required to file. Thus, the absence of many state pensions from the data is due to the use of investment
managers under whose name the assets are reported, not due to the absence of a requirement to report.

12

Wilshire report, these 21 plans manage more than half (53 percent) of all the state pension plan
assets.
As these figures suggest, it is primarily the very large plans that manage their own equity
portfolio: the median size of the plans in our sample was $54.9 billion in 2007, compared with a
median size of $8.6 billion for plans outside of our sample. These large plans tend to hold a
slightly higher fraction (43%) of their overall portfolio in equities than do the smaller plans not
in our sample (41%). Finally, for state pension plans that report U.S. stock holdings on form
13F, these stock holdings represent the vast majority of the plans total U.S. equity ownership
(obtained by comparing total 13F holdings with total U.S. equity holdings in the Wilshire
report). As seen in Table 2, the U.S. stock holdings reported on the 13F represent approximately
four fifths of total U.S. equity holdings for half of the plans in 2007.
Using the 13F data, we are able to construct the self-managed equity portfolios for these
plans. Our data spans 115 quarters (from the first quarter of 1980 to the third quarter of 2008),
although not all plans manage their own portfolio over the entire sample period. We will report
the state pension plans’ equity allocation by size (S&P 500 versus smaller companies) and by
industry classification (we use a 12-industry classification, focusing on the largest industry for a
given state). 10 We also compare the pension plan weights of their U.S. equity investments to the
weights of these particular categories of stocks in the entire U.S. stock market.

3.2 Is There an In-State Bias?

10

The industry classifications are from Ken French’s website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/det_12_ind_port.html. The 12 broad industry
categories are: 1) consumer nondurables; 2) consumer durables; 3) manufacturing; 4) energy (e.g., oil); 5) chemicals
and allied products; 6) business equipment (e.g., computers/software); 7) telecommunications; 8) utilities; 9)
wholesale, retail and some services; 10) healthcare; 11) finance; and 12) “other”.

13

Table 3 provides the first evidence that state pension plans managing their own equity
portfolios exhibit a substantial in-state bias in their stock holdings. A firm is defined as being instate if it is headquartered in the same state as the pension plan. In rows 1 through 6, we
compare in-state and out-of-state stock holdings – further delineated by large (S&P 500) stocks
versus smaller (non-S&P 500) stocks – to the holdings we would expect if these plans simply
held a value-weighted index for the entire U.S. stock market. We report portfolio shares on a
value-weighted basis – in other words, we simply add up the asset holdings across all 27 plans in
our sample for each quarter, compute the portfolio shares for this overall state pension plan
portfolio, and then take the average of these shares across the 115 quarters. These valueweighted state-pension plan holdings over the 115 quarters of the sample are then compared to
the average quarterly stock-market weights.
On a value-weighted basis, the plans in our sample hold 9.7 percent of their portfolio in
in-state stocks (column 1), versus a benchmark holding of only 5.6 percent in the market
portfolio (column 2), a difference of 4.2 percentage points in their portfolio (column 3),
representing a 76% overweighting (column 4). The Coval and Moskowitz (1999) study of
mutual fund managers and the Baik, Kang, and Kim (2010) study of institutional managers in
general, were also conducted on a value-weighted basis across funds/institutions, thus allowing
direct comparison with our sample of state pension plans. Coval and Moskowitz found mutual
fund managers overweight local holdings by 13% and Baik, Kang, and Kim found that
institutions in general overweight their within-state holdings by 24% – one third of the within
state bias exhibited by state pension plans that manage their own U.S. equity holdings. 11

11

We also find that the bias to invest in within-state stocks does not spill over to the stocks of firms headquartered in
neighboring states (e.g., Oklahoma for Texas; New Jersey for New York), as the percent underweighting of
neighbor-state stocks and non-neighbor out-of-state stocks is very similar (rows 7 and 8 of Table 3).

14

States exhibiting an in-state bias would seem to be ignoring the initial intuition of most
financial economists because this bias would appear to be increasing, rather than decreasing, the
volatility of the state’s overall fiscal “portfolio” – more on this in Section 4.1 and Table 4.
Relative to other institutional money managers, a state pension fund manager should also
account for the background risk of the state financial situation. For example, if the economy of
Texas (and consequently the state’s budget balance) is correlated with the performance of the oil
industry, it would be unwise from a diversification perspective for state pension plans in Texas to
invest heavily in oil stocks. Indeed, Texas might increase the benefits of diversification by
holding airline stocks that do particularly well when oil prices are low.
Prior work on the returns to local information suggests that information advantages are
most likely to exist for smaller, non-S&P 500, companies (Ivkovich and Weisbenner, 2005). The
intuition is simply that it would be difficult to maintain an informational advantage on the large
firms which are national in scope, that tend to have dedicated analysts at leading investment
firms, and that receive prominent coverage from the business press. To the extent that
informational advantages exist for investments in local firms, therefore, they are likely to be
concentrated in smaller firms that receive less national attention.
At first blush, this within-state bias of state pension plans appears to be concentrated in
larger S&P 500 stocks, whereas the in-state non-S&P 500 stocks are held in the same proportion
as in the market portfolio (rows 2 and 3). However, once one considers that these pension plans
underweight small company stocks in general by a wide margin, it becomes clear that the in-state
bias is present in the selection of smaller stocks. For example, out-of-state small company stock
comprises nearly 27% of the market portfolio, but only 14% of the portfolio of state pension
plans (row 6). Thus, while in-state non-S&P 500 stocks comprise 9.7% of all non-S&P 500

15

stocks in the state pension portfolios (1.5 / 15.5), they account for only 5.3% of the market
weight of all non-S&P 500 stocks (1.5 / 28.3), indicating a substantial within-state bias.
As a final breakdown of the state pension plan portfolio, we examine investment in firms
in the industry that dominate the state’s economic base. For example, it is reasonable to think
that investment managers in Texas may know more about the oil industry than investment
managers in Illinois. Further, members of the primary industry in the state may have stronger
within-state political connections than other firms. The final 6 rows of Table 3 present the
portfolio holdings on the basis of whether a firm is in the largest industry in the state (as
measured by total firm market capitalization across the industries in the state at the end of the
prior quarter). For example, when the state in question is California, the state’s largest industry
is business equipment/technology (e.g., computer/software), and thus any firm that is in the
business equipment/technology industry is coded as a 1 when the plan being analyzed is a
California plan, and zero otherwise. 12 Thus, Microsoft (headquartered in Washington state)
would be coded as “Largest industry = 1” for California PERS and California Teachers, but
would be coded as “Largest industry = 0” for all other plans in states for which technology is not
the largest industry. The within-state bias of pension plan holdings for stocks in the state’s
largest industry is 89% (3.7% of the portfolio but only 2.0% of the market benchmark; row 10),
while the out-of-state bias for stocks in the largest industry in the pension plan’s home state is
zero (e.g., investments by the California plans in technology companies in Washington; row 11).
12

We define the largest industry of a state as being the industry with the largest share of aggregate market
capitalization of all public-traded firms in the state at the end of the prior quarter. The industry that is most
frequently the largest industry for the 17 states that have pension plans with 13F holdings in our sample are as
follows: Alaska – telecommunications; California – business equipment (e.g., computers/software); Colorado –
telecommunications; Florida – finance; Illinois – manufacturing; Kentucky – wholesale, retail, and some services;
Maryland – manufacturing; Michigan – consumer durables (e.g., cars); Missouri – consumer nondurables; Montana
– utilities; New Mexico – finance; New York – finance; Ohio – chemicals and allied products; Pennsylvania –
finance; Texas – energy (e.g., oil); Virginia – consumer nondurables; Wisconsin – manufacturing. Thus, there is
considerable diversity of the largest industry across these states as of the 12 Fama-French industries, 10 of them are
the “largest industry” of at least one state (the exceptions being health care and “other”).

16

4. Implications and Explanations of the In-State Bias
4.1 Do Pension Stock Holdings Exacerbate or Mitigate State Fiscal Risks?
The data on portfolio holdings clearly indicate that there exists an in-state bias. Before
turning to an analysis of why state pension plans might choose this approach, it is instructive to
consider whether this in-state bias is likely to have welfare consequences aside from any
differences in returns. The intuition from standard economic models would suggest that a state
pension plan would want to avoid investing in securities whose returns are more positively
correlated with the home state’s tax revenues than other stocks; otherwise, the state will observe
a greater decline in its pension assets at the same time that it is also experiencing negative shocks
to its tax revenue.
Table 4 reports the correlations of the growth in annual state tax revenue with both the
contemporaneous and lagged annual returns on the self-managed U.S. equity portion of the state
pension plan from an OLS regression that also includes both year and state fixed effects. The
inclusion of year fixed effects assures that the correlation between the growth in state tax
revenue and state pension plan performance is identified by variation in plan stock holdings (and
their performance) across states as opposed to simple time-series variation in economy-wide
factors, such as the U.S. stock market. We find that there is zero correlation with
contemporaneous pension returns and the growth in state tax revenue (column 1), but a positive
correlation emerges when we lag returns by one year (column 2). Specifically, in column 2, we
find a positive coefficient of 0.16 on the one-year-lagged state pension return on U.S. stock
holdings. This lead-lag relation likely reflects the fact that stocks are typically leading indicators
of changes in a state’s economy. These changes are then reflected in tax revenue growth a year
later. Thus, state plans are investing in a manner that creates a positive correlation between this

17

year’s pension returns on U.S. stock investments and the subsequent year’s growth in tax
revenue over and above the baseline correlation between tax revenue growth and the U.S. stock
market index. Given the within-state bias in stock investments by state pension plans
documented in Table 3, this higher correlation should not be a surprise.

4.2 Familiarity versus Information: Do States Earn Excess Returns from their In-State Bias?
Given that overweighting in-state stocks increases risk to taxpayers (as measured by the
correlation between investment returns and the growth in tax revenues), it is important to know
whether state pension plans are able to generate excess returns on their stock holdings (consistent
with an information-based story), or whether the in-state bias is welfare-reducing and largely
driven by familiarity or political factors. Thus, we now turn to an analysis of investment
performance.
As a starting point, we report in Table 5 analyses of aggregated state pension plan stock
holdings as a whole using standard empirical asset-pricing models. In this and subsequent tables
that analyze the returns from various stock holdings, we calculate monthly returns aggregated
across state pension plans based on pension plan holdings from the end of the prior quarter
(weighted by the dollar amount of the holding). State pension plan holdings are available every
3 months from the end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of 2008. Thus,
the monthly return series calculated based on these holdings spans April of 1980 to December of
2008 or 345 months.
In column 1 of Table 5, we report the results from the CAPM model, in column 2 we
report results from a 3-factor model that adds size and value factors (Fama and French, 1993),
and in column 3 we report the results from a 4-factor model that adds a momentum factor

18

(Carhart, 1997). These return analyses suggest that relative to the market portfolio, the selfmanaged state plans tend to overweight large stocks and underweight small stocks (consistent
with the portfolio shares documented in Table 3). We do not find strong evidence of any other
“style” investing: the coefficients on the value and momentum factors are rather small in
magnitude even though they are statistically significant. We also find in Table 5 that the alpha,
or risk-adjusted performance, of the overall stock portfolio of state pension plans is
insignificantly different from zero and small in magnitude. Thus, in aggregate, state pension
plan portfolios mimic the U.S. stock market, with a slight tilt towards large-cap stocks.
The more detailed analysis in Table 6 reveals some evidence consistent with informationbased portfolio decisions. In this table, we separately measure alpha for in-state and out-of-state
stock holdings. 13 A priori, we would expect that if the state pension plan managers have an
informational advantage on any type of their plan holdings, it would most likely be the homestate stocks of firms that are within the state’s largest industry (i.e., Texas pension plan managers
likely know more about oil/energy firms than do New York pension plan managers). In
particular, we would expect this advantage to be stronger in smaller (non-S&P 500) stocks that
have less of a national reputation and receive less coverage from professional analysts.
We begin by looking at holdings in panel A of Table 6. Across all industries (the first
row), the alphas are not significantly different across in-state and out-of-state investments.
Consistent with the hypothesis that it is difficult to have or maintain an information advantage
for larger, more well-known stocks, there is no significant difference in the alphas for S&P 500
firms across in-state and out-of-state investments. Although the difference in performance
across within-state and out-of-state holdings for non-S&P 500 firms is larger than it is for S&P

13

All risk-adjusted returns (i.e., alpha) reported in Tables 6, 7, and 10 are obtained from a 4-factor model.

19

500 firms (rising from 4 basis points per month in column 6 to 16 basis points in column 9), it
just misses statistical significance (p-value = 0.11).
In row 2 of Table 6, we focus on the largest industry in a state. Here, evidence of
information-based selection of stocks surfaces. We find that investments made in stocks that are
in the largest home-state industry of the pension plan, the in-state portion of the portfolio
significantly outperforms the out-of-state portion of the portfolio. While this is true for both
S&P and non-S&P firms, the advantage is more pronounced for the smaller stocks. Specifically,
we find that in-state, non-S&P 500 stocks from the state’s largest industry outperform out-ofstate small stock investments from the same industry by 53 basis points per month, or an annual
difference of 6.5 percentage points (roughly twice the differential found for S&P 500 stocks).
A natural question is whether this performance is due to the in-state location or simply
due to close geographic proximity. To address this, we have also compared (in results not
shown) in-state holdings with holdings from neighboring states (e.g., oil holdings in Texas to oil
holdings in Oklahoma from the perspective of the Texas plan). The difference in risk-adjusted
returns of in-state and neighbor-state holdings in the largest home-state industry is a statistically
significant 0.47% per month for all stock holdings, and 0.58% for non-S&P 500 stocks. Thus, it
is the actual in-state location that is important, not geographic proximity that is linked to the
superior stock selection – any information-based portfolio holdings seem to stop at the state
boundary.
Whereas panel A focused on holdings, panel B of Table 6 focuses on stocks that the
pension fund purchased during the prior quarter. We define a purchase of a stock as an increase
in the number of shares of stock held by the fund from the start to the end of the prior quarter,
adjusted for stock splits. We calculate monthly returns, aggregated across all state pension

20

funds, for the three months following the purchase made in the prior quarter. 14 As with holdings,
we find no differences in the performance between in-state and out-of-state stock purchases
across all industries, but strong differences in the stocks purchased from the largest industry in
the plan’s home state. In particular, we find a 1.16 percentage point difference in monthly
returns between in-state and out-of-state stocks purchased over the prior quarter. This is an
extremely large difference in performance that is driven both by superior performance of in-state
stock purchases (+0.72) and underperformance of out-of-state purchases (-0.43) within the
largest industry.
The prior analysis was based on comparing in-state and out-of-state stocks held by the
plans, another way to assess the presence of information-based investing is to test whether these
self-managed state plans are able to choose the better stocks and shun the worse stocks (Coval
and Moskowitz, 2001, conduct such an analysis for mutual fund managers). We examine this
issue in Table 7 by comparing the performance of the stocks in which state pensions chose to
invest relative to those that they avoided, for various types of stock investments.
The evidence in Table 7 is striking: for in-state stocks – and especially for smaller instate stocks or in-state stocks from the largest state industry – pension funds appear to be able to
differentially choose between winners and losers (and indeed, they seem particularly adept at
avoiding the losers). The in-state stocks held in the state pension plan outperform in-state not
held in the plan by a statistically significant 25 basis points per month on a risk-adjusted basis, or
3 percent annually. Further, when comparing small (non-S&P 500) stocks in the state’s largest
industry, we find that the firms in which the state plan invests have a risk-adjusted return of 32
basis points per month while those firms that are avoided by the state have a negative risk14

Specifically, the returns in Panel B of Table 6 are weighted by the dollar amount of the buy (calculated as the
change in shares held last quarter multiplied by the average of the beginning and end-of-period stock prices from the
prior quarter), aggregated across all the state pension plans.

21

adjusted return of 35 basis points per month, for a difference of 67 basis points per month. This
translates into an 8.3 percent annual return difference between the performance of small in-state
stocks from the largest industry that the state invests in and the performance of those they shun.
Put simply, CALPERS appears to know which in-state small technology stocks to buy and which
to avoid, and Texas Teachers knows which in-state small oil companies to buy and which to
shun.
Also consistent with an information-based explanation, we do not find any evidence of an
information advantage when comparing the returns of “chosen” versus “avoided” out-of-state
stocks. In results not shown, we also confirm that there is no informational advantage for stocks
held versus not held in neighboring states (our prior example of Oklahoma as the neighbor of
Texas.) Across all stocks, the return to neighbor-state stocks held minus neighbor-state stocks
not held is insignificantly different from zero (0.07% per month, SE = 0.12). A similar analysis
of neighbor-state stocks held versus not held that are from the largest industry of the pension
fund’s home state also show insignificant differences (-0.18% per month, SE = 0.31). Thus,
once again, there is something special about the state boundaries, rather than close geographic
proximity.

4.3 Political Considerations
Despite some efforts to isolate state pension funds from political interference, state
pension fund management is nonetheless potentially subject to political considerations. These
considerations could be quite explicit – such as outright corruption (e.g., sharing of inside
information, states investing in companies in return for political support, etc.) – or it could be

22

much more subtle – such as investment managers simply have more exposure to the leadership
of well-connected companies (particularly those that share similar political leanings).
Finding systematic evidence of outright corruption is difficult because empirical work is
limited by the fact that those who engage in corrupt behavior have an obvious incentive to hide
their actions from the public, and thus from researchers. Until quite recently, researchers
circumvented this problem primarily by using variation in the amount of corruption perceived by
the public. 15 Olken (2009), however, has shown that using corruption perceptions can lead to
incorrect conclusions, even if the perceptions appear correct on average. A recently emerging
literature – particularly in development economics – has begun to focus on more objective
measures. For example, Olken (2007) documents missing expenditures in Indonesian road
projects by comparing independent engineering estimates of prices and quantities to official
village expenditure reports. 16
Glaeser and Saks (2006) note that there is no shortage of corruption in the U.S. with
federal prosecutors in the U.S. having “convicted more than 10,000 government officials of acts
of official corruption, such as conflict of interest, fraud, campaign-finance violations, and
obstruction of justice” between 1990 and 2002. Using this data, Hochberg and Rauh (2013) find
that overweighting in home-state private-equity investments by public pension funds is greater in
states with higher levels of corruption.
Of course, political connections and influence can affect firm value even in the absence
of outright corruption. Indeed, a number of papers have used event studies to show that political
connections affect firm value. Roberts (1990) provides evidence that U.S. politicians with
seniority can provide benefits to specific firms by documenting a differential stock-price reaction
15

Rose-Ackerman (2005) provides a review of this literature.
Other studies of corruption in the development literature include Fisman and Wei (2004), Reinikka and Svennson
(2004), Olken and Barron (2007), and Tran (2008).

16

23

to the news of the death of Senator Henry “Scoop” Jackson, the powerful chairman of the Senate
Armed Services Committee. Jayachandran (2006) uses soft-money donations to national parties
as a measure of a firm’s political alignment and finds that that for every $250,000 a firm gave to
Republicans, the firm lost 0.8% of its market valuation when Senator Jeffords switched parties in
2001. Cooper, Gulen, and Ovtchinnikov (2010) find that firms that make federal campaign
contributions subsequently earn higher returns and conclude that “… the contribution effect
appears to increase for firms that have longer relationships with candidates, that support more
home candidates, and support more powerful candidates (p. 689).” Kim (2015) shows that the
unexpected exit of a member of Congress leads to a decline in firm value for companies whose
lobbyist used to work for that member. In a non-U.S. context, Fisman (2001) estimates the value
of political connections by examining share price reactions to the end of Suharto’s reign.
We are interested in whether public pension plan investment decisions, and the returns
earned on those investments, are influenced by political considerations. Because governors are
often in a position to select or influence the members of the governing boards of state pension
plans, we collect data on campaign contributions and votes from gubernatorial elections.
Specifically, we collect data on campaign finance contributions for state gubernatorial elections
from the Institute on Money in State Politics, a not-for-profit organization that maintains a
database of contributions to state political campaigns. This data covers the 1994, 1998, and 2002
gubernatorial election cycles and the donations are aggregated at the county-level of the donor.
Thus, given the states in our sample, we have campaign gubernatorial campaign contribution
data for California, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania
(1998 and 2002 contribution data only), Texas, and Wisconsin. We augment the campaign

24

contribution data with data on voting outcomes for the same gubernatorial elections using
information provided by Polidata on historical vote counts (also aggregated at the county level).
We test whether the likelihood a pension plan holds an in-state stock, as well as the
likelihood of holding an in-state stock in the state’s largest industry, is related to campaign
contributions that flowed to the governor’s campaign and to voting patterns during the prior
election cycle. 17 Using this data, we identify the campaign contributions going to the winning
gubernatorial candidate at the county level. We link each firm located in the state of the pension
plan (i.e., each potential within-state investment for the pension plan) to the fraction of total
county-wide political contributions from the county where the firm is headquartered that went to
the current governor. We also examine the vote counts in the county in which each firm is
headquartered. For both contributions and votes, we examine a simple measure of whether the
Governor received the most dollars or votes from that county during the last election, as well as
whether the Governor received a higher fraction of dollars or votes from that county than s/he
did statewide. The comparison to statewide figures is especially informative for elections that
were not particularly close because it helps assess a county’s relative support for the Governor.
For reference, Figure 1 shows the probability that a state pension plan holds a particular
type of stock (averaged across all plans and all quarters). The probability of a state pension
holding any stock is 17.8%. This probability rises to 24.8% for stocks that are in-state. Further,
we find that the probability of being held in a state’s pension portfolio is 31.1% for in-state
stocks from the state’s largest industry. This is nearly double the probability of an out-of-state
stock from the largest industry in the plan’s home state being held (16.6%).

17

Our campaign contributions and vote outcomes data cover the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections. We relate a
decision to hold a stock to the election variables from the most recent election (e.g., holding decisions at the end of
the first quarter of 1995 through the last quarter of 1998 are related to 1994 election data). Thus, the holding
decisions in both Table 9 and 10 span the first quarter of 1995 to the last quarter of 2006.

25

With these tabulations as background information, we test how holding probabilities vary
with the flow of campaign contributions and votes. We start in Table 8 with an OLS regression
of the likelihood that a state pension plan holds an in-state stock in its portfolio. The first
column focuses on all in-state stocks, whereas the second column focuses on the in-state stocks
of the largest industry. The dependent variable is set to one if the in-state stock is held in a given
pension plan’s portfolio that quarter and is set to zero if the in-state stock is not held by the given
pension plan during the quarter. All coefficients are multiplied by 100 so they represent
percentage points. Regressions include both plan-by-quarter fixed effects (to control for a plan’s
average likelihood of holding in-state stocks in a given quarter) and firm-county fixed effects (to
control for county-level characteristics that do not vary over time). For example, given the
inclusion of county-level fixed effects in the regression, the campaign contribution and vote
variables are identified by changes in donation patterns and electoral outcomes within a given
county over time (as opposed to simple cross-sectional differences across counties within a state).
The first pattern to note from Table 8 is that campaign contributions matter significantly
for in-state pension plan portfolio decisions, particularly those in the largest industry in the state.
In contrast, measures of voting outcomes from the last gubernatorial election have no significant
effect on in-state pension holdings. Focusing on the results in the first column for all in-state
stocks, the stock of a firm located in a county that gave most of its campaign contributions to the
current Governor last election is a statistically significant 0.9 percentage points more likely to be
held by the state pension plan (or 1.7 percentage points more likely if the firm was further
located in a country that gave a higher fraction of contributions to the current governor than the
statewide average). The most striking result is that an in-state stock in the largest industry is 2.8
percentage points more likely to be held in the state’s portfolio if the county in which that

26

company is headquartered gave a disproportionately large share of campaign contributions to the
Governor (i.e., 4.3-1.5=2.8, p-value = 0.02). This 2.8 percentage point increase represents
almost 10% of the baseline likelihood of the state plan holding such a stock. Also, the highly
significant coefficient of 4.3 on whether the Governor received a higher fraction of campaign
contributions from that county than statewide and the insignificant coefficient on the simple
gave-majority-of-contributions variable, suggest that it is the relative-share variable that is most
important for influencing the plan’s in-state portfolio decisions of these firms.
The in-state holding regressions reported in Table 8 also include firm-level and additional
county-level controls. Not surprisingly, larger firms headquartered in the state (whether
measured by market cap or number of employees) are more likely to be held in the state pension
plan. We also include several county-of-firm controls to be sure that the campaign contribution
results are driven by political considerations and do not reflect other factors (such as state
pension plans investing in firms from better-off counties). We find that for firms in the largest
industry of the state, the state plan is significantly more likely to hold the stock of firms located
in counties with a higher level of campaign donations and higher median income (these effects
are insignificant for the “in-state holding” regression). The key takeaway is that even after
controlling for various measures of the wealth and size of a county where a firm is
headquartered, the share of campaign contributions that went to the current governor is an
important predictor of a stock being in the state pension plan.
To further increase confidence that these results are driven by political considerations,
Table 9 expands on the Table 8 results. In Table 9, we focus on holdings of stocks in the largest
industry of the pension fund’s home state, with the first two columns considering in-state holding
decisions and the last two columns considering out-of-state holding decisions for this group of

27

stocks. In the first column of Table 9, we revisit the result that companies in the state’s largest
industry are more likely to be held by the state pension fund if the Governor received a
disproportionate share of campaign contributions in the prior election cycle. In the second
column, we add a control for the number of times the home state was mentioned in the firm’s 10k, as a fraction of all state mentions, a measure developed by Garcia and Norli (2012) to control
for the degree of economic concentration in the state. Including this control has virtually no
effect on the coefficient related to campaign contributions, and the home-state mention variable
itself is insignificant. This result likely reflects the fact that in-state firms from the state’s largest
industry are already well known to the state pension fund.
In columns 3 and 4 of Table 9, we analyze the holding decisions of out-of-state stocks
from the largest industry in the pension fund’s home state. For these out-of-state stocks, the
campaign contribution and vote outcome variables reflect political attitudes of the firm’s home
state (which is, by definition, different from the home state of the pension plan making the
holding decision). 18 Under our political-consideration hypothesis, the campaign contributions to
the Governor in the home state of the pension plan should affect holding decisions of in-state
stocks, but the flow of campaign contributions to the Governors of other states should not
influence a given pension plan’s out-of-state holdings. We indeed find, for out-of-state stocks in
the largest industry of the home state of the pension fund, that there is no relation between
campaign contributions and vote outcomes and the likelihood that the out-of-state stock is held
by the pension fund. These results clearly indicate that the patterns found in columns 1 and 2 –
that campaign contributions from a firm’s home county increase the likelihood of that in-state
firm being held in the state pension portfolio – reflect within-state political considerations.
18

Since campaign contribution data is only available for California, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New Mexico, New
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin for the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections, the out-of-state holding decisions
by pension plans are limited to firms headquartered in those 10 states.

28

According to the results in columns 3 and 4, a state pension plan is more likely to hold an
out-of-state stock if it is larger in size (whether based on S&P 500 status, market cap, or number
of employees). Also, the more mentions of the home state of the pension plan in the 10-k of the
out-of-state firm, the more likely is the plan to hold the stock. These state mentions could reflect
that the out-of-state firm sells products or has operations in the home state of the pension plan
and this familiarity may lead to inclusion in the pension plan portfolio.
Finally, we consider the role political considerations/connections may have on portfolio
performance. In particular, we relate the return on in-state stock holdings to whether the firm
was located in a county that gave a high share of campaign contributions last election to the
current governor (above the statewide average). 19 As shown in the top panel of Table 10, the
performance of within-state investments is strongest for the counties that gave the current
governor the highest fraction of their financial support. The stocks of in-state firms that gave a
higher share of contributions to the Governor than the statewide share experienced a riskadjusted return of 0.22% per month, while the holdings of firms that are headquartered in
counties that were less generous to the Governor underperform their benchmark by 0.23% per
month. Thus, the difference in the performance of in-state holdings in politically-connected
counties and those from counties that are less so is 46 basis points per month – both highly
significant and economically substantive. This difference rises to 53 basis points per month
(6.5% on an annual basis) for in-state firms in the largest industry of the state.
One explanation for this pattern of results is that counties that were generous to the
current Governor during the last election receive economic development that benefits all firms in

19

Our campaign contributions and vote outcomes data cover the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections. Thus, as discussed
in an earlier footnote, the sample that uses this election data consists of stock holdings from the first quarter of 1995
to the last quarter of 2006. Thus, the monthly return series calculated based on these quarterly holdings after the
1994, 1998, and 2002 elections spans April of 1995 to March of 2007.

29

the county (both those subsequently held and not held by the state pension plan). Under this
hypothesis, there should be no difference in the performance of the stocks held and not held.
Thus, the differences in performance displayed in the last row should be zero, once we account
for the return of the stocks not held by the pension plan. To test this possibility, in the right two
columns of Table 10, we report the returns on holdings of stocks held versus those that are not
held for each category of in-state firms. We again find substantial and significant differences
between the performance of in-state holdings in politically-connected counties and those from
counties that are less so (on the order of 35 to 87 basis points per month). In sum, the ability of
pension plans to differentiate good from bad in-state stock investments is much stronger in the
counties that gave the strongest financial support to the Governor during the last election. This
pattern suggests that some form of information is transmitted along a network that shares
common connection points with the political power structure of the state.
Turning to bottom panel of Table 10, we conduct a similar exercise using sample splits
based on votes rather than campaign contributions. Unlike the flow of campaign contributions,
the share of votes has absolutely no predictive power for the performance of within-state
investments. This result mirrors our finding for state pension plan holdings; simply put, vote
outcomes are not relevant while the flow of campaign contributions is important.

5. Conclusions
State pension plans that manage their own U.S. equity investments tilt their portfolios to
stock holdings within the state to an even larger degree than other institutional investors. A
significant portion of this within-state bias reflects an informational advantage, since the
holdings of these pension plans, particularly their holdings in companies in the state’s primary

30

industry, outperform the stocks they choose not to hold by a wide margin. This differential is
only found for investments made (or avoided) within the state, the domain in which the pension
plan is more likely to have access to information about firm prospects. We find evidence that
political influence may also play a substantial role in the stock selection process: state pension
plans are more likely to hold a within-state firm in its portfolio if the county where the firm is
located gave a high fraction of its campaign contributions in the last election to the current
governor. Further, these politically-motivated within-state holdings yield excess returns for the
pension fund. Even though data limitations preclude a more in-depth investigation of the
channel through which political connections influence state pension plans, our results are broadly
consistent with the importance of networking in fund management (as found in Cohen, Frazzini,
and Malloy (2008)) as well as the research on political contributions/connections and stock
returns (e.g., Cooper, Gulen, and Ovtchinnikov (2010)).

31

References
Bae, K., R. Stulz, and H. Tan, 2008, “Do Local Analysts Know More? A Cross-Country Study of
the Performance of Local Analysts and Foreign Analysts,” Journal of Financial Economics
88(3), 581-606.
Badrinath, S. G. and Sunil Wahal, 2002, “Momentum Trading by Institutions,” Journal of
Finance 57(6), 2449-2478.
Baik, Bok, Jun-Koo Kang, and Jin-Mo Kim, 2010, “Local Institutional Investors, Information
Asymmetries, and Equity Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 97, 81-106.
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
Company Stock,” Journal of Finance 56(5), 1747-1764.
Carhart, M., 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy, 2008, “The Small World of Investing: Board Connections
and Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.
Cooper, M., H. Gulen, and A. V. Ovtchinnikov, 2010, “Corporate Political Contributions and
Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance 65, 687-724.
Coronado, Julia L., Eric M. Engen, and Brian Knight, 2003, “Public Funds and Private Capital
Markets: The Investment Practices and Performance of State and Local Pension Funds,”
National Tax Journal 56(3), 579-594.
Coval, J. and T. J. Moskowitz, 1999, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preferences in
Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.
Coval, J. and T. J. Moskowitz, 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and
Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy 109, 811-841.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks
and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Federal Reserve, 2014, “Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States: Flows and Outstandings,
Third Quarter 2014.” http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/current/z1.pdf
Fisman, Raymond, 2001, “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American Economic
Review 91(4), 1095-1102.
Fisman, Ray and Wei, Shang-Jin, 2004, “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from Missing
Imports in China,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 471-500.

32

French, Kenneth R. and James M. Poterba, 1991, “International Diversification and International
Equity Markets,” American Economic Review 81(2), 222-226.
Garcia, Diego and Oyvind Norli, 2012, “Geographic Dispersion and Stock Returns,” Journal of
Financial Economics 106(3), 547-565.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Raven E. Saks, 2006, “Corruption in America,” Journal of Public
Economics 90(6-7), 1053-1072.
Hochberg, Yael V. and Joshua D. Rauh, 2013, “Local Overweighting and Underperformance:
Evidence from Limited Partner Private Equity Investments,” Review of Financial Studies
26(2), 403-451.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies 14, 659680.
Ivković, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, “Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the
Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments,” Journal of Finance 60,
267-306.
Jayachandran, Seema, 2006, “The Jeffords Effect,” Journal of Law and Economics 49(2), 397425.
Kang, J. and J. Kim, 2008, “The Geography of Block Acquisitions,” Journal of Finance 63,
2817-2858.
Kim, Taehyun, 2015, “Does a Firm's Political Capital Affect Its Investment and Innovation?,”
University of Illinois working paper.
Malloy, Christopher, 2005, “The Geography of Equity Analysis,” Journal of Finance 60, 719755.
Massa, Massimo and Andrei Simonov, 2006, “Hedging, Familiarity and Portfolio Choice,”
Review of Financial Studies 19, 633-686.
Munnell, Alicia H., Kelly Haverstick, Mauricio Soto, and Jean-Pierre Aubry, 2008, “What do we
Know about the Universe of State and Local Plans?,” BC CRR Issue Brief Number 4.
http://crr.bc.edu/images/stories/Briefs/slp_4.pdf?phpMyAdmin=43ac483c4de9t51d9eb41
Munnell, Alicia H. and Annika Sunden, 2001, “Investment Practices of State and Local Pension
Plans: Implications for Social Security Reform,” In Olivia S. Mitchell and Edwin C.
Hustead, eds., Pensions in the Public Sector (The Pension Research Council and University
of Pennsylvania Press).
Olken, Benjamin A., 2007, “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy 115(2), 200-249.

33

Olken, Benjamin A. and Patrick Barron, 2007, “The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence
from Trucking in Aceh,” NBER Working Paper 13145.
Olken, Benjamin A., 2009, “Corruption Perceptions vs. Corruption Reality,” Journal of Public
Economics 93 (7-8), 950-964.
Pennacchi, George and Rastad, Mahdi, 2011, “Portfolio Allocation for Public Pension Funds,”
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(2), 221-245.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jacob Svennson, 2004, “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
Government Transfer Program in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 679-705.
Roberts, Brian E., 1990, “A Dead Senator Tells No Lies: Seniority and the Distribution of
Federal Benefits,” American Journal of Political Science 34(1), 31-58.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, 2005, “The Challenge of Poor Governance and Corruption,” Revista
Direitogv Special Issue 1, 207-266.
Seasholes, Mark S. and Ning Zhu, 2010, “Individual Investors and Local Bias,” Journal of
Finance 65(5), 1987-2010.
Tran, Anh, 2008, “Can Procurement Auctions Reduce Corruption? Evidence from the Internal
Records of a Bribe-Paying Firm,” Harvard University working paper.
Useem, Michael and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2000, “Holders of the Purse Strings: Governance and
Performance of Public Retirement Systems,” Social Science Quarterly 81(2), 489-506.
Wilshire Consulting, 2014, “2014 Report on State Retirement Systems: Funding Levels and
Asset Allocation.”
http://www.wilshire.com/media/17614/wilshire_2014_state_funding_report_20130226.pdf

34

Figure 1: Likelihood of a State Pension Plan Holding a Particular Stock, by Type of Stock (in percentage points), 1980:Q1 to
2008:Q3

Sources: 13F filings with SEC, Compustat and CRSP databases, and authors’ calculations. State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the
end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of 2008, see Table 1 for the list of individual state pension plans filing form 13F and their sample
coverage. The likelihoods displayed are averages across the full sample of state pension plan investment decisions. The largest home-state industry is the largest
industry in the pension plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the 12 FamaFrench industries.

Table 1: List of State Pension Plans in Sample
First Quarter U.S.
Last Quarter U.S.
Stock Holdings
Stock Holdings
are Reported in
are Reported in
Total Number of
*
State Pension Plan Fund Name
13F filing with SEC
13F filing with SEC
Quarters in Sample
Alaska PERS
2006:Q2
2008:Q3
10
California PERS
1980:Q2
2008:Q3
111
California Teachers
1980:Q1
2007:Q2
105
Colorado Public Employees (2 plans combined)
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
115
Florida RS
1986:Q2
2008:Q3
90
Illinois SURS
1980:Q2
1985:Q1
20
Kentucky Teachers
1982:Q4
2008:Q3
104
Maryland State Retirement (3 plans combined)
1980:Q1
1992:Q4
52
Michigan Dept. of Treasury (4 plans combined)
1984:Q3
2008:Q3
97
Missouri State Employees
1998:Q3
2007:Q4
38
Montana State Board of Investment (2 plans combined)
1991:Q3
2001:Q4
42
New Mexico Education Retirement Board
1990:Q1
2008:Q3
75
New York Common Retirement Fund
1986:Q4
2008:Q3
88
New York Teachers
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
108
Ohio PERS
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
110
Ohio STRS
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
115
Pennsylvania Teachers
2000:Q2
2008:Q3
34
Texas Teachers
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
115
Virginia RS
1996:Q4
2008:Q3
48
Wisconsin RS
1980:Q1
2008:Q3
115
*
The last quarter of data we collected was holdings at the end of the third quarter of 2008. Our data on state pension plan stock
holdings covers 27 state plans that are represented by 20 separate investment funds (as some state plans are comingled with others
from the same state).
Source: 13F filings with SEC.

36

Table 2: Number, Size, and Investment Allocation of State Pension Plans by Whether Directly Manage U.S. Stock
Investments, end of Fiscal Year 2007
Plans that Manage U.S. Equity
Investments Directly on Own
21
17%

Plans that Outsource Management
of U.S. Equity Investments
104
83%

Median Plan Size (assets, in $B)
Percent of Aggregate State Pension Plan Assets

54.9
53%

8.6
47%

Median Percent of Plan Invested in U.S. Equities

43%

41%

Number of Plans
Number as Percent of All State Pension Plans

Median Percent of Total U.S. Equity Holdings
that are Reported on 13F filing (i.e., percent of
79%
0%
U.S. equity holdings that are directly managed
by the pension plan)
Sources: 2007 Wilshire Report on State Retirement Systems and 13F filings with the SEC. The 21 state plans that manage stock
investments on their own as of 2007 are represented by 17 separate investment funds (as some state plans are comingled with others
from the same state).

37

Table 3: Breakdown of State Pension Plan Stock Holdings by In-State and Out-of-State Investments (allocation expressed as a
share of total stock holdings, weighted by size of holdings, in percentage points), 1980:Q1 to 2008:Q3

(1) In-State Investments
(2) In-State & Member of S&P 500
(3) In-State & Not in S&P 500

State Plans weighted by Size ($) within a quarter
Average weight Average weight
Difference
Amount of bias
in holdings
in market
(bias)
in percent
(1)
(2)
(3) = (1) – (2) (4) = (1)/(2) - 1
9.7
5.6
4.2
76%
8.2
4.0
4.2
105%
1.5
1.5
0.0
0%

(4) Out-of-State Investments
(5) Out-of-State & Member of S&P 500
(6) Out-of-State & Not in S&P 500

90.3
76.2
14.0

94.4
67.6
26.8

-4.2
8.6
-12.8

-4%
13%
-48%

(7) Investment in Neighbor States
(8) Investment in Non-Neighbor States (that are out-of-state)

8.3
81.9

8.5
85.9

-0.2
-4.0

-2%
-5%

(9) Largest/Primary Home-State Industry
(10) In-State Investment in Largest Home-State Industry
(11) Out-of-State Investment in Largest Home-State Industry

13.1
3.7
9.3

11.3
2.0
9.3

1.8
1.8
0.0

16%
89%
0%

(12) Non-Largest Home-State Industry
86.9
88.7
-1.8
-2%
(13) In-State Investment in non-Largest Home-State Industries
6.0
3.6
2.4
68%
(14) Out-of-State Invest. in non-Largest Home-State Industries
80.9
85.1
-4.2
-5%
State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of
2008. See Table 1 for the list of individual state pension plans filing form 13F and their sample coverage. The pension plan portfolio
weights displayed in this table are calculated by first tabulating aggregate value-weighted portfolio weights across plans in a given
quarter, and then averaging these aggregate portfolio weights across quarters. The largest home-state industry is the largest industry in
the pension plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the
12 Fama-French industries.

38

Table 4: Correlation of Annual Growth Rate in State Tax Revenue with Contemporaneous and Lagged Annual State Pension
Plan Returns (OLS Regression), 1981-2008
Coefficient from Regression of
Annual Growth Rate in State Tax Revenue:
(1)
(2)
Contemporaneous Annual State Pension Return on U.S. Stock Investments
One-year Lagged State Pension Plan Return on U.S. Stock Investments

0.01
(0.10)
0.16**
(0.08)

Include year fixed effects and state fixed effects?
Yes
Yes
Number of Pension-Year Observations
375
350
Annual state tax revenue is obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/govs/www/qtax.html). State pension plan
returns on their U.S. stock investments are based on authors’ calculations using 13F filings with the SEC and the CRSP and
Compustat databases. State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of
the third quarter of 2008. See Table 1 for the list of individual state pension plans filing form 13F and their sample coverage. Thus,
1981 is the first full year an annual return on U.S. stock investments can be calculated for a state pension plan. The standard error of
the coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity as well as two-way clustering
by year and state of the pension plan.
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

39

Table 5: Performance of U.S. Stock Investments of State Pension Plans (aggregated across plans, expressed as monthly returns
in percentage points), 1980-2008
Regressions of Monthly Returns of Aggregated State Pension Plans,
4/1980-12/2008, (in percentage points)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Constant
(Alpha = risk-adjusted excess return)

0.01
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.01
(0.03)

Market Factor Return: Value-weighted Market
(VWRF)

0.98***
(0.01)

1.01***
(0.01)

1.00***
(0.01)

Size Factor Return
(SMB)

-0.10***
(0.01)

-0.10***
(0.01)

Value Factor Return
(HML)

0.05***
(0.01)

0.04***
(0.02)

Momentum Factor Return
(UMD)

-0.02**
(0.01)

R-squared
0.98
0.99
0.99
Number of Observations (months)
345
345
345
This table presents monthly returns aggregated across state pension plans based on pension plan holdings of U.S. stocks from the end
of the prior quarter (weighted by the dollar amount of the holding). State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the
end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of 2008. See Table 1 for the list of individual state pension plans filing
form 13F and their sample coverage. Thus, the monthly return series calculated based on these holdings spans April of 1980 to
December of 2008. The standard error of the coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for
heteroskedasticity as well time-series correlation in the error term over the prior four quarters (i.e., Newey-West standard errors).
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

40

Table 6: Performance of Various Components of State Pension Plans’ Stock Investments (aggregated across pension plans,
expressed as monthly returns in percentage points), 1980-2008
Panel A: Risk-adjusted Excess Monthly Portfolio Return of Holdings (in percentage points), 4/1980-12/2008
All Stocks
S&P 500 Stocks
Non-S&P 500 Stocks
Out-ofOut-ofOut-ofIn-State
In-State
In-State
Diff
Diff
Diff
State
State
State
(1)
(2)
(4)
(5)
(7)
(8)
(3)
(6)
(9)
Stock holdings in all
industries

0.07
(0.07)

0.01
(0.04)

0.06
(0.07)

0.07
(0.07)

0.03
(0.05)

0.04
(0.07)

0.08
(0.13)

-0.09
(0.07)

0.16
(0.10)

Stock holdings in the
largest home-state
industry

0.10
(0.16)

-0.18**
(0.08)

0.28*
(0.16)

0.09
(0.15)

-0.17**
(0.08)

0.26*
(0.16)

0.32
(0.24)

-0.21*
(0.13)

0.53**
(0.25)

Panel B: Risk-adjusted Excess Monthly Portfolio Return of Buys (in percentage points), 7/1980-12/2008
All Stocks
S&P 500 Stocks
Non-S&P 500 Stocks
Out-ofOut-ofOut-ofIn-State
In-State
In-State
Diff
Diff
Diff
State
State
State
(1)
(2)
(4)
(5)
(7)
(8)
(3)
(6)
(9)

Stock buys in all
industries

-0.05
(0.17)

-0.03
(0.06)

-0.02
(0.15)

-0.04
(0.14)

-0.01
(0.07)

-0.03
(0.13)

-0.08
(0.26)

-0.08
(0.11)

0.00
(0.20)

Stock buys in the
largest home-state
industry

0.10
(0.28)

-0.36***
(0.13)

0.46*
(0.28)

-0.11
(0.26)

-0.32**
(0.14)

0.21
(0.27)

0.72*
(0.39)

-0.43***
(0.15)

1.16***
(0.42)

This table presents monthly returns aggregated across state pension plans by whether the stock investment is within the state, in the home state’s largest industry, and
S&P 500 status. State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the end of the first quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of 2008. See Table 1 for
the list of individual state pension plans filing form 13F and their sample coverage. Thus, the monthly return series calculated based on these holdings spans April of
1980 to December of 2008. Panel A presents monthly returns aggregated across all pension plans based on pension plan holdings of U.S. stocks from the end of the prior
quarter (weighted by the dollar amount of the holding), while Panel B presents monthly returns aggregated across all pension plans based on stocks bought by pension
plans during the prior quarter (returns following buys thus start in July 1980). A buy of a stock by the pension plan is defined as an increase in the shares of the stock
held by the plan over the prior quarter (split adjusted). The returns in Panel B are weighted by the dollar amount of the buy (calculated as the change in shares held last
quarter multiplied by the average of the beginning and end-of-period stock prices from the prior quarter). The displayed returns are risk-adjusted, that is, they are
obtained from a four-factor return model that controls for market, firm size, firm value/growth, and momentum factors as in column 3 of Table 5. The largest home-state
industry is the largest industry in the pension plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the
12 Fama-French industries. The standard error of the coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity as well timeseries correlation in the error term over the prior four quarters (i.e., Newey-West standard errors).
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

Table 7: Performance of Stocks that State Pension Plans HELD Relative to Stocks NOT HELD (aggregated across pension
plans, expressed as monthly returns in percentage points), 1980-2008

Held

Risk-adjusted Excess Monthly Portfolio Return (in percentage points), 4/1980-12/2008
All Stocks
S&P 500 Stocks
Non-S&P 500 Stocks
Not Held
Held
Not Held
Held
Not Held
Diff
Diff
Diff

All in-state stocks

0.07
(0.07)

-0.18**
(0.08)

0.25**
(0.11)

0.07
(0.07)

-0.01
(0.32)

0.08
(0.32)

0.08
(0.13)

-0.18**
(0.08)

0.25*
(0.14)

In-state stocks in
the largest homestate industry

0.10
(0.16)

-0.31**
(0.16)

0.41**
(0.17)

-0.01
(0.14)

-0.56
(0.35)

0.55
(0.36)

0.32
(0.24)

-0.35**
(0.16)

0.67***
(0.25)

All out-of-state
stocks

0.01
(0.04)

-0.10
(0.07)

0.10
(0.09)

0.03
(0.05)

0.00
(0.19)

0.03
(0.19)

-0.09
(0.07)

-0.13*
(0.07)

0.05
(0.09)

Out-of-state stocks
-0.18**
-0.26**
-0.17**
-0.01
-0.21*
-0.37***
0.08
-0.16
0.16
in the largest home(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.34)
(0.13)
(0.11)
(0.08)
(0.33)
(0.13)
state industry
This table presents monthly returns aggregated across state pension plans by whether the stock investment is within the state, in the
home state’s largest industry, and S&P 500 status. State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months from the end of the first
quarter of 1980 to the end of the third quarter of 2008. See Table 1 for the list of individual state pension plans filing form 13F and
their sample coverage. Thus, the monthly return series calculated based on these holdings spans April of 1980 to December of 2008.
The table also presents monthly returns aggregated across state pension plans of stocks NOT HELD by plans in the different
categories. Monthly returns of stocks held are aggregated across all pension plans based on pension plan holdings from the end of the
prior quarter (weighted by the dollar amount of the holding). The monthly returns of the portfolio of stocks NOT HELD by a given
pension plan last quarter is value-weighted by firm market cap. Each pension plan’s NOT HELD return is then weighted by total
equity assets of the pension plan to compute the aggregated NOT HELD return across all state pension plans for a given month. The
displayed returns are risk-adjusted, that is, they are obtained from a four-factor return model that controls for market, firm size, firm
value/growth, and momentum factors as in column 3 of Table 5. The largest home-state industry is the largest industry in the pension
plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the 12 FamaFrench industries. The standard error of the coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for
heteroskedasticity as well time-series correlation in the error term over the prior four quarters (i.e., Newey-West standard errors).
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table 8: Likelihood a State Pension Plan Holds an IN-STATE Stock in its Portfolio (OLS
Regression in percentage points), 1995-2006 (based on 1994, 1998, and 2002 election data)
IN-STATE
All
Stocks in
IN-STATE Largest
Stocks
Industry
Governor Received Most $ in Firm’s County during last election?
Governor Received Higher Share of $ in Firm’s County than did
Statewide during last election?
Governor Got Most Votes in Firm’s County during last election?
Governor Got Higher Share of Votes in Firm’s County than did Statewide
during last election?
Firm is in the state’s largest industry?
S&P 500?
Ln(firm market cap)
Ln(number of firm employees)
(County Firm Market Cap / State Firm Market Cap) end of prior quarter
(County Firm Employees / State Firm Employees) last year
(Total County Gubernatorial Contributions / Total State Gubernatorial
Contributions) last election
Ln(Total County Gubernatorial Contributions during last election)
Ln(Median income in county during prior year)
Include Plan-by-Quarter fixed effects?
Include Firm’s County fixed effects?
R-squared
Number of Plan-Quarter-Stock Holding Decisions

0.9**
(0.4)
0.8
(1.3)
0.3
(1.0)
-0.0
(0.9)
1.5
(2.3)
11.3*
(6.5)
10.9***
(1.6)
3.0***
(0.5)
-4.3
(6.2)
-3.7
(4.4)
-1.5
(4.9)
1.3
(0.9)
30.9
(21.8)
Yes
Yes
0.51
198,223

-1.5
(2.6)
4.3**
(1.9)
2.7
(2.0)
-0.6
(1.6)
-2.1
(6.0)
12.2***
(1.5)
3.4***
(0.9)
-5.0
(5.4)
-24.1
(14.9)
-4.7
(7.8)
2.8***
(1.0)
42.9**
(19.1)
Yes
Yes
0.53
52,693

The dependent variable takes on the value one if the in-state stock is held in a given pension plan’s portfolio that
quarter and is zero if the in-state stock is not held by the given pension plan during the quarter. All coefficients are
multiplied by 100 so they represent percentage points. The largest home-state industry is the largest industry in the
pension plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms
assigned to one of the 12 Fama-French industries. Gubernatorial campaign contribution data (aggregated at the
county level) are available for the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections for California, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New
Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania (1998 and 2002 only), Texas, and Wisconsin. Data on voting outcomes in
gubernatorial elections covers the same elections (i.e., years and states). The standard error of the coefficient
estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity as well as two-way
clustering by pension plan and quarter.
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Table 9: Likelihood a State Pension Plan Holds Stock in the Largest Industry of its Home
State (OLS Regression in percentage points), 1995-2006 (based on 1994, 1998, and 2002
election data)
Investments in Largest Industry of
Pension Fund’s Home State
IN-STATE
OUT-of-STATE
Stocks
Stocks
Governor Received Most $ in Firm’s County during last
election?
Governor Received Higher Share of $ in Firm’s County
than did Statewide during last election?
Governor Got Most Votes in Firm’s County during last
election?
Governor Got Higher Share of Votes in Firm’s County than
did Statewide during last election?
Mentions of pension fund home state in firm’s 10-k last year
(as a fraction of all state mentions in the 10-k)
S&P 500?
Ln(firm market cap)
Ln(number of firm employees)
(County Firm Market Cap / State Firm Market Cap) end of
prior quarter
(County Firm Employees / State Firm Employees) last year
(Total County Gubernatorial Contributions / Total State
Gubernatorial Contributions) last election
Ln(Total County Gubernatorial Contributions during last
election)
Ln(Median income in county during prior year)
Include Plan-by-Quarter fixed effects?
Include Firm’s County fixed effects?
R-squared
Number of Plan-Quarter-Stock Holding Decisions

(1)
-1.5
(2.6)
4.3**
(1.9)
2.7
(2.0)
-0.6
(1.6)
-2.1
(6.0)
12.2***
(1.5)
3.4***
(0.9)
-5.0
(5.4)
-24.1
(14.9)
-4.7
(7.8)
2.8***
(1.0)
42.9**
(19.1)
Yes
Yes
0.53
52,693

(2)
-2.6
(3.6)
4.6*
(2.5)
3.5
(2.2)
-0.1
(1.5)
-1.6
(2.3)
-6.3
(4.5)
12.9***
(1.6)
3.3***
(0.7)
-10.7
(9.5)
-21.0*
(11.7)
4.6
(10.4)
0.7
(1.6)
2.6
(22.6)
Yes
Yes
0.57
40,885

(3)
-0.5
(0.7)
-0.7
(0.7)
-0.3
(0.6)
-0.6
(0.8)
30.8***
(7.9)
8.1***
(1.3)
1.3***
(0.5)
-3.9
(4.6)
-4.8
(5.0)
-6.4
(4.2)
0.1
(0.2)
9.5
(12.7)
Yes
Yes
0.49
154,305

(4)
-0.0
(0.7)
-1.1
(0.7)
0.2
(0.7)
-0.7
(0.9)
9.2***
(3.0)
29.3***
(8.6)
8.6***
(1.5)
1.4***
(0.3)
-5.2
(5.7)
-4.2
(6.2)
-4.0
(4.4)
0.1
(0.2)
-12.1
(20.6)
Yes
Yes
0.52
119,318

The dependent variable takes on the value one if the stock is held in a given pension plan’s portfolio that quarter and is
zero if the stock is not held by the given pension plan during the quarter. All coefficients are multiplied by 100 so they
represent percentage points. The largest home-state industry is the largest industry in the pension plan’s home state based
on total firm market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the 12 Fama-French
industries. Gubernatorial campaign contribution data (aggregated at the county level) are available for the 1994, 1998, and
2002 elections for California, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania (1998 and 2002
only), Texas, and Wisconsin. Data on voting outcomes in gubernatorial elections covers the same elections (i.e., years and
states). Since campaign contribution data is available for California, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New Mexico, New
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin, the out-of-state holding decisions by pension plans are limited to firms
in those 10 states. The standard error of the coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing
for heteroskedasticity as well as two-way clustering by pension plan and quarter.
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

Table 10: Performance of IN-STATE Investments of State Pension Plans by Campaign
Contributions and Votes of Firm’s County (aggregated across plans, expressed as monthly
returns in percentage points), 1995-2007
Risk-adjusted Excess Monthly Portfolio Return
(in percentage points), 4/1995-3/2007
SHARE OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS

Firms in Counties that Governor Surpassed
Statewide Result Last Election

Return on Holdings
All
IN-STATE
IN-STATE
in Largest
Stocks
Industry
*
0.22
0.46**
(0.12)
(0.22)

Return on Holdings
MINUS Return on
Stocks Not Held
All
IN-STATE
IN-STATE
in Largest
Stocks
Industry
0.06
0.32
(0.19)
(0.27)

Firms in County that Governor Did Worse
than Statewide Result Last Election

-0.23
(0.14)

-0.07
(0.29)

-0.29
(0.24)

-0.55*
(0.29)

Difference

0.46***
(0.16)

0.53*
(0.31)

0.35*
(0.19)

0.87**
(0.34)

SHARE OF VOTES

Firms in Counties that Governor Surpassed
Statewide Result Last Election

Return on Holdings
All
IN-STATE
IN-STATE
in Largest
Stocks
Industry
0.14
0.24
(0.23)
(0.41)

Return on Holdings
MINUS Return on
Stocks Not Held
All
IN-STATE
IN-STATE
in Largest
Stocks
Industry
0.20
0.11
(0.28)
(0.39)

Firms in County that Governor Did Worse
than Statewide Result Last Election

0.15
(0.12)

0.34*
(0.18)

0.09
(0.20)

0.24
(0.29)

Difference

-0.01
(0.28)

-0.10
(0.41)

0.11
(0.23)

-0.13
(0.44)

This table presents monthly returns from in-state stock holdings aggregated across state pension plans. The top
(bottom) panel presents the returns from in-state holdings by whether the firm is located in a county that gave a
higher share of campaign contributions (votes) to the current governor during the last election than was the share of
contributions (votes) received by the current governor statewide. Monthly returns of stocks held are aggregated
across all pension plans based on pension plan holdings from the end of the prior quarter (weighted by the dollar
amount of the holding). The right panel of the table presents monthly returns aggregated across state pension plans
of stocks held minus the aggregated return of the stocks NOT HELD by plans in the different categories. The
displayed returns are risk-adjusted, that is, they are obtained from a four-factor return model that controls for
market, firm size, firm value/growth, and momentum factors as in column 3 of Table 5. The largest home-state
industry is the largest industry in the pension plan’s home state based on total firm market capitalization at the end
of the prior quarter with firms assigned to one of the 12 Fama-French industries. Gubernatorial campaign
contribution data (aggregated at the county level) are available for the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections for California,
Colorado, Florida, Michigan, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania (1998 and 2002 only), Texas, and
Wisconsin. Data on voting outcomes in gubernatorial elections covers the same elections (i.e., years and states).
State pension plan holdings are available every 3 months, so the monthly return series calculated based on these
holdings after the 1994, 1998, and 2002 elections spans April of 1995 to March of 2007. The standard error of the
coefficient estimate is in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity as well timeseries correlation in the error term over the prior four quarters (i.e., Newey-West standard errors).
*** ** *
, , denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

45

