NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORRELATION, CONSUMPTION, CONFUSION, OR CONSTRAINTS:
WHY DO POOR CHILDREN PERFORM SO POORLY?
Elizabeth M. Caucutt
Lance Lochner
Youngmin Park
Working Paper 21023
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21023
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

For helpful comments, we thank participants at the 2014 HCEO Conference on Social Mobility at
the University of Chicago. We also thank Eda Bozkurt and Qian Liu for excellent research assistance.
Caucutt and Lochner gratefully acknowledge support from CIGI-INET Research Grants. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Elizabeth M. Caucutt, Lance Lochner, and Youngmin Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Correlation, Consumption, Confusion, or Constraints: Why do Poor Children Perform so Poorly?
Elizabeth M. Caucutt, Lance Lochner, and Youngmin Park
NBER Working Paper No. 21023
March 2015
JEL No. D1,I24,I26,J24
ABSTRACT
The economic and social mobility of a generation may be largely determined by the time it enters school
given early developing and persistent gaps in child achievement by family income and the importance
of adolescent skill levels for educational attainment and lifetime earnings. After providing new evidence
of important differences in early child investments by family income, we study four leading mechanisms
thought to explain these gaps: an intergenerational correlation in ability, a consumption value of investment,
information frictions, and credit constraints. In order to better determine which of these mechanisms
influence family investments in children, we evaluate the extent to which these mechanisms also explain
other important stylized facts related to the marginal returns on investments and the effects of parental
income on child investments and skills.
Elizabeth M. Caucutt
Department of Economics
Social Science Center
The Univeristy of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2, Canada
ecaucutt@uwo.ca

Youngmin Park
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 Canada
ypark96@uwo.ca

Lance Lochner
Department of Economics, Faculty of Social Science
University of Western Ontario
1151 Richmond Street, North
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
llochner@uwo.ca

Correlation, Consumption, Confusion, or Constraints: Why do
Poor Children Perform so Poorly?∗
Elizabeth M. Caucutt
University of Western Ontario,

Lance Lochner
University of Western Ontario
NBER

Youngmin Park
University of Western Ontario
March 5, 2015

Abstract
The economic and social mobility of a generation may be largely determined by the time
it enters school given early developing and persistent gaps in child achievement by family
income and the importance of adolescent skill levels for educational attainment and lifetime
earnings. After providing new evidence of important differences in early child investments by
family income, we study four leading mechanisms thought to explain these gaps: an intergenerational correlation in ability, a consumption value of investment, information frictions,
and credit constraints. In order to better determine which of these mechanisms influence
family investments in children, we evaluate the extent to which these mechanisms also explain
other important stylized facts related to the marginal returns on investments and the effects
of parental income on child investments and skills.

1

Introduction

Adolescent skill and achievement gaps by parental income explain a substantial share of subsequent differences in educational attainment and lifetime earnings (Cameron and Heckman, 1998;
Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Carneiro and Heckman, 2002), suggesting that the economic and social
mobility of a generation is largely determined by adolescence. Perhaps more troubling, sizeable
differences in achievement by parental income are already evident by very young ages, persisting
throughout childhood (Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Cunha et al., 2006; Cunha and Heckman,
2007; Cunha, 2013). This raises the possibility that a generation’s fate may be sealed by the time
it enters school.1 Altogether, this evidence suggests that a complete understanding of intergenerational mobility and its implications for economic and social policy requires convincing answers
to the vexing question: Why do poor children perform so poorly?
∗

For helpful comments, we thank participants at the 2014 HCEO Conference on Social Mobility at the University
of Chicago. We also thank Eda Bozkurt and Qian Liu for excellent research assistance. Caucutt and Lochner
gratefully acknowledge support from CIGI-INET Research Grants.
1
Recent studies show that these early achievement and educational attainment gaps have been growing in the
United States for decades (Belley and Lochner, 2007; Reardon, 2011).

1

Given the importance of family investments for early child development (Todd and Wolpin,
2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha et al., 2010; Del Boca et al., 2014; Pavan, 2014), we
concentrate on understanding why low-income families invest so much less in their young children
compared to higher income families (Guryan et al., 2008; Kaushal et al., 2011). We consider four
broad mechanisms often thought to explain early investment and achievement gaps by family
income. First, the natural ability of children and parents may be correlated (Becker and Tomes,
1979, 1986). If child achievement is an increasing function of own ability, then a positive intergenerational ability correlation can generate the income – achievement gradients documented in
the literature. Second, parents may enjoy making investments in their children. If investments
provide a direct benefit to parents above and beyond the future labor market returns to children,
parents will choose to invest more as their income rises like they would purchase more of any other
normal good. It is also possible that low- and high-income families place different intrinsic value
on investments (or human capital more generally).2 Third, low-income parents may be poorly
informed about the productivity of investments in their children (Cunha et al., 2013; Cunha,
2014; Dizon-Ross, 2014). For example, poor parents may incorrectly believe that investments in
their young children are unproductive, or they may simply face greater uncertainty in the productivity of or returns to investments. Alternatively, poor parents may recognize the importance of
investing in their children, but they may not know which types of investment activities/goods are
most productive. Fourth, poor families may be unable to invest efficiently in their children due to
limits on their capacity to borrow against their own future income or against the potentially high
returns on investments in their children (Becker and Tomes, 1979, 1986; Caucutt and Lochner,
2006, 2012; Cunha et al., 2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Cunha, 2013; Lee and Seshadri, 2014).
We use a simple framework of dynamic human capital investment to formally examine whether
these mechanisms are also able to account for other important stylized facts in the literature on
child development: (i) the high marginal returns to early investments in economically disadvantaged children, (ii) lower returns on marginal investments in higher income children, (iii)
exogenous increases in family income lead to greater investments in children and improved childhood outcomes, and (iv) the impacts of income on child investments, achievement and educational
attainment are greater if the income is earned (or received) when children are young. While our
analysis does not necessarily reveal which mechanism is most important for explaining incomebased achievement gaps, it is useful for helping understand which mechanisms are needed to
provide a complete picture of the child development process and the role of family income.3 This
2
See Lazear (1977) for an early treatment of schooling choices that incorporates a ‘consumption’ value. More
recently, Keane and Wolpin (2001), Cunha et al. (2005), and Carneiro et al. (2011) emphasize and estimate the
role of heterogeneity in the ‘consumption’ value of schooling for explaining schooling behavior.
3
See Cunha (2014) for a novel effort to empirically decompose the relative importance of a similar set of

2

is important, because the different mechanisms can have very different policy implications. For
example, if investment and achievement gaps are driven by intergenerational ability correlations
or a ‘consumption’ value of investment, then investments in children are likely to be economically efficient and policies designed to improve equity will be inefficient. By contrast, either
information-based or credit market frictions can lead to inefficiently low investments in economically disadvantaged children. In this case, it may be possible to improve both equity and efficiency
through well-designed policies.
We organize this paper in the following way. In Section 2, we briefly document differences in
child achievement and investment levels by family income using data from the Children of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (CNLSY). Then, we summarize evidence on other stylized facts from the literature on child development in Section 3. In Section 4, which is the main
contribution of this paper, we develop a unified framework of dynamic skill investment that incorporates all four potential mechanisms commonly thought to drive investment and achievement
gaps by family income. We use this model to formally examine whether the explanations are also
consistent with the stylized facts in Section 3 as well as other evidence in the child development
literature. In Section 5, we conclude with a summary of our main results and their implications
for future research.

2

Child Achievement and Investment Gaps by Family Income

In this section, we document differences in child achievement and investment behavior by family
income using data from the CNLSY. A longitudinal survey that links mothers with their children,
the CNLSY contains excellent measures of family background and income (starting in 1979), as
well as biennial measures of child math and reading achievement and family investments in
children (beginning in 1986).4
We use background measures of maternal education, race/ethnicity, and “ability” as measured
by the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT).5 As a medium-run measure of family income, we
average all available reports of earnings by the mother and her spouse (if married) from the
child’s birth through ages 6 or 7 (depending on which of these ages achievement and investments
in children were measured).6 Child achievement is measured by the Peabody Individual Achievemechanisms using unique data on parental perceptions and stated choices about investments in children under
different hypothetical budget sets. While we do not empirically evaluate the relative importance of different
mechanisms, our theoretical analysis is based on a more general dynamic human capital investment model. We
consider a wide range of information frictions and explicitly model intertemporal borrowing constraints.
4
Our analysis is based on children born to mothers from the random sample.
5
(Nearly) all CNLSY mothers, born between 1957 and 1964, took the AFQT in 1980 as part of the survey. The
AFQT tests basic math and verbal/reading skills.
6
Before averaging across time, we discount all income back to the child’s birth year using a 5% discount rate, so

3

ment Tests (PIAT) in math, reading recognition and reading comprehension; these measures are
standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one at each age. A number of
child investment activities/inputs are also reported in the CNLSY as we discuss below.
Figure 1 documents sizeable differences in ages 6-7 math and reading achievement by family
income quartile. The light (beige) bars represent raw differences in achievement between the
reported parental income quartile and the bottom income quartile, while the dark (red) bars
report differences after controlling flexibly for maternal race/ethnicity, AFQT, and educational
attainment.7 Raw gaps by income are sizeable: math and reading scores of children with parents
in the highest income quartile are all more than half of a standard deviation higher than those with
parents in the lowest income quartile. Controlling for other important maternal characteristics
substantially reduces these gaps (by as much as three-quarters), but does not eliminate them –
parental income still has economically (and statistically) significant effects on child achievement.
Figures 2 and 3 document a number of early childhood family investment measures by parental
income at different ages. For all measures except ‘eat with mom and dad daily’ (ages 0-1, 2-3,
4-5) and ‘family meets friends/relatives two or more times per month’ (ages 6-7), investments
are monotonically increasing in parental income. For a number of measures, the differences are
substantial. For example, mothers of young children from the highest income quartile are over
50% more likely to read to their child three or more times per week compared to mothers from
the lowest income quartile. High income mothers with children ages 0-1 are more than twice as
likely to have 10 or more books in the home. Among children ages 6-7, those from high income
families are more than twice as likely to be enrolled in special lessons or extracurricular activities.
One interpretation of the investment measures reported in Figures 2 and 3 is that they represent different types of investment inputs that influence child development. An alternative
interpretation is that they all represent noisy measures of a single underlying ‘investment’. Under the latter interpretation, factor analysis can be used to uncover a more precise measure of
the latent investment (Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha et al., 2010).8 Based on this insight,
our earnings measure reflects average discounted family earnings from the child’s birth through ages 6-7. Individuals
are dropped if fewer than 3 income reports are available.
7
Standard multivariate regressions are used to control for maternal race/ethnicity (white, black, hispanic),
AFQT quartiles, and educational attainment (high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, completed
college) by including three-way interactions of all three sets of indicators along with indicator variables for parental
income quartile. Sample sizes for raw differences by income are 3,449 for math, 3,436 for reading recognition,
and 3,267 for reading comprehension. Approximately 80 observations are dropped due to missing covariates when
controlling for maternal characteristics.
8
These interpretations are not necessarily mutually exclusive if families face the same relative prices and productivity of inputs (assuming families maintain correct beliefs about the relative productivity of inputs). In this
case, all inputs (in a given period) will be proportional to total child investment expenditure (that period), with
all families choosing the same proportional mix. One can then think about the various reported measures as noisy
measures of that specific input or of total investment expenditure (multiplied by the factor share for that input).
We study the link between multiple early inputs and total early investment expenditures in Section 4.4.3 along

4

Figure 1: Ages 6-7 Achievement Gaps by Parental Income Quartile (Relative to Quartile 1)

(a) Math Achievement

(b) Reading Recognition Achievement

(c) Reading Comprehension Achievement

5

Figure 2: Family Investments in Children Ages 0-1, 2-3, and 4-5 by Parental Income Quartile
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
10+ books at home

Mom reads 3+
times/week
Quartile 1

Eat w/mom & dad Child leaves house 4+
daily
times/week
Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Child sees father
daily

Quartile 4

(a) Child Ages 0-1
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
10+ books at home

Mom reads 3+
times/week
Quartile 1

Eat w/mom & dad daily Child leaves house 4+ Child sees father daily
times/week
Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

(b) Child Ages 2-3
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
10+ books at home

Mom reads 3+
times/week
Quartile 1

Eat w/mom & dad daily Child leaves house 4+ Child sees father daily
times/week
Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

(c) Child Ages 4-5

6

Figure 3: Family Investments in Children Ages 6-7 by Parental Income Quartile
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

we employ principal factor analysis using the measured inputs reported in Figures 2 and 3 to
create age-specific predicted investment factor scores for each child. (See Appendix A.) For
interpretation purposes, we normalize scores to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of
one, plotting average scores by age and parental income quartile in Figure 4. The figure reveals
sizeable differences in investment factor scores by parental income that are already evident at
very young ages. Investments are roughly a full standard deviation higher among children from
high income families relative to low income families. Figure 5 shows that these gaps shrink by
as much as 50% but remain sizeable when controlling for maternal race, AFQT, and educational
attainment.9 Comparing Figures 2 and 3 with Figure 5 reveals that maternal characteristics
explain a greater share of the income-based gaps in achievement than in investments.

3

Additional Stylized Facts on Child Development

In this section, we discuss four important stylized facts about child development.
Fact 1: the returns to early marginal investments are higher than the return to savings for
with the consequences of family mis-perceptions about relative and overall early input productivity levels.
9
Sample sizes for raw income differences are 2,324 (ages 0-1), 2,749 (ages 2-3), 2,813 (ages 4-5), and 3,493 (ages
6-7). When controlling for maternal characteristics, between 50 and 80 observations are dropped due to missing
covariates.

7

Figure 4: Family Investment Factor Scores by Child Age and Parental Income Quartile
0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00

-0.20

-0.40

-0.60

-0.80
Ages 0-1

Ages 2-3

Ages 4-5

Ages 6-7

Age
Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

economically disadvantaged children. A number of comprehensive surveys (Karoly et al., 1998;
Blau and Currie, 2006; Cunha et al., 2006; Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman and Kautz, 2014;
Kautz et al., 2014) document both the short- and long-term impacts of numerous early childhood
interventions in the U.S.10 Most notably, an experimental evaluation of the Perry Preschool program followed participants in the early 1960s through age 40, measuring the program’s impacts on
a wide-array of outcomes, including cognitive achievement, educational attainment, earnings, and
crime.11 Based on program costs and impacts measured from ages 15-40, Heckman et al. (2010)
estimate a private internal rate of return to Perry Preschool participants of around 8%.12 The
Abecedarian Project offered high quality full-day preschool to a (randomly assigned) sample of
mostly African American children born in the mid-1970s who were at risk for delayed intellectual
and social development. Follow-up evaluations of Abecedarian through age 21 reveal significant long-term benefits that exceed the program’s costs by a factor of roughly 2.5 (Barnett and
10
Gertler et al. (2014) analyze the long-run impacts of a Jamaican early childhood intervention that aimed to
develop cognitive, language and psychosocial skills. Their estimates suggest that the program significantly increased
educational attainment by 0.6 years and earnings by 25% at age 22.
11
Perry Preschool provided daily high quality preschool (2.5 hours per day) and weekly home visits for two years
to children ages 3 and 4. The randomized control trial sample was drawn from low IQ children from families of low
socioeconomic status.
12
Social returns are even higher, largely due to benefits from crime reduction.

8

Figure 5: Family Investment Gaps by Parental Income Quartile (Relative to Quartile 1)

(a) Child Ages 0-1

(b) Child Ages 2-3

(c) Child Ages 4-5

(d) Child Ages 6-7

9

Masse, 2007).13 Researchers have also extensively analyzed the long-term impacts of Chicago’s
Child-Parent Center (CPC) preschool program, following a sample of low-income, mostly African
American participants from the mid-1980s to the present. Rough calculations based on program
impacts measured through age 26 suggest an average (private) benefit/cost ratio of 3.6 (Reynolds
et al., 2011).14 Finally, a number of studies document significant long-term impacts of Head Start
(Currie and Thomas, 1995, 1999; Garces et al., 2002; Deming, 2009; Ludwig and Miller, 2007;
Carneiro and Ginja, 2014); however, its full rate of return has not been systematically estimated.
Fact 2: the returns to marginal investments are lower for more economically advantaged children. Because most experimental and government-subsidized early childhood programs serve
low-income families, less is known about the lifetime returns to early investments in children
from higher income families. However, a number of studies estimate short- and medium-term
impacts of early childhood interventions by family income or socioeconomic status (SES). These
studies typically report greater benefits for more disadvantaged children. For example, Duncan and Sojourner (2013) estimate that the Infant Health Development Program (IHDP), which
provided the Abecedarian preschool curriculum to an economically diverse sample of low-birth
weight 1-2 year-olds, yielded significantly greater improvements in age five IQ for the subsample
of children from low-income families relative to those from higher income families.15 A recent
analysis of Head Start (Puma et al., 2012) estimates significantly greater impacts on third grade
cognitive and learning outcomes for children from ‘high risk’ (i.e. low SES) households relative to
lower risk households. Estimated impacts of the Chicago CPC preschool program on educational
attainment and earnings at age 28 are also higher for children from ‘high risk’ families (Reynolds
et al., 2011). A few studies that estimate the impacts of introducing universal early child care
subsidies in Canada and Norway find negligible or even adverse impacts on children from middleand high-income families, likely due to the substitution of lower quality subsidized/free child care
in place of higher quality unsubsidized family or informal care (Baker et al., 2008; Havnes and
Mogstad, 2014; Kottelenberg and Lehrer, 2014).16
Taking a very different approach, Cunha et al. (2010) apply dynamic factor models using
13

As is common in this literature, these calculations assume an annual real discount rate of 3%. The benefit
calculations project lifetime earnings impacts based on average earnings differences by educational attainment and
the significant effects of Abecedarian on educational attainment. An age 30 follow-up study (Campbell et al., 2012)
estimates a sizeable but statistically insignificant increase in annual earnings for participants ($33,000 vs. $21,000).
Estimated effects on employment rates and use of public aid at age 30 are statistically significant.
14
As with the Abecedarian cost-benefit analysis of Campbell et al. (2012), Reynolds et al. (2011) use a 3%
discount rate and project lifetime earnings benefits from estimated impacts on age 26 educational attainment; they
also incorporate benefits from reductions in child care costs and child abuse/neglect. In a subsequent follow-up,
Reynolds et al. (2011) show that the program significantly increased age 28 earnings by 7%.
15
Brooks-Gunn et al. (1992) estimate greater effects of IHDP on age three IQ for families with lower maternal
education.
16
See (Baker, 2011) for a careful discussion of recent universal early child care initiatives.

10

multiple noisy measurements of child investments and skill levels to estimate the technology of
human capital production from birth through the end of school. Their estimated technology
suggests that the most efficient allocation of educational investments would provide more to
young disadvantaged children. The fact that actual investments are much lower for disadvantaged
children (see Figures 2-5) coupled with diminishing marginal returns, suggests that returns on
the margin are higher for the most disadvantaged.
Fact 3: exogenous increases in parental income lead to greater investments in children and
improvements in childhood outcomes. A number of recent studies attempt to address concerns
about endogeneity in estimating the effects of exogenous changes in family income on children.
Dahl and Lochner (2012) exploit expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit (primarily over the
mid-1990s) to estimate the effects of additional family income on cognitive achievement. Their
instrumental variable estimates suggest that an additional $1,000 in family income raises combined
math and reading scores by 6 percent of a standard deviation. Estimated effects also appear to
be larger for children from more disadvantaged families. Milligan and Stabile (2011) estimate
that expansions of child tax benefits in Canada led to similar improvements in child cognitive
and educational outcomes as well as improvements in child and maternal health. Combining
data from ten welfare and anti-poverty experiments, Duncan et al. (2011) attempt to separately
identify the effects of changes in family income from employment and other effects induced by
different programs. Their analysis reaches similar conclusions regarding the impacts of income on
child achievement as Dahl and Lochner (2012) and Milligan and Stabile (2011). Finally, Løken
(2010) and Løken et al. (2012) estimate the impact of family income on Norwegian children using
regional variation in the economic boom following the discovery of oil as an instrument for income.
The latter study estimates that income has sizeable impacts on education and IQ for children
from low-income families but much weaker effects for children from higher income families.17
Changes in income may affect children in many ways. In this paper, we focus on investmentbased theories, so it is important to know whether changes in family income cause families to make
different investment choices. A few studies suggest that this is the case. Carneiro and Ginja (2014)
estimate models of income dynamics in the U.S., examining the extent to which family investments
in children respond to permanent and transitory income shocks. Their results suggest modest
positive responses to permanent shocks but negligible responses to transitory shocks. Effects
appear to be largest for younger children and those with less-educated parents. Among children
whose mothers had not attended college, a 10% increase in permanent income is estimated to
17
Studies on the effects of parental job displacement on children also suggest that family income may have
important effects on child schooling and labor market earnings (Oreopoulos et al., 2008; Stevens and Schaller,
2011); however, parental job displacement may also affect child development through other channels (e.g. family
dissolution).

11

increase measures of cognitive stimulation and time investments by about .02 standard deviations.
Cunha et al. (2010) and Pavan (2014) estimate both the technology of skill formation for children
(from birth through later school ages) and the extent to which family income, as well as maternal
and child skills, affect investments in children. Their estimated investment functions suggest that
increases in family income lead to significantly higher investments in children.
Fact 4: the timing of income matters for child development: increases in income at early ages
(compared to later ages) lead to larger increases in investments and achievement/educational
outcomes. The estimated child investment functions of Pavan (2014) imply significantly greater
effects of family income on investments at very early ages relative to older ages. Other studies
estimate the effects of family income received at different child ages on adolescent achievement or
educational outcomes. For example, Duncan and Brooks-Gunn (1997), Duncan et al. (1998), and
Levy and Duncan (1999) all estimate that income received at earlier ages has a greater impact
on adolescent achievement than income received at later ages. Carneiro and Heckman (2002)
correctly point out, however, that (undiscounted) early income should have a larger effect than
(undiscounted) later income due purely to discounting – something not taken into account in
previous analyses.18 More recent studies address this concern by discounting all income measures
back to the year of birth (Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Caucutt and Lochner, 2006, 2012).19
Caucutt and Lochner (2006) report results consistent with the earlier literature, finding that
income received at young ages has a greater effect than income received at older ages on subsequent
child achievement. Caucutt and Lochner (2012) further show that family income earned when
children are younger has a significantly greater effect on college attendance than does income
earned at later ages; however, Carneiro and Heckman (2002) cannot reject that income has the
same effects on college enrolment regardless of the age at which it was received. While both of
these studies use data from the CNLSY, the former benefits from a sample size that is roughly
twice as large, allowing for greater precision. Furthermore, because Carneiro and Heckman (2002)
are more concerned with the importance of borrowing constraints at college-going ages, they
control for age 12 math achievement levels, which may absorb much of the effect of early income.

4

Understanding Investment and Skill Gaps by Family Income

We now develop a general model of dynamic human capital investment that incorporates four
mechanisms thought to generate child investment and skill gaps by family income. Within this
framework, we explore the extent to which these mechanisms are also capable of explaining the
18

That is, with perfect credit markets, income received at age 0 should have an effect that is (1 + r)a times larger
than income received at age a, where r is the annual interest rate.
19
These studies all use a 5% rate to discount income back to the year of a child’s birth.

12

additional stylized facts just discussed. The problem is written as a lifecycle problem in which
individuals invest in their human capital, while borrowing and saving (potentially subject to
borrowing constraints) in an effort to finance investments and smooth consumption over time.
However, the problem can also be interpreted as a ‘family’ investment problem, where altruistic
parents make investments in their children and family borrowing/saving decisions to smooth
family consumption.20

4.1

A General Model of Child Human Capital Investment

We assume that people live through three stages in their lives. Human capital investment takes
place in the first two stages (i.e. ‘childhood’), followed by the final stage, adulthood. Adulthood
may last for many periods; however, its length is inconsequential for most of our analysis. We are
largely agnostic about the form that investments may take, instead focusing primarily on total
investment expenditures at different ages and the dynamic nature of skill production. Conceptually, investments may include various forms of goods inputs like computers and books, parental
time in child development activities, formal schooling, and other time inputs by older children.
4.1.1

Technology for Human Capital Production

Denote a child’s ability to learn by θ > 0. Investment expenditures in periods 1 and 2 are given
by i1 and i2 , respectively. Early investment produces an interim level of human capital,
h2 = zi1 ,

(1)

where z > 0 is the productivity of early investment. Together, late investment and this interim
human capital produce stage 3 (adult) human capital:
h3 = θf (h2 , i2 ).

(2)

The human capital production function f (·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave in both of
its arguments. To guarantee appropriate second order conditions hold in the decision problems
described below, we assume the following throughout our analysis (without explicit reference):
n  
 o
f1
f2
2 <f f
Assumption 1. f12
and
f
>
max
f
,
f
.
11 22
12
22 f2
11 f1

The first condition limits the degree of dynamic complementarity in investments and ensures

strict concavity of the production function. The second condition implies that the least costly
way to produce additional human capital h3 is to increase both early and late investments. Most
20
See Caucutt and Lochner (2012) for a direct mapping between this lifecycle problem and a more explicit
intergenerational problem.

13

plausible specifications for human capital production would entail dynamic complementarity (i.e.
f12 ≥ 0), satisfying this condition (Cunha et al., 2010; Caucutt and Lochner, 2012); however,

the condition holds much more generally.21 We also assume standard Inada conditions to ensure
interior solutions.22
At times our analysis will employ a CES human capital production function of the form

d/b
f (h2 , i2 ) = a1−b hb2 + (1 − a)1−b ib2
,

(3)

where a ∈ (0, 1), b < 1, and d ∈ (0, 1); however, most of our analysis does not rely on any
particular functional form. Assumption 1 holds for this production function.
4.1.2

General Decision Problem

We assume a period utility function over consumption, u(c), that is strictly increasing, strictly
concave and satisfies standard Inada conditions. Tastes for early educational investment, i1 , are
given by νi1 . The time discount rate is β ∈ (0, 1), and the gross rate of return on borrowing and
saving is R > 0. Assets saved in period j are given by aj+1 .
The individual/family receives exogenous income yj during childhood periods j = 1, 2. We
will sometimes refer to these as (early and late) parental income; although, it may also include
government transfers or earnings while older children are still enrolled in school (in period 2).23
Children/families allocate their resources to consumption and skill investment, leaving some
assets/debt for when the child grows up:
max

c1 ,c2 ,i1 ,i2 ,a2 ,a3



E u(c1 ) + νi1 + βu(c2 ) + β 2 V (a3 , h3 )

(4)

subject to human capital production equations (1) and (2); budget constraints
aj+1 = Raj + yj − ij − cj

for j = 1, 2;

(5)

initial assets a1 given; and where V (a3 , h3 ) represents the child’s utility in adulthood given a3
and h3 .
We now consider the main mechanisms commonly thought to explain income-based gaps in
early investment and skill levels. We analyze each mechanism separately, abstracting from the
others, in order to highlight the key underlying forces of each mechanism and the extent to which
it can explain other stylized facts discussed in Section 3. In the next two subsections, we abstract
21

For example, the condition holds for homothetic functions (e.g., CES) regardless of the degree of complementarity.
22
That is, limh2 →0 f1 (h2 , i2 ) = ∞, ∀i2 ≥ 0, and limi2 →0 f2 (h2 , i2 ) = ∞, ∀h2 ≥ 0.
23
Even if one considers the child to be the sole decision maker with y1 and y2 reflecting inter vivos transfers from
parents, the interpretations in the text regarding parental income carry through as long as transfers are strictly
increasing in parental income.

14

from uncertainty and other information problems, considering the consumption value of investment and the intergenerational correlation of ability. In Section 4.4, we study the implications of
uncertainty and mis-information, at which point we describe information sets and variables over
which expectations are taken in Equation (4). Finally, in Section 4.5 we introduce restrictions
on borrowing of the form aj+1 ≥ −Lj , where Lj is an upper limit on the amount that can be
borrowed in period j. Until then, we assume that borrowing and saving are unrestricted.

4.2

Correlated Ability

We begin by studying the implications of a positive intergenerational correlation in ability, which
is likely to generate a positive correlation between a child’s ability and lifetime parental income,
i.e. Cov(θ, Y ) > 0. To focus on this potential explanation for income-based gaps in investment
and achievement, we study the effects of θ on investments, marginal returns to investment, and
human capital, while abstracting from any consumption value of schooling, uncertainty, and credit
constraints. Specifically, we assume ν = 0 and that families have full and perfect information
about the productivity of human capital investments. In the absence of borrowing constraints,
the length of adulthood is irrelevant for our analysis, so we simply consider a three-period problem
with V (a3 , h3 ) = u(Ra3 + h3 ) and a single lifetime budget constraint. For expositional purposes,
we normalize z = 1.
With these assumptions, the problem can be written as:
max

c1 ,c2 ,c3 ,i1 ,i2

{u(c1 ) + βu(c2 ) + β 2 u(c3 )}

subject to the lifetime budget constraint:
c1 + R−1 c2 + R−2 c3 = Y − i1 − R−1 i2 + R−2 θf (i1 , i2 ),
where Y ≡ Ra1 + y1 + R−1 y2 , which we will often (loosely) refer to as ‘lifetime parental income’. Notice, Y may also include initial family assets and government transfers; however, we
can interpret the effects of changes in Y as changes in parental income holding these constant.
Optimal investments must satisfy the following first order conditions:
θf1 (i1 , i2 ) = R2 ,

(6)

θf2 (i1 , i2 ) = R.

(7)

When investments are made purely for investment purposes, they are chosen to equate the
marginal labor market returns to investment,

∂h3
∂ij

= θfj (i1 , i2 ) in both periods j = 1, 2, with

the corresponding return to savings. This is the well-known result of Becker (1975): in the absence of borrowing constraints, uncertainty, and a direct utility value from investment, human
15

capital investments simply maximize discounted lifetime earnings net of investment expenditures.
Importantly, this relationship holds regardless of ability or family income. As such, investments
are independent of family income, Y , given ability. The role of ability is summarized in the
following proposition. (All proofs can be found in Appendix B.)
Proposition 1. Optimal investments satisfy the following: (i) the marginal returns to investments are independent of ability; (ii) early and late investments are strictly increasing in ability;
(iii) adult human capital h3 is strictly increasing in ability.
Not surprisingly, a positive correlation between parental income and child ability would produce a positive correlation between parental income and child investments and skills. Yet, the
marginal return on investments should be unrelated to parental income, because investments in
all children equate their marginal returns to the interest rate. This is inconsistent with both
stylized Facts 1 and 2, which document returns to early investments for poor children that exceed
standard interest rates as well as the returns for more economically advantaged children.
Additionally, the model implies no causal relationship between parental income and child
investments/skills. Holding the child’s ability constant, there should be no correlation between
investments and parental income. Furthermore, exogenous changes in parental income should
have no effect on investments in children, contradicting stylized Facts 3 and 4.

4.3

Consumption Value of Investment

We next explore the implications of a consumption/utility value associated with investment. To
focus on this mechanism, we now incorporate tastes for schooling ν 6= 0 as in Equation (4), while
continuing to assume perfect information, no credit constraints with V (a3 , h3 ) = u(Ra3 + h3 ),
and z = 1.
For simplicity, we assume that β = R−1 so that optimal consumption profiles are flat: ct =
c = B −1 [Y − i1 − R−1 i2 + R−2 θf (i1 , i2 )] for t = 1, 2, 3, where B = 1 + R−1 + R−2 . In the absence
of any consumption value associated with late investment, i2 is still determined from the first
order condition above (Equation (7)); however, optimal early investment must now satisfy:


ν
θf1 (i1 , i2 ) = 1 − 0
R2 .
u (c)

(8)

When investment provides a direct consumption or utility value to children or their families,
this must be taken into account when making investment decisions, driving a wedge between the
marginal labor market return to investment and the return to savings. For a positive consumption
value (ν > 0), early investment will have a low labor market return on the margin (i.e. θf1 < R2 ),

16

because families will want to invest beyond the point where lifetime income is maximized. The
opposite is true if families/children dislike investment (ν < 0).
When investment has a non-zero consumption value, the effects of parental income on investments and human capital, as well as the marginal labor market return to early investment,
are easily derived from the the first order conditions above and are summarized in the following
proposition.
Proposition 2. For ν > 0 (ν < 0), optimal investments satisfy the following: (i) the marginal
return to early investment is strictly less (greater) than the return to savings and is strictly
decreasing (increasing) in lifetime parental income Y ; (ii) early investment is strictly increasing
(decreasing) in lifetime parental income Y ; (iii) later investment is increasing (decreasing) in
lifetime parental income Y if and only if f12 ≥ 0; and (iv) final human capital h3 is strictly
increasing (decreasing) in lifetime parental income Y .
These results are intuitive. If families enjoy investing in their children (ν > 0), they will invest
beyond their income maximizing amounts and will invest more if their income rises. Thus, the
positive relationship between family income and early childhood investment and skills requires a
positive consumption value. Proposition 2 shows that if ν > 0, the marginal labor market return
to early investment should be low (inconsistent with Fact 1) and decreasing in lifetime parental
income (consistent with Fact 2). A positive consumption value predicts that early investment
should rise with exogenous increases in lifetime parental income (consistent with Fact 3); however,
it predicts that the timing of that income is irrelevant (inconsistent with Fact 4).
One might reconcile the high estimated returns for early interventions targeted to economically disadvantaged children (Fact 1) by assuming that low-income parents find investment in
their children costly (i.e. ν < 0 for low-income families). However, this would then imply that
investment in young children and their skill levels should decline when poor parents receive additional income, contradicting Fact 3.

4.4

Confusion

Poor families may face greater uncertainty about the returns to investment, or they may simply
maintain inaccurate beliefs about the productivity of various investments. We next examine how
uncertainty and mis-information influence investment behavior and highlight the importance of
accounting for the dynamic nature of skill production. Throughout this subsection, we continue
to assume ν = 0 and V (a3 , h3 ) = u(Ra3 +h3 ) in order to focus on the role of information frictions.
It is useful to define a number of terms as we use them. We use the term beliefs to reflect
a family’s subjective probability distribution for some (productivity) parameter(s). For much of
17

our analysis, it does not matter whether these beliefs reflect actual variation or simply subjective
uncertainty. We use the term purely objective uncertainty to refer to the case where beliefs coincide
with the actual probability distribution for the parameter(s) of interest. This is also commonly
referred to as rational expectations. We use the term purely subjective uncertainty to refer to the
case where beliefs are non-degenerate even though the actual probability distribution is degenerate
(i.e. if the true distribution for parameters were known, there would be no uncertainty). Whether
uncertainty is purely objective or purely subjective is important for the realized marginal labor
market returns to investments, because the former implies a distribution of ex post marginal
returns for the same investments while the latter does not. We return to this point below.
We begin our analysis by studying uncertainty about θ, which can reflect uncertainty about
the child’s ability to learn, parents’ abilities to teach, or even the price of skill in the labor market.
Here, we focus on the role of risk aversion and assume θ is revealed only after all investments have
been made. We next consider uncertainty about θ, as well as the marginal productivity of early
investments, when that uncertainty is completely resolved after early investments are made but
before later investments are made. To focus on the nature of skill production and irreversibility
of investments, we abstract from risk aversion here. Finally, we study early investments and their
marginal returns when there are many types of early investment activities/inputs, and parents
are mis-informed about the relative productivity of those activities/inputs.
4.4.1

Risk Aversion and Uncertain Returns

We begin with a very natural form of purely objective uncertainty: both beliefs and the true
distribution of θ are given by θ ∼ Φ(θ), with θ̄ ≡ E(θ). For this analysis, we assume that the
true value of θ is not revealed until after all skill investments have been made. We continue to
normalize z = 1.
If individuals are risk averse, the expected return to risky investments should exceed the
return on safe investments if individuals are to hold risky assets at all. With a concave human
capital production technology, this means that skill investments will be lower under uncertainty
(Levhari and Weiss, 1974).
The first order conditions for investments satisfy
f1 (i1 , i2 ) = Rf2 (i1 , i2 ).
Given the separability between θ and f (·), there is no distortion between early and late investment
even if total investment spending is distorted. That is, for a given level of spending i1 + R−1 i2 ,
early and late investments are chosen to maximize f (i1 , i2 ). Assumption 1 ensures that both i1
and i2 increase when total investment spending increases.
18

The level of total investment spending will equate the expected marginal benefit with the
marginal cost of investment, so

Cov u0 (c3 (θ)), θ

 f1 (i1 , i2 ) = R2 ,
θ̄f1 (i1 , i2 ) +
E u0 (c3 (θ))

where c3 (θ) = Ra3 + θf (i1 , i2 ) is optimal period 3 consumption in state θ. The expected marginal
benefit of investment consists of a monetary return (first term) and a utility cost (second term).
Because the marginal utility of consumption is low in states with a high return to investment,
uncertain returns produce an additional utility cost of investment as reflected in the (negative)
covariance term. As such, the expected marginal labor market returns to investment exceed the
return to savings:
θ̄f1 (i1 , i2 ) = Rθ̄f2 (i1 , i2 ) > R2 .
Risk averse individuals facing uncertain returns invest less at all ages relative to those who know
the return with certainty.
Moreover, if having greater resources makes people less risk averse, then investments are
increasing and marginal labor market returns decreasing in lifetime parental income Y . Because
no information about the value of θ is revealed until all investments have been made, choices
depend only on the discounted present value of income over all investment years and not the
timing of that income. The following proposition summarizes these results.24
Proposition 3. When there is uncertainty in the final return to investment θ, optimal investments satisfy the following: (i) expected marginal returns to investment are strictly greater
than the return to savings; (ii) expected marginal returns to investment are strictly decreasing
in parental income Y if u(·) exhibits decreasing absolute risk aversion; and (iii) early and late
investments are strictly increasing in parental income Y if u(·) exhibits decreasing absolute risk
aversion.
4.4.2

Uncertain Returns and the Irreversibility of Early Investment

We now consider the case in which families face uncertainty when making early investments in
their children; however, that uncertainty is fully resolved before late investments are chosen.
While early investments made under uncertainty are irreversible (i.e. families cannot go back
in time to modify ex post suboptimal early investment choices), families can base late investment decisions on the realizations of early investments and full knowledge of the human capital
24

These results assume purely objective uncertainty; however, they also apply to the case of unbiased subjective
uncertainty. The only difference in the latter case is that all individuals would experience the same marginal
return to investments, given by the expected marginal returns in the case of purely objective uncertainty. Thus,
the marginal returns to investment exceed the return on savings (and decline with income) regardless of the form
of uncertainty.

19

production process. Thus, families may be able to partially compensate for ex post suboptimal
early investment through their choice of late investment. The extent to which this is effective
depends crucially on the intertemporal complementarity/substitutability of investments.25 It also
depends on which features of technology are unknown. We consider uncertainty in the productivity of both investments, θ, as well as in the productivity of early investments alone, z, at the
time early investments are made.
To focus on the implications of investment irreversibility and the dynamic nature of human
capital productivity, we abstract from risk aversion. We continue to focus on purely objective uncertainty with the distribution of beliefs over (θ, z) reflecting the true variation in these productivity parameters; however, we comment briefly on the implications of purely subjective uncertainty
at the end of our discussion.
It is useful to begin with the second period investment problem, which conditions on early
investment and technology once θ and z are known. Let î2 (zi1 , θ) denote the optimal second
period investment conditional on i1 and technology state (θ, z):

î2 (zi1 , θ) ≡ argmax − i2 + R−1 θf (zi1 , i2 ) .

(9)

i2

Optimal late investment equates the marginal labor market return with the return to savings,
i.e. θf2 (zi1 , i2 ) = R. From this, it is easy to see that second period investment is increasing
in θ. However, late investment is increasing in z if and only if early and late investments are
gross complements (i.e. f12 ≥ 0), because z only affects the marginal return to late investment
indirectly through h2 = zi1 . Here, we begin to see the distinction between neutral and earlyspecific productivity as well as the importance of intertemporal complementarity/substitutability
of investments. These factors are also important in determining the response of early investment
to uncertainty about investment productivity.
Taking the late investment policy î2 (zi1 , θ) as given, the net realized (or ex post) return to
early investment for actual productivity parameters (θ, z) is given by:

Π(i1 , θ, z) ≡ −i1 − R−1 î2 (zi1 , θ) + R−2 θf zi1 , î2 (zi1 , θ) .

(10)

The following lemma establishes concavity of net realized returns in early investment and is useful
for a number of results.
Lemma 1. The net return to early investment Π(i1 , θ, z) is strictly concave in i1 .
25

See Cunha and Heckman (2007) for a discussion of dynamic complementarity and the difficulty of compensating
for low early investments by increasing late investments. Cunha et al. (2010) estimate and Caucutt and Lochner
(2012) calibrate a strong degree of intertemporal complementarity for investments in children.

20

Because i1 must be determined before (θ, z) is realized, optimal early investment maximizes
the expected net return:



ĩ1 ≡ argmax E Π(i1 , θ, z) ,
i1

where the expectation is taken over the distribution of (θ, z). The first order condition equates
the expected marginal labor market return to early investment with the return to savings:
h
i
E zθf1 z ĩ1 , î2 (z ĩ1 , θ) = R2 .

(11)

With purely objective uncertainty and risk neutrality, the expected marginal labor market return
to early investment always equals the return to savings regardless of the type (i.e. θ or z) or
extent of uncertainty – the expected marginal return is independent of the (θ, z) distribution. In
contrast with Facts 1 and 2 of Section 3, the average marginal labor market return should equal
the interest rate for children from all backgrounds.
We are also interested in understanding how changes in the distribution of (θ, z) affect early
investment amounts. We consider two notions of a change in the distribution that are widely
used in economics: first order stochastic dominance and mean-preserving spread (Rothschild and
Stiglitz, 1970, 1971). In this framework, how ĩ1 changes with the distribution of productivity
parameters depends on how ∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 varies with (θ, z). If ∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 is increasing
(decreasing) in θ, a first order stochastic dominance shift in θ will increase (decrease) ĩ1 . If
∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 is concave (convex) in θ, a mean-preserving spread in θ decreases (increases) ĩ1 .
The same is true for changes in the distribution of z. We first consider investment when θ is
unknown, then turn attention to the case with z unknown. Some of our results assume a CES
production function for human capital as defined in Equation (3).
Neutral Productivity Shock
We now consider uncertainty in the overall ability of a child (θ) that is fully resolved after early
investments have been made but before late investments are chosen. We assume z is known.26
Proposition 4. (i) A first order stochastic dominance shift in θ increases early investment.
(ii) For the CES production function (3), a mean-preserving spread in θ reduces early investment
if and only if b > d.
It is not surprising that a first order stochastic shift in θ unambiguously increases early
investment, because θ directly raises the marginal return to investment for any given level of
early and late investment. The effect of a mean-preserving spread in the distribution of θ is more
26

This case was originally considered by Hartman (1976) in the analysis of firm investment and labor demand
under uncertain output prices.

21

complicated and depends on the degree of complementarity between investments. For a CES
human capital production function, an increase in uncertainty about θ reduces early investment
if and only if early and late investments are gross substitutes (i.e. b > d ⇔ f12 < 0). With strong
intertemporal substitutability, families facing uncertainty about θ will choose to invest little in the
first period and wait to learn the productivity of investment. If investment is highly productive,
the family can easily compensate for inadequate early investment by investing more in the second
period. In the more empirically relevant case where investments are gross complements (f12 > 0),
it is too costly to make up for a lack of early investment by increasing late investment. As a
result, early investment increases with the degree of uncertainty.
Early Investment-Specific Productivity Shock
Families may be more uncertain about the productivity of early investments in their children
than they are about later investments like college attendance. To explore this possibility, we now
assume θ is known from birth and consider the case where z is initially unknown but revealed
after early investments have been made.
A change in z has two opposing effects on the marginal return to early investment. An
increase in z directly increases the productivity of i1 , but it also reduces the marginal return
because h2 = zi1 is subject to diminishing returns in the production of adult human capital h3 .
The latter effect is attenuated by adjustments in late investments when f12 6= 0. The overall
effect of z depends on the following condition:


2
f f22 −f12
Condition 1. f1 > 11 −f
zi1 .
22

If the direct productivity effect (left hand side) is greater than the the diminishing return

effect (right hand side), then the marginal return to i1 is greater for larger z. For the CES
production function given in Equation (3), this condition holds if b ≥ 0.
Condition 1 is appealing, because it is equivalent to requiring that an increase in z raises the
net marginal return to early investment.
Lemma 2. The marginal net return to early investment ∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 is strictly increasing in
z if and only if Condition 1 holds.
When Condition 1 is satisfied, a better distribution of z produces a higher marginal return to
i1 , on average, which makes it profitable to increase early investment. The following proposition
formalizes this result and characterizes the effects of a mean-preserving spread in z.
Proposition 5. For the CES production function (3), (i) a first order stochastic dominance
shift in z increases early investment if b ≥ 0; (ii) a mean preserving spread in z reduces early
investment if b ≥ 0.
22

The effect of a mean-preserving spread in z is similar to its counterpart for θ (Proposition 4),
except that uncertainty in z discourages early investment more than does uncertainty in θ. In
contrast with an increase in uncertainty about θ, an increase in uncertainty about z can reduce
early investment even when early and late investment are gross complements (e.g. 0 ≤ b ≤ d).
Intuitively, diminishing marginal returns to h2 = zi1 in the production of adult human capital
lessens the benefits of high z realizations for the marginal return to early investment. This force
moderates the costs of under-investment and discourages early investment when z is uncertain,
but it is absent with uncertainty in θ.
Purely Subjective Uncertainty, Investments, and Marginal Returns
The previous analysis assumes individuals have purely objective uncertainty about heterogeneous
productivity levels (θ, z). Even if all children have the same productivity levels, they may have
different subjective beliefs about the true productivity of investments. For example, the poor
may have downward biased beliefs or they may have unbiased beliefs with greater subjective
uncertainty. Regardless, Propositions 4 and 5 characterize the effects of changes in beliefs on
early investment choices.
More interestingly, purely subjective uncertainty has different implications from purely objective uncertainty for observed marginal returns in the labor market. In the latter case, families
facing the same distribution of productivity levels make the same early investment choices, but
they experience different labor market outcomes due to heterogeneous productivity levels. As
discussed earlier (see the discussion surrounding Equation (11)), the average realized marginal
labor market return under purely objective uncertainty always equals the return to savings. The
case of purely subjective uncertainty is quite different. All families with the same beliefs and
ability/productivity will make the same early investment choices and will, therefore, experience
the same labor market returns. Strict concavity of Π(i1 , θ, z) in i1 (Lemma 1) directly implies
that under purely subjective uncertainty, the observed marginal labor market return to early investment is strictly decreasing in the level of early investment. This, together with Propositions
4 and 5, directly implies the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Assume the CES production function given in Equation (3). Under purely subjective uncertainty, a mean-preserving spread in the distribution of beliefs about θ (z) increases the
marginal labor market return to early investment if and only if b > d (if b ≥ 0).
Families with greater subjective uncertainty about θ will have a higher marginal labor market
return to early investment if and only if early and late investments are gross substitutes. Marginal
labor market returns will be increasing in the amount of subjective uncertainty about z under a
23

modest amount of dynamic complementarity in investments.
4.4.3

Biased Beliefs about Human Capital Production

Thus far, we have focused on the extent of uncertainty about the productivity of investments.
It is also possible that parents may have little subjective uncertainty about the productivity
of investments, but their beliefs may be biased. This possibility seems particularly likely to
arise when there are many different potential inputs/activities families may engage in to raise
the human capital of their children (e.g. reading to children, taking them to museums, teaching
them to play musical instruments, playing with them). Even if parents are correct in gauging the
average productivity across different inputs, they might easily misjudge their relative productivity.
To explore this issue, we now assume homogeneity in the productivity of different early inputs
across families; however, we allow for the possibility that families may hold biased beliefs about
the productivity of any or all early child inputs. To simplify the analysis, we abstract away from
any form of uncertainty – families are certain but may be wrong. We further assume that families
learn the true outcomes of their early investments, h2 , before they need to make later investment
decisions.
Assume early investment consists of n different ‘activities’ x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) that produce h2
according to the following CES production function:

1
φ
n
X
1−φ φ 

h2 = z
wj xj
,

(12)

j=1

where φ ∈ (0, 1) and w = (w1 , . . . , wn ) ≥ 0 satisfies

Pn

j=1 wj

= 1.27 Here, z reflects the total

factor productivity of early investments. Changes in z have no affect on the relative productivity
or optimal composition of different inputs. Productivity weights wj determine the relative importance of each input as well as their optimal expenditure shares. It is straightforward to show
P
that demand for input xj conditional on total early investment spending i1 = nj=1 xj is given
by

xj = wj i1 .
By substituting these conditional demands into the production function, we obtain the indirect
production function (as a function of total early expenditure i1 ) equivalent to that assumed
earlier:

27



h2 = z 

n
X
j=1

1

φ

wj1−φ (wj i1 )φ 

= zi1 .

Vector equality and inequality are defined as follows: (i) x̃ = x if x̃j = xj for all j = 1, . . . , n; (ii) x̃ 6= x if
x̃j 6= xj for some j = 1, . . . , n; (iii) x̃ ≤ x if x̃j ≤ xj for all j = 1, . . . , n.

24

To investigate the implications of incorrect beliefs about early investment productivity, it is
useful to distinguish beliefs from actual productivity parameters. Let z̃ and w̃ denote a family’s
P
beliefs about z and w, respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume nj=1 w̃j = 1. We say
that a belief is biased if z̃ 6= z or w̃ 6= w. When z̃ 6= z, the bias is systematic in the sense that

families are, on average, biased about the productivity of early investments. When z̃ = z but
w̃ 6= w, the bias is non-systematic, because beliefs are, on average, correct even though they are
wrong about the relative productivity of different early inputs.
Let (x̃, ĩ1 , h̃2 , h̃3 ) be the optimally chosen investments and realized human capital of children
with family beliefs (z̃, w̃). Let (x∗ , i∗1 , h∗2 , h∗3 ) reflect these same variables when beliefs are unbiased.
Families first choose investments x and i1 based on their beliefs (z̃, w̃):
ĩ1 = argmax Π(i1 , θ, z̃)
i1

x̃j =w̃j ĩ1 ,

∀j = 1, . . . , n,

where the child’s lifetime income net of investments, Π(·, ·, ·), is defined by equation (10). Notice
that total early investment spending ĩ1 is only affected by z̃ and not by w̃, because w does not
affect total factor productivity.
Next, interim human capital h̃2 is realized based on investments choices (x̃, ĩ1 ) and the true
technology (z, w):

where



h̃2 = z 

n
X
j=1

1

φ

wj1−φ x̃φj 

= zτ (w̃)ĩ1 ,


1
φ
n
X
1−φ φ 

≤1
τ (w̃) ≡
wj w̃j
j=1

reflects the distortion due to a suboptimal allocation of expenditures across inputs. When w̃ 6= w,
early investment spending is less productive than it should be (τ (w̃) < 1), so interim human
capital is low (h̃2 < z ĩ1 ).
We assume that i2 is chosen knowing the actual realization for h̃2 . That is, families are able
to evaluate their child’s skill/achievement, effectively learning that their beliefs were mistaken.28
Given the resulting interim human capital, late investments are determined as in Section 4.4.2
(see Equation (9)). Finally, adult human capital h̃3 is produced based on actual h̃2 and late
investment:

28


h̃3 = θf h̃2 , î2 (h̃2 , θ) .

Note that this does not necessarily require that parents learn the true productivity values (z, w); although, it
is too late to matter.

25

where î2 (., .) is defined in Equation (9).
We first study how systematic bias affects early investment and human capital accumulation.
Proposition 6. (i) ĩ1 is strictly increasing in z̃ if and only if Condition 1 holds for (h2 , i2 ) =

z̃ ĩ1 , î2 (z̃ ĩ1 , θ) . (ii) Suppose that w̃ = w. If and only if ĩ1 ≤ i∗1 , then: x̃ ≤ x∗ , h̃2 ≤ h∗2 , h̃3 ≤ h∗3 ,

and zθf1 h̃2 , î2 (h̃2 , θ) ≥ R2 .
Families with a biased belief about z behave as if the true productivity of early investment is z̃

rather than z. As shown in Lemma 1, higher productivity in early investment does not necessarily
lead to more early investment due to the diminishing return effect. However, when this effect
is weak so Condition 1 is satisfied (e.g. modest dynamic complementarity or substitutability),
individuals with downward biased beliefs under-invest in all early inputs/activities resulting in
low levels of human capital. Moreover, under-investment implies a high observed marginal labor
market return to early investment. By contrast, when Condition 1 does not hold, families with
downward biased beliefs may over-invest (in all inputs) and obtain high levels of human capital.
In this case, providing information that shifts beliefs upwards towards the truth would actually
reduce early investment and human capital. Figure 6 demonstrates this possibility with CES
production function (3) and b < 0. In this example, moving downward biased beliefs z̃ from the
middle of the graph towards the true (higher) value of z would result in lower (but more efficient)
levels of early investment.
Next, consider the effects of non-systematic bias.
Proposition 7. Suppose that z̃ = z and w̃ 6= w. Then (i) x̃j ≤ x∗j if and only if w̃j ≤ wj ; (ii)

ĩ1 = i∗1 , h̃2 < h∗2 , and h̃3 < h∗3 ; (iii) zτ (w̃)θf1 h̃2 , î2 (h̃2 , θ) < R2 if Condition 1 holds for all

(h2 , i2 ) = z 0 i∗1 , î2 (z 0 i∗1 , θ) where z 0 ∈ [zτ (w̃), z].
Non-systematic bias does not affect total early investment spending ĩ1 , but it reduces the

actual return to early investment due to the misallocation of resources to the wrong inputs. As
such, it leads to low levels of human capital. In this case, providing more precise information will
not affect total early investment expenditures, but it will lead to more efficient human capital
production and, consequently, greater human capital. Because non-systematic bias reduces the
productivity of early investment while leaving total investment expenditure unaffected, its effect
on the marginal return to early investment depends on Condition 1. When Condition 1 holds,
families with non-systematic bias have lower marginal labor market returns to early investment
due to misallocation.

26

Figure 6: Systematic Bias and Early Investment (CES with b < 0)

ĩ1

ĩ1 < i∗1

ĩ1 > i∗1

under-investment

over-investment

ĩ1 < i∗1
under-investment

i∗1



4.4.4

1−b a d
−b 1−a 1−d

 1−b
−b

z

z̃

Information Problems and the Stylized Facts

The nature of an information problem is important for understanding its effects on human capital
investment behavior. While none of the information problems we study are able to explain why
the timing of income is important for human capital investment (Fact 4), some are more promising
for explaining the other stylized facts in Section 3.
Uncertainty about child ability θ (or labor market returns to human capital) coupled with risk
aversion causes families to under-invest in their children. With decreasing absolute risk aversion,
under-investment is worse among the poor, and an increase in lifetime parental income would be
met with an increase in child investments (Fact 3). Expected marginal returns exceed the return
to savings (Fact 1) and are especially high for children from low-income families (Fact 2). These
results apply whether uncertainty is objective or subjective.
We also explore the implications of uncertainty resolved after early investments have been
made but in time for late investment choices to respond. Here, we abstract from risk aversion
in order to focus on the role of early investment irreversibility and the technology of skill formation. If early and late investments are mildly complementary, subjective uncertainty about the
productivity of early investments, z, can lead to under-investment in young children and high
marginal returns to early investment (relative to interest rates). If poor families face greater
subjective uncertainty about z, then they will invest less in their young children than higher
27

income families, stopping investment when marginal returns are relatively high.29 Thus, with
modest dynamic complementarity, differences in subjective uncertainty by parental income can
help explain Facts 1 and 2. While this form of uncertainty can explain the positive correlation
between parental income and child investments, it does not help us understand why changes in
parental income lead to contemporaneous changes in child investments and achievement (Facts 3
and 4) unless income brings new information with it.30 Uncertainty about θ (with risk neutrality)
resolved after early childhood is inconsistent with a positive parental income – child investment
relationship and other stylized facts unless early and late investments are substitutes.31
Finally, we consider the possibility that families are simply mistaken about the productivity
of early investment activities as documented in Cunha (2014) and Dizon-Ross (2014). Assuming
modest dynamic complementarity, we show that poor families that systematically under-estimate
the productivity of early investments will under-invest in their young children and have a high
marginal return to early investment relative to the return to savings and the marginal return for
high income families with accurate beliefs (Facts 1 and 2). By contrast, non-systematic bias (i.e.
over-estimation of the productivity of some inputs offset by under-estimation of the productivity
of others) has no effect on total early investment expenditures. Instead, it results in a misallocation across early inputs, which tends to reduce the marginal return to early expenditures.32
Thus, non-systematic bias among poor families cannot explain the basic correlation between
family income and child investment/achievement, nor can it explain the high marginal return to
investment among the poor (Facts 1 and 2). Neither form of bias helps explain the responsiveness
of early investment and achievement to changes in income (Facts 3 and 4).33

4.5

Borrowing Constraints

Lastly, we explore the possibility that families may be unable to borrow against future earnings
to efficiently finance investments in their children. Extending the analysis of Cunha and Heckman (2007), we demonstrate the importance of dynamic complementarity of investments for the
impacts of both borrowing constraints and family resources on investment behavior.
We incorporate borrowing constraints by imposing upper limits on the total debts families
29

With purely objective uncertainty and risk neutrality, expected marginal returns to investment always equal
the return on savings.
30
Changes in income may lead to changes in information and, therefore, investment behavior, if information
about the productivity value of investment can be purchased by families. We do not explicitly model this possibility.
31
Available evidence suggests dynamic complementarity for investments (Cunha et al., 2010; Caucutt and
Lochner, 2012).
32
The prediction of over-investment in some inputs and under-investment in others conflicts with Figures 2 and 3,
which shows that the poor generally invest less than the rich in nearly all inputs.
33
Systematic bias in z may be consistent with Fact 3 if b > 0 and beliefs about z respond to changes in family
income. See footnote 30.

28

can accumulate in any period. Specifically, we restrict assets carried into any period j + 1 to
satisfy the constraint aj+1 ≥ −Lj . To focus on the role of borrowing constraints, we consider
the problem of Section 4.1.2 (with borrowing constraints) assuming z = 1, ν = 0, and perfect
information.
Because we are not only concerned with borrowing constraints during the investment period,
but also later in life, we interpret the continuation utility V (a3 , θf (h2 , i2 )) as the solution to the
asset allocation problem for individuals entering adulthood, allowing for the possibility of binding
future constraints. We assume that individuals live to age T and that adult earnings depend on
human capital acquired through childhood investments h3 , growing exogenously thereafter with
j ∈ {4, ..., T }.

hj = Γj h3 ,

(13)

Individuals entering adulthood with human capital h3 and assets a3 allocate consumption across
their remaining life in the following way:
V (a3 , h3 ) = max

c3 ,...,cT

T
X

β j−3 u(cj ),

(14)

j=3

subject to budget constraints aj+1 = Raj + hj − cj for j ∈ {3, ..., T }, borrowing constraints
aj+1 ≥ −Lj for j ∈ {3, ..., T − 1}, and aT +1 = 0.34

Given the value function defined in (14), families solve the maximization problem (4) subject
to budget constraints (5), initial assets a1 , and borrowing constraints a2 ≥ −L1 and a3 ≥ −L2 .
4.5.1

Investment Behavior

Consumption allocations satisfy u0 (cj ) ≥ βRu0 (cj+1 ), ∀j = 1, ..., T − 1, where the inequality is
strict if and only if the borrowing constraint for period j (aj+1 ≥ −Lj ,) binds. First order
conditions for investment are given by
∂V (a3 , h3 )
f1 (i1 , i2 ),
∂h3
∂V (a3 , h3 )
f2 (i1 , i2 ),
u0 (c2 ) = βθ
∂h3
u0 (c1 ) = β 2 θ

where

∂V (a3 ,h3 )
∂h3

=

PT

j=3 β

j−3 Γ u0 (c )
j
j

(15)
(16)

> 0 with Γ3 = 1. Taking the ratio of these equations reveals

that optimal investment equates the technical rate of substitution in the production of human
f1 (i1 ,i2 )
f2 (i1 ,i2 )
∗
χθf1 (i1 , i∗2 ) =

capital with the marginal rate of substitution for consumption:

u0 (c1 )
βu0 (c2 ) ≥ R.
R2 and χθf2 (i∗1 , i∗2 )

=

Unconstrained optimal investments, i∗1 and i∗2 , satisfy
= R,
PT
where χ = j=3 R3−j Γj reflects the discounted present value of an additional unit of human
34

Appendix B shows that V2 > 0, V22 < 0, and V21 < 0. These properties are used repeatedly in proving results
below.

29

capital. As in Section 4.2, unconstrained investments maximize the discounted present value
of lifetime earnings net of investment costs. They are independent of the marginal utility of
consumption and income/transfers, because individuals can optimally smooth consumption across
periods. This is not true when borrowing constraints bind as shown in the next proposition.
Proposition 8. (i) If and only if any borrowing constraint binds, then: optimal early investment
is strictly less than the unconstrained amount, the marginal return to early investment is strictly
greater than the return to savings, and adult human capital is strictly less than the unconstrained
level. (ii) If any borrowing constraint binds and either (a) the period one constraint does not bind
or (b) f12 > 0, then optimal late investment is strictly less than the unconstrained amount. (iii)
If and only if any borrowing constraint in period two or later binds, then the marginal return to
late investment is strictly greater than the return to savings.
Early investment is always low and its marginal labor market return high (relative to the
unconstrained case) when any borrowing constraints bind. Late investment is also low and its
marginal return high if constraints at that age or later are binding and either the early constraint
does not bind or early and late investments are complementary.
The complementarity of investments across periods plays a central role in determining individual responses to borrowing constraints and changes in parental income. If investments are
very substitutable, individuals can shift investment from constrained periods to unconstrained
periods with little loss to total acquired human capital. Their ability to do this is diminished as
investments become more complementary. In particular, the following dynamic complementarity
condition is important for a number of results.
Condition 2.

f12 f
f1 f2

>

−V22 (−RL2 ,h3 )h3
V2 (−RL2 ,h3 ) .

If preferences are given by the constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) form
u(c) =

c1−σ
1−σ

(where 1/σ is the IES) and credit constraints are non-binding throughout adulthood,

then this condition simplifies to something very intuitive:


f1 f2
1
RL2
<
1−
.
f12 f
σ
χh3
|{z}
| {z }
|
{z
}
Hicksian elasticity of substitution IES 1- maximum debt
lif etime income

See Appendix B for details.35 As the Hicksian elasticity of substitution between early and late
investments declines (i.e. investments become more complementary) or the consumption intertemporal elasticity of substitution increases (i.e. individuals become less concerned about maintaining
35

For the CES production function given in equation (3), the Hicksian elasticity of substitution between early
d
and late investments (the left hand side) is simply d−b
. The condition cannot hold for d ≤ b, but this only rules
out very strong substitution between early and late investments such that f12 ≤ 0.

30

smooth consumption profiles), this inequality is more likely to hold. More generally, when individual preferences for smooth consumption are strong, Condition 2 requires strong complementarity
between early and late investments.
We are now ready to study how family income during early and late childhood affect investment behavior. As noted above, changes in family income have no effect on investments for
unconstrained individuals. The following proposition shows how constraints at different stages of
child development determine the responsiveness of investment to changes in income at early and
late ages. These results highlight how the timing of income/transfers can impact human capital
investments and accumulation when individuals are constrained.36
Proposition 9.
I. If borrowing constraints bind in late childhood, but not early childhood, then:
∂i1
∂i1
∂i1
∂y1 = R ∂y2 = ∂(R−1 y2 ) > 0;
∂i2
∂i2
(ii) ∂y
= R ∂y
= ∂(R∂i−12 y2 ) > 0;
1
2
∂h3
∂h3
3
(iii) ∂h
∂y1 = R ∂y2 = ∂(R−1 y2 ) > 0.

(i)

II. If borrowing constraints only bind in early childhood, then:
∂i1
∂i1
∂y1 > 0; and ∂y2 < 0;
∂i2
∂i2
(ii) ∂y
> 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0; and ∂y
1
2
∂h3
∂h3
(iii) ∂y1 > 0; and ∂y2 < 0.

(i)

< 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0;

III. If borrowing constraints bind during both early and late childhood, then:
∂i1
∂i1
∂y1 > 0; and ∂y2 > 0 ⇐⇒
∂i2
(ii) ∂y
> 0 ⇐⇒ Condition 2
1
∂h3
3
(iii) ∂y1 > 0 and ∂h
∂y2 > 0.

(i)

Condition 2 holds;
holds; and

∂i2
∂y2

> 0;

There are two key implications of this proposition. First, if the late constraint binds, while
the early borrowing constraint is non-binding, investments depend only on the discounted present
value of family income y1 + R−1 y2 , not the timing of income (conditional on discounting y2 ).
Second, when the early constraint binds, both the timing of income and the extent of dynamic
complementarity are important factors determining the response of investments to changes in
income. For example, early investment is always increasing in y1 ; however, it is decreasing in y2
if only the early constraint binds because a late increase in income exacerbates this constraint.
When only the early constraint binds, the impacts of income on late investment depend entirely
on its effect on early investment and whether early investment raises or lowers the marginal
return to late investment. When constraints are binding throughout childhood, increases in
36

See Cunha and Heckman (2007) for a related analysis of the impacts of early vs. late income on the early-to-late
investment ratio i1 /i2 when the early borrowing constraint binds.

31

income in any period increase investment in both periods if and only if there is sufficient dynamic
complementarity.
To better understand the implications of policies aimed at expanding credit for educational
investments, we consider the impacts of raising borrowing limits for families at different stages
of child development, beginning with limits faced by families with older children (e.g. expanding
student loan programs for higher education).
Proposition 10. Assume that the borrowing constraint binds during late childhood (i.e. a3 =
−L2 ).
(i) If the early borrowing constraint does not bind (i.e. a2 > −L1 ), then:
and

∂h3
∂L2

> 0,

∂i2
∂L2

> 0,

> 0.

(ii) If the early borrowing constraint also binds (i.e. a2 = −L1 ), then:
holds;

∂i1
∂L2

∂i2
∂L2

> 0; and

∂h3
∂L2

∂i1
∂L2

> 0 if Condition 2

> 0.

Relaxing the borrowing constraint during late childhood unambiguously increases late investment. If the early constraint is non-binding or if early and late investments are sufficiently
complementary, then any increase in late investment encourages additional early investment as
well. Even in the case of strong intertemporal substitutability when early investment may decline,
individuals acquire more adult human capital when the late constraint is relaxed.
Next, consider expanded borrowing opportunities for families with young children (e.g. loans
for preschool).
Proposition 11. Assume that the borrowing constraint binds during early childhood (i.e. a2 =
−L1 ).
(i) If no other borrowing constraint binds, then:
∂h3
∂L1

∂i1
∂L1

∈ (0, 1);

∂i2
∂L1

> 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0; and

> 0.
(ii) If the late borrowing constraint also binds (i.e. a3 = −L2 ) and Condition 2 does not hold,

then:

∂i1
∂L1

> 0 and

∂i2
∂L1

< 0.

When individuals are only constrained during early childhood, relaxing that constraint leads
to an increase in early investment, which encourages late investment as long as the marginal
productivity of i2 is increasing in i1 .
When children are constrained in both periods, relaxing the early constraint effectively shifts
resources from late to early childhood. If early and late investments are very complementary,
they will both tend to move in the same direction. In most cases, investments will increase;
however, it is possible that investments could actually decrease in both periods. Intuitively, if
late investment is very productive, then relaxing the early borrowing constraint can ‘starve’ that
32

investment. By contrast, if investments are sufficiently substitutable over time, shifting resources
from late to early childhood by relaxing the early constraint causes investment to shift from the
late to the early period as well.
The stylized facts of Section 3 and other evidence in Caucutt and Lochner (2012) are most
consistent with binding early and late constraints and sufficient dynamic complementarity (case
III of Proposition 9). In this case, investments increase with additional family income (Fact 3)
and the timing of income matters (Fact 4). Because poor children are more likely to be borrowing
constrained, Proposition 8 implies that they are likely to have marginal labor market returns that
exceed the return to savings as well as the marginal returns for unconstrained children from higher
income families (Facts 1 and 2). Finally, Propositions 10 and 11 suggest that policies designed to
expand borrowing opportunities (at either stage of child development) can raise the investment
and skill levels of children from constrained (i.e. low-income) families, improving both efficiency
and equity.

5

Conclusions

It is well-known that poor children perform much worse academically and on achievement tests
than their more economically advantaged counterparts. The most immediate explanation for
these differences is that poor parents invest less in their young children. As we document, poor
parents have fewer books in the home, read less to their young children, engage in fewer lessons
and extracurricular activities, etc. Important differences in investment activities and achievement by family income remain even after controlling for maternal characteristics like education,
achievement, and race. In this paper, we ask the next logical question: why do poor parents
invest so much less in their children?
While there are many competing theories for these investment and skill gaps, few studies
attempt to sort amongst them.37 We systematically study four leading investment-based theories/mechanisms thought to drive income-based skill gaps: an intergenerational correlation in
ability, a consumption value of investment, information frictions, and credit constraints. In order to help understand which mechanisms drive family investments in children, we consider the
extent to which they also explain other important stylized facts related to the marginal returns
to investment and the effects of parental income on child investment and skills.
The main lessons from our theoretical analysis are summarized in Table 1, which shows
considerable differences in the extent to which each mechanism explains important stylized facts
about child development. While a positive intergenerational correlation in ability may be partially
37

Cunha (2014) is an important recent exception.

33

34

No
No
No

Lower MR to i1 for Rich

Increase in Income
causes an increase in i1

Timing of Income

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Only if info.
changes with
income‡

Yes†‡

No†
No

Yes†‡

No†

Uncertainty
w/Risk
Uncertainty Uncertainty
Aversion
in θ
in z

No

Only if info.
changes with
income‡

Yes‡

Yes‡

Systematic
downward
bias

No

No

No‡

No‡

NonSystematic
bias

Poor have biased beliefs

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Credit
Constraints

Notes: Where relevant, results in the table assume gross complementarity, i.e. f12 ≥ 0. † Under purely objective uncertainty, expected marginal returns
equal return to savings for everyone. ‡ Assumes that Condition 1 holds or that b ≥ 0 in the case of CES production function.

No

High MR to i1 for Poor

Intergen. Consum.
Ability
Value
Correlation (ν > 0)

Poor more subjective
uncertainty, risk
neutrality, i1 irreversible

Table 1: Summary of Results

responsible for the relationship between family income and child investment and achievement, it
is not helpful for understanding any of the other important stylized facts. A theory based only
on a positive consumption value of investment can explain the positive causal effects of income
on investment as well as decreasing marginal labor market returns in family income; however, it
predicts over-investment in skills such that the labor market returns to investment should be less
than the return to savings. This mechanism offers no explanation for the importance of early
income relative to late income.
Uncertainty coupled with risk aversion leads to under-investment in human capital and high
marginal returns to additional investment. With decreasing absolute risk aversion, investment
disincentives are greater for the poor. Thus, this mechanism can explain the qualitative patterns for marginal returns documented in the literature as well as the evidence on causal effects
of income on early child investments and achievement. Neither this mechanism nor any other
information-based explanation we explore can explain why the timing of income is important.
Even in the absence of risk aversion, subjective uncertainty in the productivity of early investments can lead to under-investment and high marginal returns due to the irreversibility of investments. If poor families face greater subjective uncertainty than rich families, then predicted
patterns for marginal returns are consistent with empirical evidence. This is also true if poor
families simply under-estimate the productivity of early investments compared to higher income
families. Unless changes in income directly improve the information of poor families, these misinformation problems only generate a correlation between family income and investment; they
cannot explain why changes in income produce changes in investment or achievement.
The inability of poor families to borrow against future income can lead to under-investment
in their children, which can further explain high marginal returns to investment among the poor.
For children in constrained families, improvements in income lead to increases in investment and
higher skill levels. If constraints are binding for families with young children, the timing of income
will be important. Thus, binding credit constraints are consistent with all of the stylized facts
we consider.
We caution that our comparison of model predictions with the evidence should not be taken as
a score sheet, evaluating the importance of each mechanism by the number of facts it explains. For
example, a positive intergenerational correlation in ability is almost certainly important given the
extent to which maternal characteristics help explain income-based differences in investment and
achievement (see Figures 1 and 5); yet, it offers no explanation for any of the other stylized facts.
Instead, our results help identify the limits of different mechanisms. For example, only borrowing
constraints are capable of explaining why the timing of income may be important. Information or
credit market frictions are needed to explain the high marginal returns to early investment among
35

the poor, suggesting that appropriately designed policies may be able to reduce inequality while
improving economic efficiency. More generally, understanding the limits of different mechanisms
should be helpful in refining current theories and developing new ones to provide a more complete
understanding of the child development process.

References
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011). Human capital development before age five. In Handbook of
Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Chapter 15, pp. 1315–1486. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Baker, M. (2011). Innis lecture: universal early childhood interventions: What is the evidence
base? Canadian Journal of Economics 44 (4), 1069–1105.
Baker, M., J. Gruber, and K. Milligan (2008). Universal child care, maternal labor supply, and
family well-being. Journal of Political Economy 116 (4), 709–745.
Barnett, W. S. and L. Masse (2007). Comparative benefit-cost analysis of the Abecedarian
program and its policy implications. Economics of Education Review 26 (1), 113–125.
Becker, G. S. (1975). Human Capital, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979). An equilibrium theory of the distribution of income and
intergenerational mobility. Journal of Political Economy 87 (6), 1153–1189.
Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1986). Human capital and the rise and fall of families. Journal of
Labor Economics 4 (3), S1–S39.
Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007). The changing role of family income and ability in determining
educational achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1 (1), 37–89.
Blau, D. and J. Currie (2006). Pre-school, day care, and after-school care: Who’s minding the
kids? In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 2,
Chapter 20, pp. 1163–1278. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Brooks-Gunn, J., R. T. Gross, H. C. Kraemer, D. Spiker, and S. Shapiro (1992). Enhancing the
cognitive outcomes of low birth weight, premature infants: For whom is the intervention most
effective? Pediatrics 89 (6), 1209–1215.
Cameron, S. and J. J. Heckman (1998, April). Life cycle schooling and dynamic selection bias:
Models and evidence for five cohorts of American males. Journal of Political Economy 106 (2),
262–333.
36

Campbell, F. A., E. P. Pungello, M. Burchinal, K. Kainz, Y. Pan, B. H. Wasik, O. A. Barbarin,
J. J. Sparling, and C. T. Ramey (2012). Adult outcomes as a function of an early childhood
educational program: An Abecedarian project follow-up. Developmental Psychology 48 (4),
1033.
Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2014). Long-term impacts of compensatory preschool on health and
behavior: Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (4),
135–173.
Carneiro, P., J. Heckman, and E. Vytlacil (2011). Estimating marginal returns to education.
American Economic Review 101 (6), 2754–81.
Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2002). The evidence on credit constraints in post-secondary
schooling. Economic Journal 112 (482), 705–734.
Caucutt, E. and L. Lochner (2012). Early and late human capital investments, borrowing constraints, and the family. NBER Working Paper No. 18493.
Caucutt, E. and L. J. Lochner (2006). Borrowing constraints on families with young children. In
Innovation in Education, pp. 39–48. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Cunha, F. (2013). Investments in children when markets are incomplete. Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Cunha, F. (2014). Gaps in early investments in children. Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Cunha, F., I. Elo, and J. Culhane (2013). Eliciting maternal expectations about the technology
of cognitive skill formation. NBER Working Paper No. 19144.
Cunha, F. and J. Heckman (2007). The technology of skill formation. American Economic
Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F., J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005). Separating uncertainty from heterogeneity in life
cycle earnings. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2), 191–261.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 738–782.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the evidence on
life cycle skill formation. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Volume 1, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
37

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive
and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995). Does Head Start make a difference?

American Economic

Review 85 (3), 341–364.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1999). Does Head Start help hispanic children? Journal of Public
Economics 74 (2), 235–262.
Dahl, G. and L. Lochner (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence
from the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review 102 (5), 1927–1956.
Del Boca, D., C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall (2014). Household choices and child development. Review
of Economic Studies 81 (1), 137–185.
Deming, D. (2009). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development: Evidence from
Head Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 111–34.
Dizon-Ross, R. (2014). Parents’ perceptions and children’s education: Experimental evidence
from Malawi. Working Paper.
Duncan, G. and J. Brooks-Gunn (1997). Consequences of Growing Up Poor. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Duncan, G., P. Morris, and C. Rodrigues (2011). Does money really matter? Estimating impacts of family income on young children’s achievement with data from random-assignment
experiments. Developmental Psychology 47 (5), 1263–1279.
Duncan, G., W.-J. Yeung, J. Brooks-Gunn, and J. Smith (1998). How much does childhood
poverty affect the life chances of children? American Sociological Review 63 (3), 406–423.
Duncan, G. J. and A. J. Sojourner (2013). Can intensive early childhood intervention programs
eliminate income-based cognitive and achievement gaps? Journal of Human Resources 48 (4),
945–968.
Garces, E., J. Currie, and D. Thomas (2002). Longer-term effects of Head Start. American
Economic Review 92 (4), 999–1012.
Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. M. Chang, and
S. Grantham-McGregor (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation intervention in Jamaica. Science 344 (6187), 998–1001.
38

Guryan, J., E. Hurst, and M. Kearney (2008). Parental education and parental time with children.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (3), 23–46.
Hartman, R. (1976). Factor demand with output price uncertainty. American Economic Review 66 (4), 675–681.
Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2014). Is universal child care leveling the playing field? Journal of
Public Economics.
Heckman, J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz (2010). The rate of return to
the high/scope perry preschool program. Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 114–128.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014). Fostering and measuring skills interventions that improve
character and cognition. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth
of Achievement Tests: the GED and the Role of Character in American Life, Chapter 9, pp.
341–430. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Karoly, L. et al. (1998). Investing In Our Children: What We Know And Don’t Know About The
Costs And Benefits Of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica: The RAND Corporation.
Kaushal, N., K. Magnuson, and J. Waldfogel (2011). How is family income related to investments
in children’s learning? In G. Duncan and R. Murnane (Eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising
Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances, Chapter 9, pp. 187–206. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Kautz, T., J. J. Heckman, R. Diris, B. ter Weel, and L. Borghans (2014). Fostering and Measuring
Skills: Improving Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills to Promote Lifetime Success. OECD.
Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997). The career decisions of young men. Journal of Political
Economy 105 (3), 473–522.
Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (2001). The effect of parental transfers and borrowing constraints
on educational attainment. International Economic Review 42 (4), 1051–1103.
Kottelenberg, M. and S. Lehrer (2014). Reinvestigating who benefits and who loses from universal
childcare in Canada. Working Paper, Queens University.
Lazear, E. (1977). Education: Consumption or production? Journal of Political Economy 85 (3),
569–598.
Lee, S. Y. and A. Seshadri (2014). On the integenerational transmission of economic status.
Working Paper.
39

Levhari, D. and Y. Weiss (1974). The effect of risk on the investment in human capital. American
Economic Review 64 (6), 950–963.
Levy, D. and G. Duncan (1999). Using sibling samples to assess the effect of childhood family
income on completed schooling. Working Paper.
Løken, K. (2010). Family income and children’s education: Using the norwegian oil boom as a
natural experiment. Labour Economics 17 (1), 118–129.
Løken, K., M. Mogstad, and M. Wiswall (2012). What linear estimators miss: The effects of family
income on child outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2), 1–35.
Ludwig, J. and D. Miller (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from
a regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1), 159–208.
Milligan, K. and M. Stabile (2011). Do child tax benefits affect the well-being of children?
Evidence from canadian child benefit expansions. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 3 (3), 175–205.
Oreopoulos, P., M. E. Page, and ann Huff Stevens (2008). The intergenerational effects of worker
displacement. Journal of Labor Economics 26 (3), 455–83.
Pavan, R. (2014). On the production of skills and the birth order effect. Working Paper, Royal
Holloway, University of London.
Puma, M., S. Bell, R. Cook, C. Heid, P. Broene, F. Jenkins, A. Mashburn, and J. Downer
(2012). Third grade follow-up to the Head Start Impact Study: Final report. Technical report,
Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.
Reardon, S. (2011). The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor:
New evidence and possible explanations. In G. Duncan and R. Murnane (Eds.), Whither
Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances, Chapter 5, pp. 91–116.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, S.-R. Ou, I. A. Arteaga, and B. A. White (2011). School-based
early childhood education and age-28 well-being: Effects by timing, dosage, and subgroups.
Science 333 (6040), 360–364.

40

Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, B. A. White, S.-R. Ou, and D. L. Robertson (2011). Age 26 costbenefit analysis of the child-parent center early education program. Child development 82 (1),
379–404.
Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1970). Increasing risk: I. A definition. Journal of Economic
Theory 2 (3), 225 – 243.
Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1971). Increasing risk II: Its economic consequences. Journal
of Economic Theory 3 (1), 66 – 84.
Stevens, A. H. and J. Schaller (2011). Short-run effects of parental job loss on children’s academic
achievement. Economics of Education Review 20 (3), 289–299.
Thomson, G. H. (1951). The Factorial Analysis of Human Ability. London: University of London
Press.
Todd, P. and K. I. Wolpin (2007). The production of cognitive achievement in children: Home,
school and racial test score gaps. Journal of Human Capital 1 (1), 91–136.

41

Online Appendix
A

Factor Score Weights

We employ principal factor analysis using the measured inputs reported in Figures 2 and 3
(separately by age) to create age-specific predicted investment factor scores for each child using
the Thomson (1951) method. Estimated weights for each factor used in constructing the scores
are reported in Table A. For interpretation purposes, scores are normalized to have a mean of
zero and standard deviation of one.
Table A: Weights used to Construct Factor Scores

Early Investment Measure
10+ Books at Home
Mom Reads 3+ Times/Week
Child Eats with Mom and Dad Daily
Child Leaves House 4+ Times/Week
Child Sees Father Daily
Musical Instrument in Home
Child Taken to a Performance in Past Year
Child Taken to a Museum in Past Year
Child Takes Special Lessons/Extracurricular Activities
Family Gets a Daily Newspaper
Family Encourages Hobbies
Family Meets Friends/Relatives 2+ Times/Month

B

0-1
0.33
0.32
0.08
0.18
0.09

Age Group
2-3
4-5
0.24 0.21
0.26 0.22
0.16 0.19
0.14 0.15
0.20 0.24

6-7
0.12
0.09
0.03

0.10
0.18
0.15
0.14
0.08
0.08
0.02

Proofs and Technical Results

Proof of Proposition 1
Part (i): Follows directly from the first order conditions (6) and (7).
Parts (ii) and (iii): Applying Cramer’s rule to first order conditions (6) and (7) yields
di1
dθ
di2
dθ

=
=

f2 (i1 , i2 )f12 (i1 , i2 ) − f1 (i1 , i2 )f22 (i1 , i2 )
>0
2 ]
θ[f11 f22 − f12
f1 (i1 , i2 )f12 (i1 , i2 ) − f2 (i1 , i2 )f11 (i1 , i2 )
> 0,
2 ]
θ[f11 f22 − f12

where these effects can be signed using Assumption 1. These imply that the final human capital
level, h3 , is increasing in θ.

1

Proof of Proposition 2
Part (i): The difference between marginal returns to early investment and the return to savings
is immediate from Equation (8).
Consider the effects of parental income on the marginal value of investment,

∂h3
∂i1

= θf1 (i1 , i2 ).

Differentiating f1 (i1 , i2 ) with respect to Y at an optimum yields:
df1 (i1 , i2 )
dY

where ∆ =

h

ν 2 u00 (c)
[u0 (c)]3 B

i

di1
di2
= f11
+ f12
dY
dY



νu00 (c) 
2
=
f11 (i1 , i2 )f22 (i1 , i2 ) − f12
(i1 , i2 ) /∆,
0
2
[u (c)] B

2 ] > 0 by Assumption 1.
f22 + β 2 θ[f11 f22 − f12

df1 (i1 ,i2 )
dY

has the opposite sign

as ν, because the second term in brackets is positive by Assumption 1.
Parts (ii) and (iii): We can determine the effects of Y on child investments from first order
conditions (7) and (8) using Cramer’s rule:


di1
νu00 (c)
=
f22 (i1 , i2 )/∆
dY
[u0 (c)]2 B


di2
−νu00 (c)
=
f12 (i1 , i2 )/∆.
dY
[u0 (c)]2 B
If investment has no consumption value (i.e. ν = 0), then investments are independent of parental
income Y . Otherwise, the effects of parental income on investments depend on whether investment
has a positive (i.e. ν > 0) or negative (i.e. ν < 0) consumption value and, in the case of second
period investment, the complementarity of early and late investments f12 (i1 , i2 ).
Part (iv): The effect of parental income on final human capital levels is given by


dh3
di1
di2
= θ f1
+ f2
dY
dY
dY


00
νu (c)
= θ
[f1 (i1 , i2 )f22 (i1 , i2 ) − f2 (i1 , i2 )f12 (i1 , i2 )] /∆,
[u0 (c)]2 B
which has the same sign as ν, because the second term in brackets is negative by Assumption 1.

Proof of Proposition 3
When the return to investment is realized after all investments have been made, we can combine
the period 1 and 2 budget constraints:


c1 + R−1 c2 + i1 + R−1 i2 +R−1 a3 ≤ Y.
|
{z
} |
{z
}
≡c

≡e

Notice that only discounted lifetime income Y enters the budget constraint, so the timing of
income, y1 and y2 , is irrelevant.
2

The problem can be decomposed into 3 pieces: investment allocation between periods 1 and
2 (choosing i1 and i2 given e), consumption allocation between periods 1 and 2 (choosing c1 and
c2 given c), and portfolio choice between human capital investment and savings (choosing c, e,
and a3 ). In proving our results, we first show how i1 and i2 (and their marginal returns) depend
on the level of total investment spending e = i1 + R−1 i2 (and its marginal return) and then focus
on properties of e and its marginal return.
First, consider the investment problem for a given level of total investment expenditure e. Let
g(e) be the maximum f (i1 , i2 ) produced by spending e:
n
o
g(e) ≡ max f (i1 , i2 ) i1 + R−1 i2 ≤ e .
i1 ,i2

Note that g(·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave because f (·) is strictly increasing, strictly
concave, and the constraint set is convex. The first order conditions for i1 and i2 , combined with
the envelope condition, are
g 0 (e) = f1 (i1 , i2 ) = Rf2 (i1 , i2 ),

i1 + R−1 i2 = e.

(17)

Applying the Implicit Function Theorem, we can determine the effects of e on investments:


f1
f2
f1
f
−
f
12
f12 − f2 f22
f2
f1 11
di1
di2
=
=
,
,
f
f
f
2
2
1
de
de
2f12 − f11 − f22
2f12 − f11 − f1 f22
f1

f2

f1

f2

where we use the first order condition R = f1 /f2 . Both derivatives are strictly positive by
Assumption 1, so spending more on overall education means that both early and late investments
increase. We state this result as a Lemma for future reference.
Lemma 3. Both early and late investments are strictly increasing in total investment spending
if they are optimally chosen to maximize human capital.
Next, we consider the intertemporal consumption allocation problem. Define the indirect
utility of total consumption spending c on consumption in periods 1 and 2:
n
o
U (c) ≡ max u(c1 ) + βu(c2 ) c1 + R−1 c2 ≤ c .
c1 ,c2

Note that U (·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, because u(·) is strictly increasing, strictly
concave, and the constraint set is convex.
Using the indirect functions U (·) and g(·), we can write the saving and human capital investment problem as follows:
n
h
io
max U (Y − s) + β 2 E u R2 (s − e) + θg(e)
,
e,s

3

where s = e + R−1 a3 is total savings.
The first order conditions are




U 0 (c) = (Rβ)2 E u0 (c3 (θ)) = β 2 E u0 (c3 (θ))θ g 0 (e),

(18)

where c3 (θ) = R2 (s − e) + θg(e).

Part (i): Combining the first order conditions in (18), we get



Cov u0 (c3 (θ)), θ 0
E u0 (c3 (θ))θ 0
0
2
 g (e) = θ̄g (e) +

 g (e).
R =  0
E u (c3 (θ))
E u0 (c3 (θ))

Because c3 (θ) is strictly increasing in θ and u(·) is strictly concave, the covariance term is strictly
negative. This, combined with Equation (17), implies that the expected marginal returns to i1
and i2 are greater than the returns on savings.
Parts (ii) and (iii): We first study how the portfolio choice between the safe asset a3 and the risky
human capital investment e is affected by total savings s. Specifically, we show that optimal total
investment e is increasing in total savings s under decreasing absolute risk aversion. We then
show that total savings s is increasing in lifetime parental income Y .
Optimal human capital investment for a given s solves
h
i
ê(s) ≡ argmax E u R2 (s − e) + θg(e) .
e

Because the objective function is strictly concave in e, the Implicit Function Theorem reveals
that the sign of ê0 (s) is equal to the sign of
i
∂2  h
E u R2 (s − e) + θg(e)
∂e∂s

e=ê(s)

h

 i
= E u00 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R2 + θg 0 (ê(s)) R2 .

With decreasing absolute risk aversion, this term is strictly positive and ê0 (s) > 0. To see this,

let θ̂ = R2 /g 0 ê(s) , so
h

 i
E u00 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R2 + θg 0 (ê(s)) R2
#
Z " 00 2


u R (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s))
2
 u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R2 + θg 0 (ê(s)) dΦ(θ)
=R
u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s))
"
#  Z
00
2


2 u R (s − ê(s)) + θ̂g(ê(s))
u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R2 + θg 0 (ê(s)) dΦ(θ)
>R

u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θ̂g(ê(s))
θ≤θ̂

Z


0
2
2
0
+
u R (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R + θg (ê(s)) dΦ(θ)
θ≥θ̂
"
# h
00
2

i
2 u R (s − ê(s)) + θ̂g(ê(s))
=R
 E u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θg(ê(s)) − R2 + θg 0 (ê(s)) = 0,
u0 R2 (s − ê(s)) + θ̂g(ê(s))
4

where the inequality used the assumption that u00 (·)/u0 (·) is increasing.
Next, we show that total savings s is increasing with Y . Define the value of total savings s:
h
n
oi

V(s) ≡ E max u R2 a + θg(e) e + a ≤ s ,
e,a

and let â(s) ≡ s − ê(s) reflect the optimal investment in the safe asset conditional on s. V(s) is
strictly increasing and strictly concave, because u(·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave in
(a, e) and the constraint set is convex.
Optimal total savings ŝ(Y ) for a given income Y solves
n
o
ŝ(Y ) ≡ argmax U (Y − s) + β 2 V(s) .
s

Applying the Implicit Function Theorem to the first order condition for this problem yields

U 00 Y − ŝ(Y )
0

 > 0,
ŝ (Y ) = 00
U Y − ŝ(Y ) + β 2 V 00 ŝ(Y )
because both U (·) and V(·) are strictly concave.

With decreasing absolute risk aversion, both ŝ(Y ) and ê(s) are strictly increasing, so e is
strictly increasing in Y . From (17), expected marginal returns to investment are equal to the
expected marginal return to total investment spending: θ̄f1 (i1 , i2 ) = θ̄Rf2 (i1 , i2 ) = θ̄g 0 (e). This
implies that the expected marginal returns to investment are strictly decreasing in Y (with decreasing absolute risk aversion), because g(·) is strictly concave.

Proof of Lemma 1
We first show the properties of î2 (zi1 , θ). The first order condition is:

θf2 zi1 , î2 (zi1 , θ) = R.

By applying the Implicit Function Theorem, we get the partial derivatives:
∂ î2 (zi1 , θ, z)
f2
=
> 0,
∂θ
−θf22

∂ î2 (zi1 , θ, z)
f12
=
≥ 0 if and only if f12 ≥ 0.
∂(zi1 )
−f22

Then the partial derivatives of Π(i1 , θ, z) are
∂Π(i1 , θ, z)
= − 1 + R−2 zθf1 ,
∂i1
∂ 2 Π(i1 , θ, z)
∂ î2 (zi1 , θ)
=R−2 zθ f11 z + f12
2
∂i1
∂i1

5

!

= −R

−2 2

z θ



2
f11 f22 − f12
−f22



< 0.

(19)

Proof of Lemma 2
The cross-partial derivative is
∂ 2 Π(i1 , θ, z)
∂ î2 (zi1 , θ)
=R−2 θ f1 + zf11 i1 + zf12
∂i1 ∂z
∂z

!



 
2
f11 f22 − f12
= R−2 θ f1 −
zi1 ,
−f22

which is positive if and only if Condition 1 holds.

Proof of Proposition 4
See Hartman (1976) for proof.

Proof of Proposition 5
Part (i): A first order stochastic dominance shift in z will increase ĩ1 if ∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 is increasing
in z. For the CES production function (3), the sign of ∂ 2 Π(i1 , z)/(∂i1 ∂z) is determined by the
sign of
b



1−d
1−b



(1 − a)1−b (zi1 )1−b i2 + a1−b d(zi1 )i1−b
2 ,

which is positive if b ≥ 0.
Part (ii): A mean-preserving spread in z reduces ĩ1 if ∂Π(i1 , θ, z)/∂i1 is concave in z. For the
CES production function (3), the sign of ∂ 3 Π(i1 , z)/(∂i1 ∂ 2 z) depends on the sign of
( 
 
b−1 


1−b 



)
1−d 2
a
zi1 −b
a
zi1 b
1−d
1−d
− b
,
+d
+
− (1 − 2d)
1−b
1−a
i2
1−a
i2
1−b
1−b
which is negative if b ≥ 0.

Proof of Corollary 1
Follows directly from Lemma 1 and Propositions 4 and 5.

Proof of Proposition 6
Part (i) follows from Lemma 1 and Lemma 2.
Part (ii): x̃ ≤ x and h̃2 ≤ h∗2 follows immediately from x̃j = wj ĩ1 and h̃2 = z ĩ1 . h̃2 ≤ h∗2 also

implies h̃3 ≤ h∗3 . To show this, we differentiate h̃3 with respect to h̃2 to get
!



dh̃3
d 
∂ î2 (h̃2 , θ)
f12
=
θf h̃2 , î2 (h̃2 , θ) = θ f1 + f2
= θ f1 − f2
> 0,
f22
dh̃2
dh̃2
∂ h̃2

where we use Equation (19), and the inequality holds by Assumption 1. We state this result for
future reference.
6


Lemma 4. θf h2 , î2 (h2 , θ) is strictly increasing in h2 .


Next, the marginal return to early investment zθf1 z ĩ1 , î2 (z ĩ1 , θ) is strictly decreasing in ĩ1

by Lemma 1. So we have

if and only if ĩ1 ≤ i∗1 .



zθf1 z ĩ1 , î2 (z ĩ1 , θ) ≥ zθf1 zi∗1 , î2 (zi∗1 , θ) = R2

Proof of Proposition 7
Because ĩ1 depends only on z̃, ĩ1 = i∗1 holds when z̃ = z. From the conditional demand function
x̃j = w̃j ĩ1 = w̃j i∗1 , we can see that x̃j ≤ x∗j if and only if w̃j ≤ wj . h̃2 < h∗2 directly follows from

ĩ1 = i∗1 and the definition of optimization, but we explicitly prove this by showing that τ (w̃) < 1.
τ (w̃)φ =

n
X

wj

j=1



w̃j
wj

φ



<

n
X
j=1

wj





φ

n

X
w̃j 
=
w̃j = 1,
wj
j=1

where the inequality holds due to Jensen’s inequality and φ ∈ (0, 1).
As shown in Lemma 4, h̃2 < h∗2 also implies h̃3 < h∗3 .
Finally, the marginal return to i1 can be written as




zτ (w̃)θf1 h̃2 , î2 (h̃2 , θ) = zτ (w̃)θf1 zτ (w̃)i∗1 , î2 zτ (w̃)i∗1 , θ .


Because zτ (w̃) < z, this quantity is smaller than R2 = zθf1 zi∗1 , î2 (zi∗1 , θ) if Condition 1 holds
for all values of productivity z 0 between zτ (w̃) and z (Lemma 2).

Simplifying Condition 2 with non-binding constraints during adulthood
Condition 2 simplifies nicely if borrowing constraints are non-binding throughout adulthood and
the consumption intertemporal elasticity of substitution is constant. Notice that when constraints
are non-binding, we can write V (a, h) = v(Ra + χh) where
v(z) = max

c3 ,...,cT

With u(c) =

c1−σ
1−σ ,

T
X

β

j−3

u(cj ) subject to

j=3

T
X

R3−j cj = z.

(20)

j=3

1−σ

it is straightforward to show that v(z) = Ψ z1−σ where Ψ is a positive constant

that depends on β, R and T .
With these assumptions, Condition 2 can be re-written as:
f12 f
v 00 (−RL2 + χh3 )χ2 h3
σχh3
>− 0
=
.
f1 f2
v (−RL2 + χh3 )χ
−RL2 + χh3
Taking the inverse of both sides produces the simplified condition in the text.
7

Properties of V (a3 , h3 )
Individuals entering adulthood with human capital h3 and assets a3 allocate consumption and
saving across their remaining life in the following way:
V (a3 , h3 ) =

max

c3 ,...,cT ,a4 ,...aT

T
X

β j−3 u(cj ),

j=3

subject to budget constraints aj+1 = Raj + h3 Γj − cj for j ∈ {3, ..., T }, borrowing constraints

aj+1 ≥ −Lj for j ∈ {3, ..., T − 1}, and aT +1 = 0. Let {ĉj (a3 , h3 )}Tj=3 and {âj (a3 , h3 )}Tj=4 be the
solution to the problem. We sometimes omit the arguments of the policy functions in order to
simplify notations.
The value function can be rewritten as:
V (a3 , h3 ) = u(Ra3 + Γ3 − â4 (a3 , h3 )) +

T
X
j=4

β j−3 u(Râj (a3 , h3 ) + h3 Γj − âj+1 (a3 , h3 )).

Differentiate this with respect to initial human capital level, h3 :
V2 (a3 , h3 ) =

T
X

β

j−3 0

u (ĉj )Γj +

j=3

T
−1
X

β

j−3 ∂âj+1

j=3

∂h3

0

0

[βRu (ĉj+1 ) − u (ĉj )] =

T
X

β j−3 u0 (ĉj )Γj > 0,

j=3

where the second equality uses the fact that
∂âj+1
[βRu0 (ĉj+1 ) − u0 (ĉj )] = 0.
∂h3
This follows from the FOC: when the borrowing constraint binds, the derivative

∂âj+1
∂h3

is zero;

and when it does not bind, the Euler equation is zero.
Differentiating V2 with respect to the initial asset level, a3 , yields:
V21 (a3 , h3 ) =

T
X

β j−3 Γj u00 (ĉj )

j=3

∂ĉj
.
∂a3

If optimal consumption in every period increases with an increase in initial assets, then
and V21 ≤ 0 given strict concavity of u(·). If

∂ĉj
∂a3

∂ĉj
∂a3

≥0

> 0 for at least one j ∈ {3, ...T }, then V21 < 0.

We have two cases:
I. Suppose no borrowing constraint ever binds. In this case, we can rewrite V (a3 , h3 ) as
v(ra3 + χh3 ), where v is defined above. All of the proofs carry through with V21 = χv 00 ,
V22 = χ2 v 00 and V2 = χv 0 .
II. Let jb ∈ {3, ..., T − 1} be the first period that any borrowing constraint binds, i.e. ajb +1 =
−Ljb . In this case, as soon as the constraint binds, an increase in initial assets has no
8

impact on consumption,

∂ĉj
∂a3

= 0, j ∈ {jb + 1, ..., T }. Prior to the binding constraint, the

increase in initial assets is spread across periods, strictly increasing consumption in all,
∂ĉj
∂a3

> 0, j ∈ {3, ..., jb }. This must be the case in order for the Euler equations to hold in

all periods: u0 (cj ) = βRu0 (cj+1 ), j ∈ {3, ..., jb − 1}. If any cj increases, they all must. Note

that even if the constraint immediately binds, the increase in initial assets will increase
consumption in period 3, and therefore (minimally)

∂ĉj
∂a3

> 0, so V21 < 0.

In a similar fashion:
V22 (a3 , h3 ) =

T
X

β j−3 Γj u00 (ĉj )

j=3

∂ĉj
< 0.
∂(h3 )

Here, if an individual is constrained in a period and the Euler equation does not hold with equality,
the fact that income rises due to the increase in h3 implies that consumption will rise as well.
Again, if the individual faces no future constraints we can rewrite V (a3 , h3 ) as v(ra3 + χh3 ). All
of the proofs carry through with the V21 = χv 00 , V22 = χ2 v 00 and V2 = χv 0 .

Proof of Proposition 8
Combining FOCs for assets we have:
u0 (c1 ) ≥ (βR)j−1 u0 (cj ), j ∈ {2, 3, ...T },

(21)

where inequalities are strict when the relevant borrowing constraint binds. We can write this as:
u0 (cj ) ≤ (βR)1−j u0 (c1 ), j ∈ {2, 3, ...T }.

(22)

Parts (i): Using equations (15) and (22) we have:




T
T
X
X
β j−3 Γj u0 (cj ) ≤ β 2 θf1 (i1 , i2 ) 
β j−3 Γj u0 (c1 )(βR)1−j  ,
u0 (c1 ) = β 2 θf1 (i1 , i2 ) 
j=3

j=3

which implies θχf1 (i1 , i2 ) ≥ R2 , with strict inequality if any borrowing constraint binds, and
equality if no borrowing constraint binds.
We next prove ĩ1 ≤ i∗1 . Towards a contradiction, suppose ĩ1 > i∗1 and let h̃3 = θf (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) and

h∗3 = θf (i∗1 , i∗2 ). Then the followings hold.
Claim 1: h̃3 ≥ h∗3 .

h̃3 < h∗3 , together with ĩ1 > i∗1 , implies f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) < Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ), which contradicts the first or
der condition f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) ≥ Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ). To show this, let i1 (h3 ), i2 (h3 ) be the cost-minimizing

investment profile to produce h3 units of human capital. That is,



i1 (h3 ), i2 (h3 ) ≡ argmin i1 + R−1 i2 |θf (i1 , i2 ) ≥ h3 .
i1 ,i2

9

By Assumption 1, both i1 (h3 ) and i2 (h3 ) are strictly increasing in h3 (dual of Lemma 3). So
h̃3 < h∗3 implies i1 (h̃3 ) < i1 (h∗3 ) = i∗1 and we have i1 (h̃3 ) < ĩ1 by the assumption i∗1 < ĩ1 . Both

investment profiles i1 (h̃3 ), i2 (h̃3 ) and (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) produce the same amount of human capital h̃3 ,

but the former is efficient (because it achieves the minimum cost by definition) while the latter
uses to much i1 and too little i2 compared to the former. Because the isoquant is strictly convex
(Assumption 1 implies strict quasi-concavity of f (·), which in turn implies strict convexity of the
isoquant), the movement along the isoquant in the direction of higher i1 and lower i2 decreases
the marginal rate of technical substitution:
R=

f1 i1 (h̃3 ), i2 (h̃3 )
f2 i1 (h̃3 ), i2 (h̃3 )



>

f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 )
.
f2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 )

The inequality f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) < Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) contradicts the first order condition f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) ≥ Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ),
so it must be h̃3 ≥ h∗3 if ĩ1 > i∗1 .
Claim 2: ĩ2 ≥ i∗2 .

First, by Claim 1, h̃3 ≥ h∗3 and this implies i2 (h̃3 ) ≥ i2 (h∗3 ) = i∗2 (Lemma 3). Second, the
first order condition f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) ≥ Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) implies ĩ1 ≤ i1 (h̃3 ) and ĩ2 ≥ i2 (h̃3 ) due to the strict
convexity of the isoquant. From these two inequalities, we get ĩ2 ≥ i∗2 .

Combining Claim 1 and Claim 2 together, we have ĩ1 > i∗1 and ĩ2 ≥ i∗2 . This means that

the income-maximizing investment (i∗1 , i∗2 ) is affordable, but not chosen by the individual. This

contradicts the assumption that (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) solves the individual’s problem. For example, reducing
investment to (i∗1 , i∗2 ) and saving the rest to increase only the period 3 consumption is a better
strategy, because over-investing in human capital makes the return lower than the return to
savings. Thus, if ĩ1 is the optimal early investment, then it must be smaller than i∗1 .

Next, we show that ĩ1 ≤ i∗1 implies h̃3 ≤ h∗3 . Let ĥ3 (i1 ) ≡ θf i1 , î2 (i1 , θ) be the unconstrained
optimum human capital conditional on i1 , where î2 (·) is defined in (9). By Lemma 4, ĩ1 ≤ i∗1

implies ĥ3 (ĩ1 ) ≤ ĥ3 (i∗1 ) = h∗3 . Moreover, h̃3 ≤ ĥ3 (ĩ1 ) holds because, conditional on i1 , overinvesting in i2 is never optimal (ĩ2 ≤ î2 (ĩ1 , θ)). From these two inequalities, we have h̃3 ≤ h∗3 .

We have proved that ĩ1 ≤ i∗1 and h̃3 ≤ h∗3 when f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) ≥ Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ). We next show that

when some constraints are binding, the inequalities are strict, i.e. ĩ1 < i∗1 and h̃3 < h∗3 . Suppose
that θχf1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) > R2 = θχf1 (i∗1 , i∗2 ) but ĩ1 = i∗1 . Obviously, the inequality f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) > f1 (i∗1 , i∗2 )
cannot hold when f12 = 0. When f12 > 0, the inequality implies ĩ2 > i∗2 , which is a contradiction
because this, together with ĩ1 = i∗1 , means h̃3 > h∗3 . When f12 < 0, the inequality implies
ĩ2 < i∗2 , which in turn implies f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) < Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) due to the strict convexity of the isoquant.
This contradicts the first order condition f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) ≥ Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ). Thus, it must be ĩ1 < i∗1 when
θχf1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) > R2 . In this case, h̃3 < h∗3 also holds because ĥ3 (i1 ) is strictly increasing in i1 .
10

Part (ii): By Part (i), when any borrowing contraint binds, ĩ1 < i∗1 and h̃3 < h∗3 . (a) If the period
one constraint does not bind, f1 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ) = Rf2 (ĩ1 , ĩ2 ), so ĩ1 = i1 (h̃3 ) and ĩ2 = i2 (h̃3 ) hold. By
Lemma 3, ĩ2 = i2 (h̃3 ) < i2 (h∗3 ) = i∗2 . (b) If f12 > 0, ĩ1 < i∗1 implies î2 (ĩ1 , θ) < î2 (i∗1 , θ) = i∗2 .
Because ĩ2 ≤ î2 (ĩ1 , θ) always holds, we get ĩ2 < i∗2 .
Part (iii): A similar analysis to Part (i) shows that θχf2 (i1 , i2 ) ≥ R, with strict inequality if any
borrowing constraint in period 2 or later binds, and equality otherwise.

Proof of Proposition 9
In the decision problem described in Section 4.5, substitute in for V (a3 , h3 ) using equation (14)
and in for c1 and c2 using the budget constraints in equation (5).
(I) Assuming this person is constrained as an old child, let a3 = −L2 and re-write the decision
problem as:
max u(y1 − i1 − a2 ) + βu(Ra2 + y2 − i2 + L2 ) + β 2 V (−RL2 , θf (i1 , i2 )).

i1 ,i2 ,a2

First order conditions for i1 , i2 and a2 are:
−u0 (c1 ) + β 2 V2 (−RL2 , θf (i1 , i2 ))θf1 (i1 , i2 ) = 0

(23)

−βu0 (c2 ) + β 2 V2 (−RL2 , θf (i1 , i2 ))θf2 (i1 , i2 ) = 0

(24)

−u0 (c1 ) + βRu0 (c2 ) = 0.

(25)

Together, these first order conditions imply f1 = Rf2 at an optimum. Using this with Cramer’s
rule yields (dropping arguments of f (·) and V (−RL2 , ·) for expositional purposes):
∂i1
∂y1
∂i2
∂y1
∂i1
∂y2

∂i1
= R−1 ∂y
and
1

∂i2
∂y2

=
=

Rβ 3 u00 (c1 )u00 (c2 )θV2 (Rf22 − f12 )
> 0,
∆2
Rβ 3 u00 (c1 )u00 (c2 )θV2 (f11 − Rf12 )
> 0,
∆2

∂i2
= R−1 ∂y
, where
1

2
∆2 ≡ β 4 V2 θ2 [u00 (c1 ) + βR2 u00 (c2 )][V2 (f11 f22 − f12
) + V22 θ(f12 f22 + f22 f11 − 2f1 f2 f12 )]

+β 3 u00 (c1 )u00 (c2 )V2 θ(f11 + R2 f22 − 2Rf12 ) < 0.

(26)

All of these expressions are signed using assumptions on V, Assumption 1 and f1 = Rf2 .
Finally,
positive;

∂h3
∂yj

∂h3
∂y1

∂i1
∂i2
= f1 ∂y
+ f2 ∂y
> 0 for j = 1, 2, because all terms in this expression are strictly
j
j

3
= R ∂h
∂y2 follows directly from the fact that

∂ij
∂y1

∂i

= R ∂yj2 for j = 1, 2.

(II) Let a2 = −L1 . With no future constraints, we can rewrite the continuation value V (a, h) =
v(Ra + χh) as defined in equation (20). Substitute this into the problem:
max u(y1 − i1 + L1 ) + βu(−RL1 + y2 − i2 − a3 ) + β 2 v(Ra3 + χθf (i1 , i2 )),

i1 ,i2 ,a3

11

where χ > 0 is defined above. First order conditions for i1 , i2 and a3 are:
−u0 (c1 ) + β 2 v 0 (Ra3 + χθf (i1 , i2 ))χθf1 (i1 , i2 ) = 0
−βu0 (c2 ) + β 2 v 0 (Ra3 + χθf (i1 , i2 ))χθf2 (i1 , i2 ) = 0
−βu0 (c2 ) + β 2 Rv 0 (Ra3 + χθf (i1 , i2 )) = 0.
Combining first order conditions, we have χθf2 = R. However, f1 > Rf2 = R2 /(χθ) because L1
binds (see Proposition 8).
Cramer’s rule yields (dropping arguments of f (·) and v(·)):
∂i1
∂y1
∂i1
∂y2
∂i2
∂y1
∂i2
∂y2

=
=
=
=

β 3 u00 (c1 )v 0 χθf22 [u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ]
>0
∆1
−β 5 Ru00 (c2 )v 0 v 00 χ2 θ2 f1 f22
<0
∆1
−β 3 u00 (c1 )v 0 χθf12 [u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ]
∆1
β 5 Ru00 (c2 )v 0 v 00 χ2 θ2 f1 f12
∆1

where
∆1 ≡ β 3 u00 (c1 )v 0 [u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ]χθf22 + β 5 u00 (c2 )v 0 v 00 χ3 θ3 f12 f22
2
+β 5 [u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ](v 0 )2 χ2 θ2 [f11 f22 − f12
]<0

by Assumption 1. Clearly,
∂h3
∂yj

=

∂i1
f1 ∂y
j

+

∂i2
f2 ∂y
j

∂i2
∂y1

> 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0, and

for j = 1, 2, Assumption 1 implies that

∂i2
∂y2
∂h3
∂y1

(27)

< 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0. Because
> 0 and

∂h3
∂y2

< 0.

(III) Because we are assuming this person is constrained in both childhood periods, let a2 =
−L1 and a3 = −L2 . The decision problem can be written as:
max u(y1 − i1 + L1 ) + βu(−RL1 + y2 − i2 + L2 ) + β 2 V (−RL2 , θf (i1 , i2 )).
i1 ,i2

The first order conditions for i1 and i2 are given by equations (23) and (24), where c1 = y1 −i1 +L1
and c2 = −RL1 + y2 − i2 + L2 .
Cramer’s rule yields (dropping arguments of f (·) and V (−RL2 , ·)):
∂i1
∂y1
∂i1
∂y2
∂i2
∂y1
∂i2
∂y2

=
=
=
=

βu00 (c1 )[u00 (c2 ) + βV2 θf22 + βV22 θ2 f22 ]
>0
∆12
−β 3 u00 (c2 )θ[V2 f12 + V22 θf1 f2 ]
∆12
−β 2 u00 (c1 )θ[V2 f12 + V22 θf1 f2 ]
∆12
00
00
βu (c2 )θ[u (c1 ) + β 2 V2 θf11 + β 2 V22 θf12 ]
>0
∆12
12

where
∆12 ≡ βu00 (c1 )u00 (c2 ) + β 2 V2 θ[u00 (c1 )f22 + βu00 (c2 )f11 ] + β 2 V22 θ2 [u00 (c1 )f22 + βu00 (c2 )f12 ]
2
+β 4 (V2 )2 θ2 (f11 f22 − f12
) + β 4 V2 V22 θ3 [f2 (f2 f11 − f1 f12 ) + f1 (f1 f22 − f2 f12 )] > 0.(28)

Assumptions on V (·, ·) and Assumption 1 ensure that
Both

∂i1
∂y2

and

∂i2
∂y1

∂i2
∂i1
∂y1 , ∂y2 ,

and ∆12 are strictly positive.

are strictly positive if and only if Condition 2 holds. Using these results for

investments, Assumption 1 implies that

∂h3
∂yj

> 0 for j = 1, 2. 

Proof of Proposition 10
Part (i): Based on the problem discussed in the proof of Proposition 9 part (I), we can apply
Cramer’s rule obtaining:
∂i1
∂L2
∂i2
∂L2

=
=

β 4 RV2 V21 θ2 f2 [u00 (c1 ) + βR2 u00 (c2 )](f1 f22 − f12 ) + β 3 u00 (c1 )u00 (c2 )V2 θ(Rf22 − f12 )
>0
∆2
β 4 RV2 V21 θ2 f2 [u00 (c1 ) + βR2 u00 (c2 )](f11 − Rf12 ) + β 3 u00 (c1 )u00 (c2 )V2 θ(f11 − Rf12 )
> 0,
∆2

where ∆2 < 0 is defined previously by equation (26). All three of these expressions are signed
using assumptions on V, Assumption 1 and f1 = Rf2 . Finally,

∂h3
∂L2

∂i1
∂i2
= f1 ∂L
+ f2 ∂L
> 0, because
2
2

all terms in this expression are positive.
Part (ii): Based on the problem used in the proof of Proposition 9 part (III), Cramer’s rule yields:
∂i1
∂L2
∂i2
∂L2

=
=

β 4 RV2 V21 θ2 (f1 f22 − f2 f12 ) + β 3 Ru00 (c2 )V21 θf1 − β 3 u00 (c2 )θ(V2 f12 + θV22 f1 f2 )
∆12
00
00
2
2
2
βu (c2 )[u (c1 ) + β V2 θf11 + β V22 θ f12 ] + β 2 Ru00 (c1 )V21 θf2 + β 4 RV2 V21 θ2 (f2 f11 − f1 f12 )
> 0,
∆12

where ∆12 > 0 is defined previously by equation (28). Using assumptions on V, and Assumption
∂i1
∂L2

1, it is clear that
that

∂h3
∂L2

=

∂i1
f1 ∂L
2

+

> 0 if Condition 1 holds, and that

∂i2
f2 ∂L
2

∂i2
∂L2

> 0. Assumption 1 further implies

> 0. 

Proof of Proposition 11
Part (i): Based on the problem discussed in the proof of Proposition 9 part (II), we can apply
Cramer’s rule obtaining:
∂i1
∂L1
∂i2
∂L1

=
=


f22 β 3 u00 (c1 )v 0 χθ[u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ] + β 5 R2 u00 (c2 )v 0 v 00 χ2 θ2 f1
>0
∆1

−f12 β 3 u00 (c1 )v 0 χθ[u00 (c2 ) + βR2 v 00 ] + β 5 R2 u00 (c2 )v 0 v 00 χ2 θ2 f1
∆1

where ∆1 < 0 is defined previously by equation (27). Clearly,
∂h3
∂L2

∂i1
∂i2
= f1 ∂L
+ f2 ∂L
> 0 by Assumption 1.
2
2

13

∂i2
∂L1

> 0 ⇐⇒ f12 > 0. Finally,

Part (ii): Based on the problem used in the proof of Proposition 9 part (III), Cramer’s rule yields:
∂i1
∂L1
∂i2
∂L1

=
=

βu00 (c1 )[u00 (c2 ) + βV2 θf22 + βV22 θ2 f22 ] + β 3 Ru00 (c2 )θ[V2 f12 + V22 θf1 f2 ]
∆12
−βRu00 (c2 )[u00 (c1 ) + β 2 V2 θf11 + β 2 V22 θ2 f12 ] − β 2 u00 (c1 )θ[V2 f12 + V22 θf1 f2 ]
∆12

where ∆12 > 0 is defined previously by equation (28). Assumptions on V, and Assumption 1
∂i1
∂L1 < 1. If Condition
∂i2
and ∂L
< 0. 
1

imply that
∂i1
∂L1

>0

2 does not hold, then V2 f12 + V22 θf1 f2 < 0, which implies that

14

