                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  A STANDARD MONETARY MODEL AND
                      THE VARIABILITY OF THE
                DEUTSCHEMARK-DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE




                         Kenneth D. West




                      Working Paper No. 2102




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            December 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in International Studies and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2102
                                            December 1986




          A Standard Monetary Model and the Variability of

               the Deutschemark-Dollar Exchange Rate




                              ABSTRACT




     This paper uses a novel test to see whether the Heese (1985)
and Woo (1985) models are consistent with the variability of the
deutschemark - dollar exchange rate 1974-1984. The answer, perhaps
surprisingly, is yes. Both models, however, explain the month to
month variability as resulting in a critical way from unobservable
shocks to money demand and purchasing power parity. It would
therefore be of interest in future work to model one or both of
these shocks asexplicit  functions of economic variables.




                                           Kenneth D. West
                                          Woodra Wilson   School
                                           PrincetOn University
                                           Princeton, NJ 08544
1. Introduction

     The implications of rationality and market efficiency for the

variability of floating exchange rates have long been debated.   Some

thirty years ago, Friedman (1953) argued that speculation in a free

market would stabilize exchange rates.   Others [Viner (1956), cited in

Sohmen (1969)1, argued at least implicitly that this might not be the

case. The observed fluctuations of exchange rates in recent years do not

appear to have created a consensus view. Some believe these fluctuations

consistent with rational responses to news about basic economic variables

[Frenkel (1981), Frenkel and Mussa (1980)], others are doubtful [Huang

(1981), Meese (1985)].

     Formal evidence on whether exchange rates are in some well defined

sense excessively variable is of interest for two reasons. The first,

and perhaps more obvious, is that insofar as excess variability is prima

fade evidence of market inefficiency, the implications for economic

policy may be profound. See, for example, Tobin (1978). The second

reason, emphasized by Shiller (1981) in connection with stock market

studies, is that variability tests can produce very useful diagnostics.

A rejection of a model by a variability test may provide guidance for

future research: if a model cannot explain the variability of exchange

rates, then clearly in future research we should look for factors that

will make exchange rates variable.

     This paper extends the variability test I developed and applied to

stock market data in West (1986). I evaluate whether the variability of

the dollar/deutschemark exchange rate is consistent with the monetary

models developed in Meese (1985) and Woo (1985). The answer, perhaps

suprisingly, is yes. The 1974-1984 variability in this exchange rate is
                                        -2-




 Consistent with these models. The shocks to money demand and purchasing

 power parity assumed present by Meese and Woo play a key role in this

 result. If    the   shocks are instead assumed absent, as in, for example,

 Huang (1981), the models are no longer consistent with the 1974-84

variability.

     The models therefore explain the month to month fluctuations in the

deutschemark -   dollar   exchange rate as responses to not only news about

basic economic variables, but also to shocks to money demand and

purchasing power parity. Such an explanation certainly is logically

coherent. But it is in my opinion not completely satisfactory, at least

insofar as exchange rates are plausibly thought to move mainly in

response to news about basic economic variables. It therefore would be

of interest in future work using a monetary model to model one or both of

these shocks explicitly, as functions at least in part of observable

economic variables. This applies especially to shocks to purchasing

power parity, which are in either model the entire explanation of

deviations from purchasing power parity. Further work on sticky price

models such as Driskel]. (1981) and Frankel (1979) are therefore of

interest.

     The extent to which the apparent consistency of the models with the

variability of exchange rates may be considered evidence against

irrationalities, inefficiences and speculative bubbles is limited at best

to the extent one believes the models correctly explain the exchange

rate. Given the well documented difficulty in developing structural

exchange rate models [Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b)], most economists,

including me, would probably be hesitant to endorse without reservation

any structural model, even one as carefully developed as Meese's or
                                   -3—




Woo's. Consequently, I do not believe a strong case can be made that the

results here argue against speculative bubbles or against the notion that

exchange rate models should take into account potential shifts in policy

that do not occur [see Flood and odrick (1986) and Obstfeld and Rogoff

(1985) on this important point]. Instead the results have the natural

interpretation of providing a constructive suggestion about future

exchange rate modelling, as described in the previous paragraph. In this

connection, it is worth emphasizing that while the estimation technique,

sample period and data used here are different than in Meese and Woo, the

models are precisely as in those papers. The models are presented only

briefly and somewhat uncritically. In particular, no attempt is made to

argue for either Woo or Meese when the two make contradictory assumptions

(for example, whether secular drift is deterministic or stochastic). My

aim is to establish a robust result. More extensive discussion of the

models, as well as references to similar models, may be found in the

original tleese and Woo papers.

    The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the models

and develops the variability test. Section 3 presents empirical results.

Section 4 has conclusions. An Appendix has some technical details.
                                              .14--


2. The Exchange Rate Models

    Two models are used, those of Woo (1985) and Meese (1985). Both models

combine a money demand equation, an interest parity condition, and a

purchasing power parity condition. The unobservable shocks that Woo and

Mjese add to certain of the equations are              temporarily   suppressed for

xpositional ease; these shocks will be restored later in this section.

    In Woo, U.S. and German money demand are given by



         —
             p - -ai + ay + a2(rn1—p1),                                          (1)
         —
             p — —ai + ay + a2(m1—p1),                                           (2)




where m is the log of the money stock, p the log of the price level, y log

income, i a nominal interest rate. The ar's are            positive   parameters, with

   less than one. A "u" superscript denotes U.S., a "f" Germany. Woo

(1985,pp2—3) states that direct tests of this money demand specification

suggest that it is satisfactory, at least for 19714—81. To make it less

likely that the basic results of this paper are explained by a shift in

money demand during the larger sample period used here (19714-814), the

empirical work applies the variability test to a subsample that falls

within the 19714—81 period.

    Subtracting (2) from (1) gives



             —
                 —a0(li)      +
                                  ay — açy   +
                                                 a2(rn.1_p_1),                   (3)




where   m — m     —
                      m,   Pt —   p — p.     Meese uses a special case of (1)—(3),

setting a —      aç   a2—O:
                                             —5--

              =
                   -a0(j-i)     +
                                    a1y,                                            (3)'

  where            U     f
                        yt.
       in both models, uncovered interest parity is assun&d to hold:



                        .u .f
       Et5ti_S =


 where            is the log of the spot rate (ciollars per deutschmark) and

 denotes the market's expectation conditional on the market's period r.

 information.          There is considerable evidence against ('4) [Hansen and

 Hodrick (1983), Hodrick and          Srivastava    (198'4)].    It seems reasonable

 nonetheless to maintain ('4), at least wrn one wants to explain the sources

 of fluctuations in exchange rate movements.
                                                            This is because it is
 plausible that the vridnce of deviations from
                                                           uncovered interest parity is
small compared to the variance of the left hand side of ('4).
                                                                          The arguments
in Frankel (1985, pp2ll—215) suggest that small deviations are to be

expected a priori, at least in Frankel's portfolio
                                                                balance model, and the
low R'3 in even the unconstrained regressions in Hansen and
                                                                        Hodrlck   (1933)
and Hodrick and Srivastava (198'4) are consistent with this.

      Finally, purchasing power parity (PPP) is assumed to hold:



          =




PPP   certainly does not hold instantaneously, as assumed in (5), nor,

perhaps, even in the long run. A suitable disturbance will be added to (5)

below to provide a more realistic relation between the exchange rate and

relative price levels.
     A solution of the model requires substitution of () and (5) into (3)

or   (3)' to eliminate i                  Pt and               Rearranging terms gives




     aOES1 (l+dQ)St +              a2sti            +
                                                            ay       ay + a2m1,             (6)
               —
     a0Es1         (l+a0)s         —m +     a1y.                                            (6)'




     A solution of equation (6) is found as follows. Let L denote the lag

operator. Since a0 > 0, 0 < a2 < 1, the polynomial ao[1 — (1+a0)a01L                             +


a2aL2]    may be factored as 30(1—yL)[1--(1/A)L], where 0 <                   I < 1 < 1/A
{[1+a0+[(1+a0)2—Lla0a2f"2}/2a0.              Solve the stable root I backwards, the

unstable root A forwards to obtain


                                                                 *
        — Ist_i    +
                       E(1      0A zt+j) —    15t       +
                                                            EtZt                            (7)




where z Aa01(mt - a2m_1                    ay +    ay).
     A solution to (6)' is a special case of the solution to (7), wIth 1                              0

and the discount factor A -                                 (say) b:
                                     (1a0)1a0

                       1-            -*
                                                                                            (7)'
          E(Z1_0b       zt+i)      Etzt.



where     —
              ba0 1(m —     a1y).
     The variability test requires calculation of the variance of the

innovation to the expected present discounted value of fundamentals, that

is, the variance of the innovation to EtZ or                            This variance must be

calculated relative to two information sets, the market's and                     another       set

     or Ht. Ht is an information set consisting of all current and                       lagged
values of the fundamentals variables m, y and y, U, is the same                          f or
and            The basic inequality exploited in this paper is



           2        *               *2           *              *
                                            E(EZtIHt-.EtiZtIHti) ,
                                                                         2
                                                                                                 (8)
               E(EtZt—EtiZt)
      ci
                                                               —*
               E(Etzt—Etizt)                E(EztIH_EtiztIHti)'.                                 (8)'




It is shown in equation (9) below that o' is just the variance of the

innovation in the exchange rate, under the model (7). The same is true for

      under the model (7)'. The inequalities are                         established   in West (1986).

They say that forecasts made with a subset of the market's information set

have a larger innovation variance than actual forecasts.

      One may use (8) to test the model (7) as follows. From (7)




      E(st_Etist)2 E(1s1                        YEt_ist_i Ez —               Et1z)2              (9)

                               —            —
                                   E(EtZt       Etizt)         ci.




The left hand side of (8) is thus simply the variance of the innovation in

the exchange rate. One way to estimate this left hand side is then as

follows. Begin by rewriting (6) as



                   —
                       (1+a0Y1Ca0(Etst+1_m)
                                                      —
                                                          aY +                a2(mt_i—sti)].    (10)




      Write (10) in estimable form by following McCallt.un (1976) and replacing

the unobservable expectation Etsti with the ex—post value



               —
                       (1+a0Y1[a0(s+1m)
                                                  —
                                                      ay ay+         —
                                                                         a2(rn 13t
                                                                                         +




where                  —
                           —b(st÷i—Etst+i) and, as in equation (8)', b — (1+a0)1a0.
                                                    —8—

Equation (11) may be estimated by instrumental variables.                         Potential

instruments include current and lagged values of all the right hand side

variables except                    which is not a legitimate instrument since it is

correlated with the disturbance. One can retrieve parameters of interest

by simple arithmetic on the regression coefficients.                       For example, a1 -

                where 8 is the estimated coefficient on y. More importantly,

one can obtain an estimate of the left hand side of (8) using b2a2.

       Inference about the estimates of equation (11) will be difficult if, as

is assumed in Mese, the variables have unit roots.                          In this case a

differenced version of (11) may be used:



                          —
                              b(s+1—mt—a1y)
                                                      +                                   (11)'


where           —                         —                        The restrictions a aç and
                    —b[(s+i--Etst+i)          (st—Et_ist)].
a2 — 0 have been imposed, in accordance with Meese. Equation (11)' is

written in a fashion convenient for estimation when the income elasticity

      is imposed a priori, as was done in Meese and in the empirical work

here. Lags of                 and      may be used as instruments to obtain estimates

of b and thus a0.             The left hand side of (8)' may now be estimated as

.5b     o,   where
                      2   —
                                2
                              EJt+i.
      The right hand side of (8)              (or   (8)')   may   be calculated from estimates
of    the   multivariate process followed            by the fundamentals variables m, y

and y (or             and              The desired variance is an extremely complicated

function of A (or b), the multivariate ARIMA parameters and the

variance—covariance matrix of the multivariate innovations. Details are

given in the Appendix.

      In summary, for the models (7) and (7)', one tests
                                                     —9--




    o E(EZIH_E Z*IH                   )2       b"c,                                         (12)

                                           —   .5b      o.
    o
           E(EztHt-.EtiztHti)                                                               (12)'



If this 1nquality does not hold, the model (7) (or (7)') is not correct.

Some factor or factors left out of the model are makLng exchange rates too

variable to be consistent with the model.                        Two possibilities, not

necessarily mutually exclusive, are considered here. The first is that the

left out factors are rational bubbles, and the second is that they are the

usual unobservable regression disturbances.

    Consider bubbles first. These are otherwise extraneous variables that

are added to the solution (7) (or (7)') that still yield an exchange rate

process that satisfies equations (6) and (11) (or (6)' and (11)'):



                 +          +
                     EtZt       Ct,                                                         (13)


    S, Ez + Ct.                                                                             (13)'




The variable Ct is a bubble, and follows the stochastic process Et iCt —

A1Ct_i     in (13), Et_iCt            b1Ct_i in (13)'.           Examples of stochastic

processes for C may be found in Blanchard and Watson (1982) and West

(1986) .

    It   is easy to verify that adding C to 7 (or (7)') yields a process for

St that satisfies (6) (or (6)').                     If (13) is correct, st+i—Etst÷i —

(Et+it÷i_Etz+i)       +
                          (Ct+i—EtCt+i)
                                                             +       where Ct is the

innovation in C1. So E(st+i                    Etst+i)2 —        +      +      Now, it is

sometimes argued that financial markets tend to overreact to news about

fundamentals, causing asset prices to jump exceSsively upon good news about
                                          —10--


fundamentals   and to fall excessively            upon    bd    news [Shiller (19814).       If

this   overreaction is due to rational bubbles, this means that bubbles are

positively correlated with fundamentals, i.e.,                      > 0.   In the presence of

bubbles, then, it is plausible that E(sti                       Etst+i ) —   G.
                                                                             2
                                                                                That   is,

E(st+1
           Etsti)2 is larger than tne variance of news about fundamentals.

This would explain a failure of (12) to hold.                    The same applies to (12)'.

Under the null hypothesis of no bubbles, (12) (or (12)') of course does

hold, since in this case                      -
                                                      Etst+i.
      A second factor that might explain excess variability of the exchange

rate is that         is influenced not by a stochastic bubble, but by a

disturbance of the sort often assumed present in regression equations. If

a   random shock u is added to (11) and (11)', the equations become:



    stm (1+a0Y[a0(s+1_m) -           ay ay —      +
                                                                a2(m_1-s1)]    +


                 —
    st—mt—a1y        b(st+i—mt—a1y)
                                          +
                                                  t+1'                                   (14)'




where n1             + u,   t÷i —   t+i   +
                                              u.
     Suppose, as in Meese and one of Woo's specifications, that u is white

noise.    Woo assumes that the u in (114) results from a white noise

disturbance to the money demand equation (3).                     One   can assume more

generally that the u in (114) also reflects the sluggish deviations from

PPP that are observed empirically. Meese assumes that the u in (114)'

results from a random walk disturbance to the PPP equation (5). One can

again assume something more general, namely, that in (114)' u also reflects

a random walk disturbance to the money demand equation (3)'. A white noise

shock to (114) and (114)', then, is consistent with the sort of money demand

and purchasing power parity disturbances that appear to be observed
                                                      —•1 1—



empirically.2

    The composite disturbances n+1                       and      are both   1A(1). This    means

that current              should not be used as an instrument, since it is correlated

with u. One also cannot use current values of other variables as

instruments, insofar as money is determined simultaneously with thase

variables In equilibrium [Hodrick (1979)]. In any case, with suitable lags

of variables as instruments, (1k) and (1k)' can be estimated. Not.e that

the estimates are consistent in general under plausible identifying

assumptions (e.g.. that there are predetermined variables that shift the

money supply but that do not appear in money demand). This is true whether

or not the exchange rate and the money supply are endogenous, in either the

sense of Granger causality or the usual simultaneous equations sense.

    The solutions to (1k) and (14)' are




           Yst_i +                 +C       +
                                                Ab1EtEI.,OAUt+I                                 (15)

       —
           13ti       +
                           Ez +             + Ab
                                                   Ut,
       —
           E;—*
                  +            + Et4_ObIUt+I
                                           —1
                                                                                                (15)'

       —          +            +   (1—b)
           Etzt           Ct


where Ut is a random               walk shock whose innovation is u, U - Et_iUt             -
                                                                                                Ut.
    Our aim is still to use                     inequalities   (8) and (8)' to see whether we

must resort to bubbles to explain the variability of exchange rates. This

will turn out to be much more complicated than when the usual regression

disturbance is assumed absent. With u present in (111) and (14)', a

violation of equation (12) or (12)' can no longer be taken as evidence of

bubbles. This is because even in the absence of bubbles a2 and 2 wIll
                                                                                Ti     fl


depend not Only on the variance of news about fundamentals but also on the
variance Of U         and   on tne covariance between u, and             the news about

fundamentals.
       Nevertheless,    inequalities (8) and (8)' can still be used              to test for
bubbles.        The basic idea for the Woo specification is a follows; details

are in the Appendix. Under the null hypothesis of no bubbles, the two

nonzero moments of the MA(1) disturbance nti——Eni and Erlt+iflt—-depend on

the three unknowns o,                  and c.      The two nonzero moments can be combined

with    a third piece of information to put bounds                 on the three unknowns,

including,       in particular, a• The Cauchy—Schwarz Inequality, which states
that                         is this third bit         of information. That is,
Eflt+ir,t     and the Cauchy—Schwarz inequality suffice under the null hypothesis

of no bubbles to identify an upper and lower bound to 2. They do not,

unfortunately, suffice to identify a point estimate of a2. Similarly, in

th.    Meese specification, an upper and lower bound to                     can be identified

from    the   moments of         and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

       Even with a u shock present, the right hand side of (8) or (8)' can be

calculated as before, as a complicated function of'                  the parameters of the
multivariate ARIMA process followed by the fundamentals variables. In the

presence of a white noise disturbance u, then, one can compare the lower

bound estimates of               or      to the calculated value of the right-hand side

of (8) or (8)'. In the absence of bubbles, this lower bound should satisfy

(8) or (8)'.

       Before turning       to   the empirical results, it is important          to   note two

aspects of the procedure              that might   not be immediately obvious. The first

relates to the procedure's implicit assumption that                   the   estimates of the

ARIMA process for the fundamentals yields an accurate estimate of the right

hand sides of (8) and (8)'. One circumstance in which this will probably
                                      —1 3-


not be the case is when this process has shifted during the sample used in
estimation or has been expected by the market to shift during or after the

sample. This will happen if there are changes in policy rules [Flood and

Hodrlck (1986), Obstfeld and Rogoff (1985)]. This very real possibility Is

difficult (at least for me) to Incorporate into the null.       A partial

solution is to obtain separate estimates for different sample periods if

there is theoretical or empirical evidnce of a midsarnple process shift.

This will not, however, help if agents expected a shift that did not or has

yet to occur. Consequently, a rejection of the null can be interpreted

equally well as evidence of bubbles or as evidence of expected or actual

shifts of the fundamentals process.

    The second feature to note is that as long as the ARIMA process is

stable, the procedure is legitimate whether or not there is feedback from

the exchange rate or other variables to the fundamentals variables.

Inequalities (8) and (8)' hold so long as money and real Income follow and

are expected to follow a stable process.      Any other variables that help

determine money and real income in equilibrium have been implicitly solved

Out in the process of forecasting money and income.
                                  —14—




3.   Empirical Results

3.1 Data

     The raw data were monthly and seasonally unadjusted, 1974:1 to

1984:5. Data from 1973 and 1984:6 were used for lags and leads. Data on

industrial production, money stock (Ml) and the spot exchange rate

(dollar/deutschemark) were kindly supplied by Richard Meese; a detailed

description of this data set may be found in Meese and Rogoff (1983b).

      The raw data appeared to require some transformations to induce

stationarity. It is well known that detrending and differencing a

variable are not asymptotically equivalent, whether the variable's

secular drift is deterministic or stochastic [Nelson and Plosser (1982)].

Rather than get sidetracked into analysis of the source of the pronounced

upward movement of some of the variables (especially y and         I

decided to handle such apparent nonstationarity as did Woo and Meese.

The actual data used in my test of the Woo specification therefore were

the residuals from a regression of levels of variables on seasonal

dummies and a linear time trend, because Woo assumed that secular drift

is deterministic. The data used in the Meese specification were the

residuals from a regression of differences of variables on seasonal

dummies, because Meese assumed that secular drift is stochastic.3

Separate detrending regressions were run for each of the subsamples

described below. Since all estimation was linear, the estimates of

regression coefficients are identical to those that would have been

obtained had the trend and seasonal terms been included in the

regressions. These preliminary regressions were done to cut down the

otherwise enormous size of the variance covariance matrix of the

parameters.
                                     —15—



     Estimates were obtained for 1974:1 to 1984:5, and for two subsamples

as well, 1974:1 to 1979:9 and 1979:10 to 1984:5. The subsample estimates

were obtained because, as noted in the previous section, the procedure

described in the previous section for estimating the requisite innovation

variances tacitly assumes that the fundamentals variables follow a stable

ARIMA process over the entire sample period, and there is some evidence

that they did not. The tests in Meese (1985), for example, suggest that

the Fed's October 1979 change in operating procedures resulted in a shift

to the ARIMA process of     and/or          Woo (1985), on the other hand,

found that the Fed's change did not result in such a shift. While

neither paper uses precisely my sample period nor my specification for

the fundamentals process, and Woo uses different (seasonally adjusted)

data, the data are similar enough that the hypothesis of stability seems

debatable. I therefore also estimated and tested the model using not

only the entire sample period, but also the pre- and post- October 1979

subsamples. Note that the use of these subsamples implicitly assumes

that the market instantaneously caught on to any such shift by the Fed,

and, as noted in the previous section, that the market did not expect

such a shift.

3.2. Estimation technique

     For the Woo specification, four regression equations were estimated:

equation (14), and a three variable vector autoregression for the
                                     *
fundamentals variables m, yU and y. The lag length for the
autoregression was set at four when the whole sample was used, two when a

subsample was used. For the whole sample regressions, then, there were

twelve variables (12=3 variables x 4 lags per variable) on the right hand

side of each of the three autoregressions. The corresponding figure for
                                       —16—




the   subsample regressions was six.     A shorter lag length was used in the

subsamples to preserve degrees of freedom. Diagnostic tests such as Q

statistics suggested that the lag lengths were adequate, for the whole

sample and both subsamples. Some experimentation, summarized in footnote

9, indicated that the results are not sensitive to choice of lag length.

       For the Meese specification, three regression equations were

estimated: equation (14)', and a two variable vector autoregression for

the fundamentals variables Am and             Lag lengths were chosen as in

the Woo specification.

      Let 8 denote the vector of parameters that must be estimated to

calculate the innovation variances of interest. The vector 0 consists of

the coefficients on the right hand side variables in (14) or (14)'; Er11

and Efl+1r, the first and second autocovariances of the disturbance to

(14) or (14)'; the coefficients on the right hand side variables in the

fundamentals autoregressions; and the elements of the variance

covariance matrix of the innovations in the fundamentals. In the Woo

specification, for example, 0 contains forty eight elements, when

estimating with the entire sample period: four coefficients on the right

hand side of (14); Er1÷1 and Eflt÷iq; thirty six coefficients on the

right hand side of the autoregressions; and the six independent elements

of the variance covariance matrix of the disturbances to the

fundamentals' autoregressions.

      The elements of 0 were estimated as follows. The right hand side

variables in (14) and (14)' were estimated by two stage least squares,

with the right hand side variables of the autoregressions used as

instruments. The moments Er)+1 and               were estimated from the

moments of the two stage least squares residuals. The autoregression
                                     —17—




parameters were estimated by OLS. The elements of the variance

covariance matrix of the autoregression disturbances were estimated from

the OLS residuals, with the usual degrees of freedom adjustment.

        Calculation of the asymptotic covariance matrix of 0 is described in

the Appendix. It suffices to make three remarks here. First, the

standard errors on the coefficients in (14) and (14)' allow for the MA(1)

serial correlation that r) displays if there is a u shock present. They

are, however, still consistent if fl is serially uncorrelated when u is

absent. Second, standard errors on all regression coefficients were

calculated to allow for arbitrary heteroskedasticity conditional on the

instruments (i.e., conditional on the right-hand-side variables in the

autoregressions). Third, proper account was taken not only of the

uncertainty in the estimates of the regression coefficients, but also of

(a)the uncertainty in the estimates of the variances and covariances such

as          and (b) the correlation of the estimates of the various elements

of 0.

        The innovation variances in equations (8) and (8)' are complicated

functions of 0. Let f(O) denote one of these variances. The standard

error on f(0) was calculated as [(af/a0)V(af/a0)]½, where V is the

variance-covarjance matrix of e.    The derivatives 8f/0 of all such

functions were calculated numerically.

3.3. Empirical results

     Table 1 reports the estimates of the basic regression parameters.4

Consider first the estimates of (14), in lines (1) to (3). About half the

estimates are significantly different from zero at the five per cent

level, and almost all are more or less reasonable. Consider first the

interest semielasticity 80. Its estimates vary somewhat from sample to
                                 —18—




sample, but are roughly consistent with the estimates in Woo and Meese.
                                                               u      f
The estimates of both the U.S. and German income elasticities a1 and a1

are also roughly consistent with the slightly higher estimates in Woo.

The estimates of a2 are, again, similar to those in Woo. One estimate

[line (2)] exceded its theoretical upper bound of unity, as did one of

Woo's estimates [Woo (1985, p8)]. Combining a and a2, or a and a2, for

lines (1) and (3) yields, as in Woo, a somewhat high long run income

elasticity of two or more.

     Now consider the estimates of (14)' in lines (4) to (6) of Table 1.

The estimates of a0 were obtained by imposing a1=.5 as did Meese.

Results and estimates for a1=.4 and a1=.3, the other two imposed values

of a1 for which Meese reported results, were almost identical.5 The

estimates of a0 are somewhat lower than in Meese, but, perhaps, not

implausibly so. One of the three estimates is significantly different

from zero at the five per cent level [line (5)].

    In sum, then, the regression results suggest that the Woo

specification is quite acceptable, the Meese specification less so. In

addition, it is reassuring that the use of different sample periods,

estimation techniques and, in the case of Woo, different data, leads to

qualitatively similar parameter estimates. Let us now turn to the

variability test. Column (1) of Table 2 presents the estimates of the

right hand sides of (8) and (8)1.6 Column (2) reports the estimate of

the variance of a2 if the unobservable shock u is assumed absent. Under

the null hypothesis that bubbles are also absent, the column 2 estimate

should be less than the column (1) estimate. It is not, for any of the

six specifications. Column (2) is anywhere from five to two hundred

times as large as column (1). It is significantly larger (at the five
                                   —19—




percent level) in two specifications [lines (1) and (5)]•7 See column

 (3). Ny variability test, inequalities (8) and (8)', therefore indicates

 as did Huang's (1981) that a standard monetary model with neither bubbles

nor the usual regression disturbance is inconsistent with the variability

of the $/DM exchange rate.8

     The monetary models are not, however, inconsistent with the data if

one allows for the usual regression disturbance. Column (4) reports the

minimum possible value of a, calculated as described in the Appendix.

Column (5) reports the difference between columns (1) and (4). With one

exception [line (2)], the column (4) estimate is less than the column (1)

value. The difference, unfortunately, is estimated rather imprecisely.

In only one specification [line (4)1 is the point estimate of the

difference significantly different from zero at the five percent level.

It is clear nonetheless that once regression disturbances are permitted,

one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the variance of the innovation

in the expected present discounted value of fundamentals is less when the

market's information set is used (ci)   than   when only past values of

fundamentals are used [column (1)]. This result is robust to changes in

the lag length of the fundamentals autoregression.9

     The consistency does not, in my opinion, mean that the Woo and Meese

models capture the variability in an entirely satisfactory fashion. It

is often argued that the exchange rate is an asset price and ought to

fluctuate as do many asset prices in response to news about economic

variables [Frenkel (1981), Nussa and Frenkel (1980)]. The empirical

results suggest that in the Woo and Meese models these fluctuations

result in an important way from shocks that have no explicit links to

economic theory or even to any economic variables (except, of course,
                                  —20—




tautologically, to the variables in the equations in which the shocks

appear). Therefore, while it undoubtedly is desirable to allow for

regression disturbances in exchange rate models, it appears that some

nontrivial extensions to the Woo and Meese models are required, if one of

these models is to explain the fluctuations basically as responses to

news about observable economic variables. This may well be true of other

monetary models as well. In any case, it would seem highly desirable to

model deviations from PPP as functions at least in part of observable

economic variables. Sticky price models such as Driskell (1981) and

Frankel (1979) may be useful starting points.

3.4. Comparison with previous studies

     The basic conclusion of this paper conflicts with previous studies

on volatility and speculative bubbles [Huang (1981), Meese (1985)]. A

reconciliation with these studies therefore is in order.

     Reconciliation with Huang (1981) is simple. Huang followed some

studies such as Bilson (1978) and assumed no regression disturbances in

any of the basic equations. As was just noted, when this assumption is

made here, the result is that the monetary model cannot explain the

variability of the exchange rate. Surely, this argues more for allowing

for the usual regression disturbance than for a basic failure of the

monetary model. See Hodrick (1979) on the theoretical importance of

allowing for the usual regression disturbances.

     Reconciliation with Meese (1985) is not quite as straightforward.

Meese applied to the exchange rate the test speculative bubbles that I

developed and applied to stock prices in West (1985). A general

description of my specification test may be found in West (1985). For
                                  —21—




concreteness I will explain it here in the context of Meese's

application.

     The specification test compares two estimates of b, b —=
                                                                         —1
                                                                (1+a0)        a0
as in (7)'. One estimate of b is obtained from equation (14)' by

instrumental variables, and is consistent even if there are bubbles. The

second estimate is obtained from estimation of two types of equations: a

closed form solution to the expected present discounted formula (7)', and

the fundamentals process. This second estimate is not consistent if

there are bubbles. Meese compared the two estimates of b and found them

more different than is consistent with sampling error. The implication

is that there are bubbles.

     There are at least two possible explanations for the conflict

between Meese's results and those of the present paper. Both,

unsurprisingly, are econometric. The first is that the specification

test may have more power. The second is that one test may have better

finite sample properties. I suspect that the present paper's test is

better in this respect, at least when there are in—sample shifts in the

ARIMA process of the fundamentals variables. This is because such shifts

will obscure the link between the ARIMA process and the closed form

solution to (7)'. This will potentially cause a strong bias in the

second of the two estimates of b that were described in the previous

paragraph. By contrast, although the present variability test requires a

fundamentals process that is stable and expected by the market to remain

so, there appears to be no presumption that it is biased toward finding

excess variability if the process in fact is unstable: both sides of

(8)' are likely to be estimated quite noisily.
                                   —22—




     Both of these possible explanations are quite tentative. Some

further research is required to reconcile the fact that one of my bubble

tests finds bubbles, the other does not.




4. Conclusions

     Two basically standard monetary models appear to be consistent with

the 1974-84 variability of the $/DM exchange rate. As noted in the

introduction, the extent to which this consistency may be interpreted as

evidence against speculative bubbles or process switching is limited at

best to the extent one believes the models correctly explain this

exchange rate. But regardless of how enthusiastically one endorses

either model, it is of note that shocks to money demand and PPP play a

key role in the apparent consistency of the models with the data. It is

therefore of interest in future work to model these shocks as functions

at least in part of observable economic variables.
                                   -23-




                                Footnotes




1.   It is appropriate to add a word on the theoretical question of

whether bubbles are consistent with rationality, in light of the claims

by Obstfeld and Rogoff (1985) and Diba and Grossman (1985) that they are

not. The most rigorous and general paper that I am aware of that deals

with this question is Tirole (1985). Tirole establishes that bubbles are

perfectly consistent with rationality in a standard overlapping

generations model, under suitable conditions. That Diba and Grossman

(1985) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1985) find bubbles inconsistent with

their models appears to reflect more the particular characteristics of

the models they use rather than any general presumption against bubbles.

2. The disturbance u iS a linear combination of a shock to the money

demand equation (3), say, u1, and a shock to the purchasing power parity

equation (5), say, u2. In principle u could depend on a shock to the

interest parity conditon (4) as well. But as far as I know, such a shock

has not been assumed present in previous empirical work. Simple

arithmetic yields u =                             in (14), u =
                        Ch10)(_uit+u2t_a2u2t_i)                   (1+a0)
(-ui+u2) in (14)'. For         to be white noise in (14) requires that

u1 be white noise and/or u2 be AR(1) with parameter a2. For u to be

white noise in (14)' requires that u1 and/or u2 be a random walk.

     These requirements appear to be roughly consistent with existing

empirical evidence. See, e.g., Goldfeld (1976) or Mankiw and Suimners

(1984) on the disturbances to the money demand equation. See Adler and

Lehman (1983), Hakkio (1984) and Roll (1979) for evidence that deviations

from PPP have a serial correlation coefficient quite near one. Since a2
                                   -24-




also appears to be quite near one [Goldfeld (1976), Woo (1985) and the

estimates presented here], the assumption that u2_a2u2 is white noise

is probably reasonable.

     Technically, Woo and Meese cannot both be correct. As stated in the

introduction, however, the aim of this paper is to establish a robust

result concerning the monetary model. I will therefore not attempt to

reconcile the technically contradictory assumptions of Woo and Meese

concerning these shocks.

3. Note that it follows from equations (15) and (15)' that under the

null hypothesis of no bubbles, the endogenous drift in the exchange rate

(if any) will be deterministic under Woo's assumptions about shocks and

fundamentals variables. Similarly, the exchange rate has a unit   root
under Meese's assumptions.

4. The estimates of the fundamentals processes are not reported, to

conserve space. An appendix containing these estimates, as well as those

of the initial regressions to induce stationarity, is available on

request.

5. Allowing a1 to be estimated freely did not generate similar results.

In this case, in two of the three samples, either a0 or a1 or both were

wildly implausible (a0 > 100, or a1 negative). I therefore did not even

calculate the variability test. It is not clear to me why unconstrained

estimates were not sensible. A referee has commented that this suggests

a specification error in Meese's model, and, citing Cumby and Obstfeld

(1984), has suggested that one possible culprit is Meese's assumption

that deviations from PPP are a random walk.

6. It may help in interpreting all the figures in Table 2 to note that

the 1973-3 to 1984-5 variance in     is 11.53 (times Ø4)• The
                                  -25-



in-sample variance of the news about fundamentals in line (1), column

(1), thus, is about one sixth of what would be the out-of-sample error

variance from forecasting the spot rate as a random walk.

7. For the Meese specification in lines (4) to (6), the column (2)

estimate may be calculated as either .5b2Efl1 or _b2Efl+ifl. The

former is reported in Table 2. The latter yields values lower than those

in column (2), but still much larger than those in column (1).

8. The figures reported in Table 2 are based on estimates that used lags

of fundamentals variables as instruments. For lines (1) to (3),

different (and more efficient) estimates of columns (1) to (3) may be

obtained when there is no disturbance u by using current as well as

lagged values of fundamentals as instruments. See the discussion in

section 2. So I recalculated columns (1) and (2) using estimates

obtained when current as well as lagged values were used. For all three

sample periods, column (2) was greater than column (1).

9. To see whether the results were sensitive to choice of lag length of

the fundamentals autoregression, I calculated two additional point

estimates (but not standard errors) of each of the Table 2 entries.

These were for lag lengths r2 and 3, for the whole sample, r=3 and 4 for

the subsamples. The Woo specification proved quite robust, with all

additional calculations yielding a negative figure for column (3) in

Table 2, and a positive figure for column (5). The ileese specification

was not as robust. Three samples produced implausible parameter estimates,

such as negative b (whole sample, r2, and first subsample. r3 and

r4). The other three samples did, however, yield a positive figure

for column (3), and all but r—4, second subsample, produced a negative

figure for column (5).
                                                —26—




Appendix


       This describes calculation of: (A.1) the right hand side of (8);

(A.2) a lower bound estimate to ci when there is a shock u; and (A.3)

the variance covariance matrix.

A.l Right hand side of (8)




             "'
       Consider first when equation (14)' is the appropriate specification.

Let Ax =                         follow    an AR(r) process, l(L)ix =                       -
-. • .- crixt-r   =   vt   .    Each 4. is a (2 x 2) matrix. Using the formulas in
                                      1
Hansen and Sargent (1980), it may be shown that Eb1xt+.lI -

                  = (l-b)4'(b)                 (xt -
                                                           ExIi_1)     =
                                                                             (l_b)(bYvt,        where

4(b) =   I - cb                 rbr.       Let a =
                                                           ba01[1,-a1}'.      From equation (7)',
         -             =                               -                       =
EI11t      EIi1t                a'[EIb'x+iIi                ETh1xt+.   Iii         (1_b)''(b)•v.
                                               (1-b) a'(b) $(b)-1—
                                       2   =           -2—        -1
Thus, E(EzIH -         EzIH_1)                                  'a, 0 EVtV. When
   =                  follows an
       [m,y,y]            AR(r) process, 4(L)x =
                                                                              v,   as is consistent
                                      *        *                                    2
with (7), the comparable formula is E(EzIH -                                            =
                                                                        EzIH_1)
                            a
                                  Xa01[1-a2A, -a, aJ.


A.2 Lower bound cr

       The basic procedure for (14) is as follows. The procedure for (14)'

is similar. We have from (15) that when there are no bubbles s÷1 -
                  *    *        -1
Es+i = E+iz÷1 -            + Ab
                               Ez+i    It may be shown that the minimum

and maximum possible values of                    occur when u and                 are perfectly

correlated, u =                 for some h. In such a case


         2
             =                    -                         2
                 E[-b(s+1             Es÷1)      + u}
                                         —27—




                 = E[-b(Et÷i    + Ab 'hc+1) +
                                                 ht]2               h)

                                + Ab                                         +
   Efl÷ir)t =        E[-b(t+1          1h÷1) +   h&]    [-b(e +     Ab1h)
                        f2   (a, Ii)

A and b have been omitted as arguments in f1 and f2 since they may be

identified from the regression parameters. f1 and f2 may be combined to

eliminate a. The result is a quadratic equation in h. One of the two

roots to this quadratic may be plugged back into f1 or f2 to obtain the

minimum possible value of a.



A.3 Variance-covariance matrix

       This explains the calculation of the variance-covariance matrix of

the parameter vector 0, for the Woo specification. How the matrix was

calculated for the !leese specification will be obvious from the

description to follow.

                 =                       u         u         f           f
       Let
                                 mt_r,            t-r' ft-i'"' 't-r be the (3r
x 1) vector of instruments used; r=4 for the whole sample, r=2 for the

subsamples. Write equation (14) as w =             x+'w                          x and
(4 x 1) defined in the obvious way. Let A =
                                                            (xtz)   (zz)' be the
usual 2SLS weighting vector. Write the fundamentals autoregressions as

   =         +                     +
       z81       v1, y = z62           v2, y = z63      +
                                                            v3.   Finally, let T be the

sample size.

       One way of describing the estimation technique used is to note that

the (12+9r) x 1 parameter vector 0 was chosen to satisfy an orthogonality

condition. This orthogonality condition is
                                            —28—



                              T 1Azt(wt_x)
                              2 —1
                                 T     -

                              -'
                                                 (w_xt)
                                                 —1
                              Eqqti -T
                              T z(mt-zôi)
                              f 1z(y-zô2)
     O=T1Th(O)=
                              T1Zz(y—zo3)
                                   2
                                           (T-3r)
                                                      —1        ,      2
                                                           £(mt-zô1)
                              EVitV2 -           (T-3r)       (m-zô1) (y-zô2)
                              EV1tV3t -(T-3rY1 (mt:zÔi) (y-zÔ3)
                              Ev2 - (T-3r) (ycztô2)

                  -           EV2tV3t
                                             -   (T-3r)1      X(y-zô2) (y-zto3)
                             !EV3 -         (T-3r)         (y-zÔ3)2

As stated in the text, then,               is estimated by 2SLS, Eri and Eflr1t_1 from

the moments of the 2SLS residuals, ô, 62 and 63 by OLS, EVtVJt ,j =

1,2,3)   from the OLS residuals with a degrees of freedom correction.
                 *                  *                                 *
     Since Eh(0 )     = 0,   where 0 is the true but unknown 6, T (0-0 )                  is
asymptotically normal with (12+9r) x (12+9r) covariance matrix V                       (pliin

T1The)1S (plim T1Th0) [Hansen (1982]. he is 3h/aO and was

straightforward to calculate. S =                      Ehth_ and was calculated as
                                                 i=-
in Newey and West (1986), using three lags of h(O). Newey and West

(1986) show that the resulting positive semidefinite estimate of V is

consistent, for arbitrary correlation between r and                        (j1,2,3),

and arbitrary heteroskedasticity of                    and v conditional on the

instruments.
                                —29—




                             REFERENCES


      I thank Wing T. Woo and the participants in the 1985 NBER Summer
 Institute on "The Determinants of Asset Price Variability" for help-
 ful co.ents and discussion, an anonynus referee for an exceptionally
 careful and detailed report, and the National Science Foundation for
 financial support. Responsibility for remaining errors is mine. This
 paper was revised while I was a National Fellow at the Hoover Insti-
 tution.

 Adler, Michael and Bruce Lehmann, 1983, Deviations from PPP in the Long
      Run, The Journal of Finance 38, 1471-1487.

Bilson, John F.O., 1978, Rational Expectations and the Exchange Rate,
     in: Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry G. Johnson, eds., The Economics of
     Exchange Rates: Selected Studies, (Addison-Wesley, Reading), 75-96.

Blanchard, Oliver and Mark Watson, 1982, Bubbles, Rational
     Expectations and Financial Markets, NBER Working Paper no. 945.

Cumby, Robert E. and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984, International Interest Rate
     and Price Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review
     of Recent Evidence, in: John F.O. Bilson and Richard C. Marston,
     eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, (University of Chicago
     Press, Chicago), 121—152.

Diba, Behzad T. and Herschel I. Grossman, 1985, The Impossibility of
     Rational Bubbles, NBER Working Paper no. 1615.

Driskell, Robert A., 1981, Exchange Rate Dynamics: An Empirical
     Investigation, Journal of Political Economy 89, 357-371.

Flood, Robert P. and Robert J. Hodrick, 1986, Asset Price Volatility,
     Bubbles and Process Switching, manuscript, Northwestern University.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 197.9, On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange
     Rates Based on Real Interest Differentials, American Economic
     Review 69, 610-622.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1985, The Dazzling Dollar, Brookinga Papers on
     Economic Activity 1985:1, 199-217.

Frenkel, Jacob A., 1981, Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices, and Rate of
     'News:' Lessons fro. the 1970's, Journal of Political Economy 89,
     665-705.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Michael Muasa, 1980, The Efficiency of Foreign
     Exchange Markets and Measures of Turbulence, American Economic
     Review, 70 (May), 374-381.

Friedman, Milton, 1953, The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates, Essays
     in Positive Economics, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago),
     157-203.
                               —30—




Goldfeld, Stephen, 1976, The Case of the Missing Money, Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 683-730.

Hakkio, Craig S., 1984, A Re-Examination of Purchasing Power Parity,
     Journal of International Economics 17, 265-277.

 Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method
      of Moment Estimators, Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

 Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk Averse Speculation
      in the Forward Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of Linear
      Models, in: Jacob A. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and International
      Macroeconomics, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 113-142.

 Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent, 1980, Formulating and
      Estimating Dynamic Linear Rational Expectations Models, Journal
      of Economic Dynamics and Control 2, 7-46.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1979, On the Monetary Analysis of Exchange Rates:
     Coent, in: Karl Brunner and Allan H. Metzler, eds., Policies for
     Employment, Prices and Exchange Rates, (North Holland, Amsterdam),
      103-122.

Hodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1984, An Investigation of
     Risk and Return in the Forward Foreign Exchange Markets, Journal of
     International. Money and Finance 3, 5-29.

Huang, Roger D., 1981, The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate in an
     Efficient Foreign Market: Tests Based on Volatility, Journal of
     Finance XXXVI, 31—41.

Mankiv, N. Gregory and Lawrence H. Sussners, 1984, Are Tax Cuts Really
     Expansionary?, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     no. 1443.

McCallum, Bennett T., 1976, Rational Expectations and the Natural Rate
     Hypothesis: Some Consistent Estimates, Econometrica 44, 43-52.

Meese, Richard A., 1985, Testing for Bubbles in Exchange Markets: A
     Case of Sparkling Rates?, manuscript, University of California at
     Berkeley.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983a, Empirical Exchange Rate
     Models of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out-of-Sample? Journal of
     International Economics 14, 3-24.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, l983b, The Out-of-Sample
     Failure of Empirical Exchange Rate Models: Sampling Error or
     Misspecjfjcatjon?, in: Jacob A Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates
     and International Macroeconomics, (University of Chicago Press,
     Chicago), 67-109.
                               —31—




Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser, 1982, Trends Versus Random
     Walks in Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and
     Implications, Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 139-162.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 1986, A Simple, Positive
     Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity and Auto Correlation Consistent
     Covariance Matrix, forthcoming, Econometrica.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1985, Ruling Out Nonstationary
     Speculative Bubbles, NBER Working Paper no. 1601.

Roll, Richard, 1979, Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and Their
     Implications for Efficient International Coamodity Markets, in:
     Marshall Sarnat and Giorgio P. Szego, eds., International Finance
     and Trade, vol. 1 (Ballinger, Cambridge), 133-176.

Shuller, Robert J., 1981, The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing
     Market Efficiency, Journal of Finance ]QOCV, 291-304.

Shiller, Robert 3., 1984, Stock Prices and Social Dynamics, Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity 1984:2, 457-498.

Sohmen, Egon, 1969, Flexible Exchange Rates, (University of Chicago
     Press, Chicago).

Tirole, Jean, 1985, Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,
     Econometrica 53, 1071-1100.

Viner, Jacob, 1956, Some International Aspects of Economic
     Stabilization, in: L.D. White, ed., The State of the Social
     Sciences, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 283-98.

Tobin, James, 1978, A Proposal for International Monetary Reform,
     Essays in Economics: Theory and Policy, 1982, (MIT Press,
     Cambridge), 488—494.

West, Kenneth D., 1985, A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles,
     Princeton University Woodrow Wilson School Discussion Paper no. 97.

West, Kenneth D., 1986, Dividend Innovations and Stock Price Volatility,
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 1833.

Woo, Wing T., 1985, The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rates
     Determination Under Rational Expectations, Journal of International
     Economics 18, 1—16.
Appendix Tables



       This appendix contains the following regression output:


Al. First stage regressions (to remove deterministic terms and induce
statioriarity) —— Woo   specification    —--
                                               whole sample

A2. Fundamentals autoregressions          Woo    specification        whole sample

A3. First stage regressions        Woo   specification   ——   first    subsample

A14.   Fundamentals autoregressions —— Woo       specification   -—   first   subsample

A5. First stage regressions --- Woo      specification   -— second
                                                                   subsample

A6.    Fundamentals autoregressions ——    Woo   specification —— second subsarnpls
A7.    First stage regressions —     specification —- whole sample
                                   Meese

A8. Fundamentals autoregressions -- Meese specification —- whole sample
A9. First stage regressions — Meese        specification -—      first   subsample
AlO. Fundamentals autoregressions -— Meese         specification -- first subsample
All. First   stage regressions -— Meese specification -- second subsample

A12. Fundamentals autoregressions —- Meese specification —— second subsample
                                              Table Al
                      First       Stage RreS5irDns—_Wo S7eciieation
                                           Entire Sannie

T)EPENDE'JT VARIARLE                 S
FROM 1973— 14 UN"IL 1314— S
OBSERVATIONS            135              DEGREES OF FREE0M       122
R'42           0.0214559145              RBAR'*2        —0.071251470
SSR              2.1455145               SEE        0.114196853
DTJRBIN_'1ATSON 0.0592141411
Q( 33):     1201.75                SIGNIICAMCE LEVEL o .000000E+O0
NO.     LAT.                 LAG       OEFF'ICIENT    STAND. ERROR                     T—STTISTIc
*4*    *40*4*4               *4*      *4*4*4* 14*4*       *4*4*44*44:1*
   1    JAN                   0     O.7212145            0.5014 1178C—O 1            —17.30002
  2     FE                    0     —o.8noiq             0.50 57856E—0 1                 q  14


  3     MAR                   o     —0.929io5            0.507 !4573E0 1             —17.00229
  14    APR                   o     —0.8795161           O.148369614E—O 1            —18. 1857
  5     MAY                   o     —0.8867053           0.148 35 5E—O 1             —18.25891
  6     JUN                   o     —0.8315539           O.'4370551E—o 1             —18.09953
  7     JUL                   o     —0.97O396            0 14   14 '4113 E — 0   1   —17. 601414
        ATT'
  U     tLJJ                  o     —0.8800718           0.'495925E—o 1              —17.714355
  9     SE                    0     —0.36581714          0.'497'5387E—0 1            —17.1400'S
 10     OCT                   o     —0.85'i6071          0.1499199!4E_0 1            —17.11955
 11     NOV                   o     —0.852141411         0.50082145E—0 1             —17.220142
 12                           0      0.R5150Bl           0.02146141E_0 1             —15 . ° 14565
 13     TRENI)                0      0,145775E—o3        0.3 13814Y405-.03            1.143147143




DEPENT)ENT VRIARLE                   M
FROM 1973— 14 UNTtL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS            135              DEGREES OF FREEDOM       122
R'2                0.071430352           RBAR '2        —0.0157148143
SSR       0.5071473514          SEE        O.69980881E—0 1
OURBIN—WATSON 0.05510067
Q( 33): 12149.07           SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0. 000000E+00
NO.   LkBEL            LAG     COEFFICIENT      STAND. ERROR                           T—STATISTIC
*4*    4*4*44*           *1*                              *4*141:1*4*4*               *4*1 * *4 * 4 * I I
  1     JAN                   0      0.59014235          0.21496711 E —0 1            23.714315
  2     FEB                   0      0.57Z47O0           O.21491439E—0 1              23.031455
  3     MA.R                  0      0.5912132           0 .2503233E—0 1              23.5 1798
  14    APR                   o      0.6012167           0.2385927E—0 1               25.198145
  5     MAY                   0      0.57914927          0.23914200E—0 1              214.201403
  6     JUN                   0      0.57514176          0.2140251414E—0 1            23 .9 50 35
  7     JUL                   0      0.5691183           0.21438831E—O 1              23.33570
  8     AUC                   0      0.5725981           O.214146631E—O 1             23.140353
  9     SEP                   o      0.5809956           0.2145'450!!E_0 1            23.67050
 10     OCT                   0      0.5931610           0.2146?14149E—0 1            214.08825
 11     NOV                   0      0.5298976           0.21470'455E—0 1             21 .1414930
 12     DEC                   0      0.5503566           0.2U78553E_0 1               22.50821
 13     TREND                 o     —0.1615595E—03       0.151481 2E—0 3             —1.0143530
                                         Thle Al contirijefl



DEPENDENT VARIABLE                     YtJ
FROM 1973- '4 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS                   135            DEGREES OF FREEDOM             122
                       0.59015958             RBAR* *2           0.53896380
SSR      0.1414195999                         SEE         0 .60 18 9 8 141 E —0 1
DURBIN—WATSON 0.014537173
Q(        33):   701.652             SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL              000000E+00
                                                                   o .
NO.          LAREL            LAG        COEFFICIENT                STAND. ERROR           T—STA TISTI
1*4         *4*4*1*           *4*       * * * * * * * * .* , * *
            JAN                0        14.7570714                 0.21 387   59E—0 1    222.98 ?
     2      tE3                o        '4.7999145                 0.21'45B35E—0    1    223.6920
            MAR                0        14.80'4'470                O.2152969E—0 1        223.1555
     '4     APR                o        '4.801195                  0.20 52077E—0 1       233.9 571
     5      MAY                0        '4.803110                  0.2059 1O2E—0 1       233.2521
     5      JUN                o        14.930500                  O.2055252E—0 1        231   .77''4
     7      JUL                O        '4.77q100                  0.2097578E—O 1        27. 83q0
     3      AUG                o        14.813987                  O.210'4287E—O1        229. 770
     q      SEP                o        14.833197                  0.211 10   53E—0 1    229. 1830
 10         OCT                o        14.831579                  0.117 892E-O 1        228. 1315
 11         NOV                o                                   0.21 2147 87E—O 1     225. 17 5
 12         )EC                o        '4.755873                  0.21 317'43E—O   1    223. E
 13         THEN!)             0       O.1533018E—o2               0. 133 1507E—O3       I 2.2514143

DE?E'TDENT VARIABLE                    '(F
ROM 1973— 24 UNTIL 19811_
OBSERVATIONS                   135            DEGREES OF FREEDOM      122
R412                   0.714759065            RBAR**2         0.72275 350
SSR               0.214910229                 SEE        O.145095735E—O 1
DURBINT4ATSON 0.149211026
Q( 33):           '4214.259          SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0. 000000E+00
NO.         LABEL             LAG        COEFFICIENT     STAND. ERROR                      T—STATISTIC
*4*        1*4*11*            *4*       *    LI I I * 1* I III
     1      JAN                O     0.183671414                   0. 1602'438E—0 1     —11.145219
     2      FEB                0     —0.1003028                    0. 16077140E—o 1     —6 . 2 337 47
     3      MAR                O     —0.87314911E—ol               0.161308 5E-0 1      —5.1415033
     14     APR                0     —O.826231'4E—ol               0.1537 Z493E_o 1     —5 .37 3883
     5      MAY                0     —0.1021922                    0. 1514282Z4E—0 1    —6.623713
     6      JUN                0     —O.90191459E—O1               0.1514820 1E—0 1     —5.825768
     7      JUL                0     —0.23145317                   0. 15715314E—0 1     —114.92327
     8      AUG                o     —0.2711977                    0.15766 11E—0 1      —17.20069
  9         SEP                O     —O.99321435E—01               0 • 1591 63'4E—o 1   —5.51471421
 10         OCT                O     —0.8333717E—01                0. 158680!4E—O 1     —5.25 1893
 11         NOV                0     —O .3574435E—O 1              0.1591 970E—0 1      —2 • 214529 0
 12         DEC                0     —O.920'5892E—O1               0.1597 182E—O 1      —5.76 445 2
 13         TREND              0       O.75631145E—03              O .9975 15 1E—O14     7.681 4514
                                   Table A2
                       Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Woo Specification
                                Entire Sample




 DEPENDENT VARIABLE
 FROM 1974— 1 ØNIL 1984- 5
 OBSERVATIONS         125              DEREES OF FREEDOM            113
P**2               0. 94599446         RBA R**2      0. 94    07   37 2
SSR        3.266078820-01              SE!       3. 153411966D-01
DURBIN-VATSON 1.94705657
Q( 33= 17.4989                    srNIFI:&N:E LEVEL 0.987614
N3.      LABEL            LA          CO!FF!CIE'I T     STAND. EIOR               T—STATISrIC
5.5     5.5*...           *5*                           ********** **         **       **S S S S
   I     M                 1        0.7028695         0.95411683—31           7.366703
   2     M                    2     3.23739'3   -     0.   1150393            2.060982
   3    M                  3        0.1250633         3.1155352               1.0821167
   '4   M                  4      —0.8129396D—01      0.949811850-01       —0. 8558624
   5    YU                 1       0.2197830          0.1430292               1.536630
   S    YTJ                2      -0.49811433         3.2517826             —1.979657
   7    YU                3        3.21194603         0. 2515b 34           0.9915611
   3    YU                 4       0.38711160—31      0.1474890             0 •2624681
   9    YF                 1       0.10951113         0.5900993D• 01          1. 8563 20
 10     Yr                2        0.8384762D-02      0.63139 833—01        0. 13269   16
 11     YF                3       —D.43'46158D—31     0.6 2122080-01       —0 .6 996 157
 12     YF                4       —0.114559930—31     3.58526230-01        —0. 7630511




DEPENDENT VARIABr.E
FROM 1974— 1 I?I1. 1984— 5
BS!RV&TI0$                125         D!3REE$ 3? FREEDOM
P5*2                                                          113
            .     0. 97386638         P3AR*s2         0.971322!$3
SSR         3.11233327D-O1            SEE        3.99571323o-o2
DURBZN-RATSON 1.99899744
Q(   33* 21.O5116         SIGNIFICANCE IJT!LQ,946670
NO.     LABEL         LA
       *******                COEFFICIENT    STAND. ERtOR
 *5*                     *5*                           ********* **
                                                                              T—STATISI IC
   1    N
   2
                          1       —0.55061230—31      3.61911300-01        —0. 889 3568
        M                 2        O.2927557D—01      3.7464 739D-
   3    N                 3
                                                                   01       0.392 1847
        N
                                   O.6479t59D31       3. 7496915D. 01       0.8642435
                          4       -O.?008415D—31
  5     yu                                            3.61634333-01         —1. 137096
  6     yij
                          1         1.d$92135         0.9 0965D—O1           16.07737
                          2       —0.14673253         3.1633782
  7     TJ                3                                                 —2.860399
  8                               'O.758754b1)..O1    0.1632490           —0. 4647837
                          11
                                  —O.2g7t&435DO2      0.95703533—31       —0. 310 7936D- 01
        YF                1        O.3O61807D—O1
• 10                      2                           3.38290710-01         0 .799 62 12
 11                                O.5l99281D_O1      0.41002993-01        —1. 268025
                          3        0,803113270—01
 12     YF                4
                                                      0.3 0310140—31        1. 993128
                                  —O.6394651D—)1      3.38041 73D- 01      —1.680957
                               Table A2 (continued)




DEPENDENT VARIABLE         YF
PROM 1974— 1 UNTIL 1984- 5
OBSERVATIONS           125          DEGREES 3? PREEDOM    113
R**2           0.69896524           RB&R*2         0.66966093
SS           3.655291185D—01        SEE        3.2408125Th—)1
DURBIN-V.&TS3N 1.99729955
Q( 33= 36.1989                 StNIflCANCE LEVEL 0.321592
NO.     LABEL          LAG         COE?FIIENF
**.    *$*****                                    srAMD. ERROR                 T—STA IISTI
  1      M
                                                                        ..
                                                                              ********e**.
                         1      ).11q9483             0. 1497321             0. 8010860
  2      M              2      —0.2695655             3.1835342
  3      M                                                               —1.493154
                        3      -0.2881691p—31         3.1813124         —0.1589351
  £4     M               14     0.1322831             0. 1490622             0. 88714353
  5     YU              1       0.4885155             0 •   2244595           2.176413
  5     YU              2      —3.1954119
  7                                                   0.3951290         —0.4 91455 22
        YU              3 —0.4220897                  0.3948 165         —1.369078
  3     YU              4       0.4037675             3.2314583           1.731489
  9     YF              1       0.3641017
1)                                                    0.92605833—01       3.931736
        YF              2       3.25595350—31         0. 9916545 D-01
 11
                                                                         0.2581345
        YF              3       0.1443246             ).9748980D- 01
12                                                                            1.14801407
        YF              £4     —0.1867is98D—31        0.92003 67D-01    —0.2 029808
                                                    T3hle A3
                                               ''irst Susale Specirictjon
                           F1"st Stre Re'es5ins ——        Woo




DEPENDENT VARIABLE                        S
FROM 1973— !4 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS                       79         DEGREES OF FREEDOM      65
                          0.720143678         RBAR'2          0.66898315
SSR         0.3145140723                      SEE         0.72396806E—O1
DTJRBIN—4ATSON   0.20570791
Q( 214)              235.870            TGNIICANCE LEVEL 0 .000000E+00
NO.           LABEL             LAG           COEF'I CIT        STAN').   ERROR         T—STATISIC
*1*         **4****                                             4**t**4*** !*          **** $4****)
     1        JAN                o       —1.1014383            O.3625000E—0       1   —30 .6     I 37
     2                           o       —1.0377'40            0.3 18791E—0       1   —30.05510
     3        MR                 o       —1.056102             0 .6 398 35E—0 1       —27.86130
     LI       APR                o       —1.097953             O.3353576E—0       1   —32.714006
     S        MAY                0       —1.1033714            O.71671E—O         1
                                                                                      —32.61575
     6        JUN                0       —1.0556114            O.339033E—0 1          —31.95669
     7        JUL                0       —1.000091             O.3'417557E—O 1        —31.82596
     8        A'Jl               0       —1.1O539              0.31439533E—O 1        —32.137114
     9        SEP                O       —1.0214350            0.31461 671E—0 1       —31.61335
 10           OCT                O       —1.08'40'17           0.15 371 38E—O 1       —30.511715
 11           NOV                0       —1.111729             0.157194E—0 1          —31. 2 299
 12           DEC                0       —1.09                 0.3577457E—0       1   —30.52 53
 13           TREND              0        0.14725731E—02       0.3573501E—03           12.35353



DEPEUDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1973—   TJNTIL 1979— 9
                     14

OBSERVATIONS            78                    DEGR'ES OF FREE!OM       65
R**2            0.87970750                    RRAR**2         0.857149976
SSR                  0.560723014E—01          SEE          0.29370919E—O1
DURBI'—WATSON 0.318057314
Q(        214)=      193.1450           SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL o .000000E+00
NO.           LABEL             LAG         COEFFICIENT     STAND. ERROR                T—ST.TISTIC
4*4          *******                                                                   **** *    * * * * **
     1        JAN                0       O.7Li20576            0.114149 672E—0    1    51  13797
                                                                                             •

              FEB                0        0.73126014           0. 11458 0119E—0   1    50. 1533'5
     3        MAR                0        0.73578314           0. 11456527E—0 1        50.17152
     14       APR                o        0.7191289            0. 1351191 E—0 1        514.702014
     5        MAY                0        0.72R9'Ill           0. 1 359 69 OE—0 1      53.214310
     6        JUN                 0       0.7190523            0. 1358297E—O 1         52.55090
     7        JUL                 O       0.72219114           0. 1377010E—O 1         52 . '4 '4 6 35
     B        AUG                 0       0.7228813            0. 1385826E—O 1         5.. 162o
     9        SEP                 0       0.7363503            0.139147 113E_O 1       52.791458
 10           OCT                 0       0.71431818           0.11425 170E—0 1        52.18899
 11           NOV                 o       0.68314615           0. 114332 31E—O 1       147   . 63578
 12           DEC                 o       o.715269             0. 14'41399E—0 1        149.62095
 13           TREND               0      —O.3156688E—02        0.11451 3141E—O3       —1 .R0967
                                   TaLe A3 (onti'iue1)


DEPENDENT VARIARLE
PROM 1973— U UNTIL 1979- 9
OBSERVATIONS           78               DEOREES OF FREEDOM            65
R442           0.62935399               RBAR*'2             0.5597142142
SSR      0.212148156                    SEE             0.571714706E-O1
DURRIN—'ATS0N 0.05027771
Q( 2!4)       379.732           SI'NIFICANCE LEVEL 0 .000000E+O0
NO.     LABEL      VAR              C0EF'ICIENT     STAND. ERROR                     T-STATISTC
4*4    4*44*4*     *44            *4*44*4* #4*4             *4*4*4*4*9*4
  1     JAN         20            14.7011456               0 .28219914E—0 1      155.5005
  2                 21            14   .7152               0.293830 1E—O 1       155 .7O2
  3     MAR                       .14.735200               O.23514806E_0 1       iSs .8705
  14    APR                       14   .7'414300           0.25 39285E_0 1       180.3910
  5     MAY         214           14   .7 149 B 9 9        0.25 145832E—O 1      179.
  5     JUN         25            14.777959                0.25535SSE—0 1        179.3907
  7     JUL         25            14.7214378               O.25805'47E—O 1       175.21450
  3                 27            14.757822                0.2597709E—0    1     17 .3553
  9                 28            14   .814792             O.2715058E—0 1        175.2310
 10     OCT         29            14   777    14 14 5      0.27714293E—0 1       172.2038
 11     NOV         39            14.750295                0.27399B)E.-0   1     170.2509
 12                 31            14.70149147              0.2805999E—0 1       157. 5812
 13     TREND       12           0. 272925E—O 2            0.28836 142E_03      9.5851407




DEPENDENT V.RIABLE               YF
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS               78      DEOREES OF FREEDOM        65
R'42             0.7861433143      RBAR442          0.714700575
SSR         0.11735902             SEE         O.1424fl3261E—O1
D1JRRIN—WATSON 0.1426310141
Q( 2!4)     291.1459          SIGNIFT.CANCE LEVEL 0.000000E+00
NO.    LABEL             LA3      COEFFICIENT       STAND. ERROR                 T-STATISTIC
*4*    4*4*4*4            4*4     4*4*4*4*4*4*              *4*4*4*4*44*        *4*4*4*4*4,4
  1     JAN                0    —0.2125251                 0.2097356E—0 1      —10 .13305
  2     FEB                0    —0.15029'O                 0.21091476E—0 1     —7.1 2!j 1142
  3     MAR                O    —0.13169514                0.21217 143E—0 1    —5 .2O6L75
  14    APR                o    —0.9914392E—01             0. 19514876E—0 1    —5.071623
  5     MAY                0    —0.10965614                0. 1967173E—0 1     _5.5714316
  6     JUN                0    —o.93145459E—O1            0. 197925E—O 1        .7 208 28
                                                                               _14
  7     JUL                0    —0.2673081                 0. 1992230E—0 1     —13.141753
  8     AUG                O    —0.2932229                 0.2004985E—0 1      —114.621459
  9                        O    —0.1217750                 0.20 17887E—0 1           .0314780
 10    OCT                 O    —0.117140147               0.2051907E—0 1      5. SQ 3935
 11    NOV                 0    —0.5969971E—01             0.2073570E—0 1      —2.830853
 12    DEC                 0    —0.1182532                 0.2085397E—0 1      —5.671282
 13    TREND               0     0.1203070E—92             0.2143 1714E—03      5.613498
                                       Table A4
                        Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Woo Specification
                                    First Subsample




 DEPENDENT VARIABLE        N
 ?RM 1974— 1 UNTIL 1979— 9
 DBS!RV&TXOKS          59             DEGRERS 3? FRERDON     53
 a**2               0.76074273        RBAR*2         0.74175l4)
SSR       3.11717464D—31              SEE               0. 1363787D-.)1
DRBIN—WATS3R 2.02668832
( 241     111.42815              SIGNIFICANI LEVEL 3.936375
N3.   LABEL               LAG                       StAN). RR3R                     T-STATISTI:
S..  6*5*5*5              *5*      ***5 * * S * * *5*
      1     M              I      0.591131593              3.1212885            4.900281.
   2        M              2      0.17931521               3.11811189           1.5114472
   3        YTJ            1      0.3509856D-02            0. 11452565         0.24163 17
   15

   5
            YIJ
            YF
                           2
                           I
                                 -0.75724'12D-)1
                                  0.2073239DO1
                                                           0.151 9285
                                                          0.83874603.01
                                                                              -0.   4 842114
                                                                               0. 2147 18 32
   6        YF             2      0.1953295                0.831 1915 3D—01     2. 31$ 63 77




DEPENDENT VARIABLE          YU
P13N 197's— 1 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS            59     D!3REES 0? ?&ED)N      53
RS52           3.95950989      RB&R**2        0.9562963
SSR        0.68310853D-02      SEE        0.101416D—31
DURBIN-VUSON 2.28e3533
3( 24$ 11.566's                 SIGII?I:aw:E LEVEL o • 9814366
RO.        LABEL         LAG        COEFFICIENT     St AID. ERROR                T- S TA TI STI
*0*       *5*5*5*        *5*                                                    *5 5* *5 *5*5 5 5
            M             1                               0.9260785 D-01
  1                               0.1775082D—31                                0.1917637
  2         14
                          2      •a.8950823D.o1           0.901416790.01      —0.98995114
  3         YU            1        1.1427191              0.1109082             12. 8 6822
  11        YU            2      —0.5330376               3.1160025            —14.5914795
  5         YF
            YF
                          1       0.5295259D—01           0.6140141063—01      0.8268537
                          2       0.6169356D-31           0.634614*60-01       0.9720962
                              Table A4 (continued)




DEPENDENT VARIABLE            Yr
FR3 1974— 1 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS           69      D!8RRS 01 PREBD)N      63
RS02          0. 72098164      RBAR**2       0. 69883732
SSR       0. 255526 08 D—01      SEE        0.20139433D—)1
D!YaBIN—VATSON  2.03004272
)( 24)—   39.1091           SIGNI!I:&N;E LEVEL ).265979D-31
      LABEL             LAG     COI?ICIEN?      STAND. ERROR     T— S TA   TI S T1
  1    M               1    0.1899134           0.1791103        1.060315
  2    M               2   •3.2898516           0.1748726      —1.657501
  3    YU              1    0.5128516           0.2145044       2.390867
  4    YU              2   -0.1739734           3.2243572      0.7620812
 5     YF              1    0.1403264           0.1233601       1.197532
  6    YF              2    0.29478)5           0.1227449
                                                            T'D AS
                            Ft'st     Ste Reresion —— '4oo                SDec4'tcation
                                                       Se'on' usrno1e
DEPENDENT VARIAELE                                S
ROM  197q—   UNTIL 1934— 6
                      -


O9SERVATI.ONS                             514         DECREES O'   FREE')OM        Si
R**2                      0.93143014214                                0.35703171
SSR          0.17302616                               SEE          0.5923137 3—0 1
IDURRIN-WP.TSON  0.20361629
Q(        214):       151.1451                  SIIFI'ANCE LEVEL 0. 000000E+00
NO.
***
              LAT3EL
            ***4***
                                    LA                IC!ENT           STLND. EIROR             T— ST P. TI ST I

     1        JAN                     0           0.114014911         0.5549522E—O 1        2.531500
     2                                O           0.15                0.55914970E—0 1       2.3 03S9
                                      0           0.1229115           0.5 2 12 SE—0 1       2.503131
     14                               O           0.13914531          0. 33503 Bt_0 1       2. 114 17
     5        MAY                     0          0.1214')578          0.5 37 10143E—0 1     2 14 ) 35
     6        JUT                     o               13315'          0.51407050E—O 1       2.1455575
     7        JUL
              T7
                                      0           o.ii3'Sii           O.53382914E—0 1       2.215     33
              tiJ-3                   0                               U.S 7 3311 E—0 1      2 • 2 3507
  9           SEP                     0           0.1l4214O7          0.5l408!12Eo      1   2    7    14 1   3
 10           OCT                     0           0.11414791i1        U.5LI14353SE_0    1   2.659i 7
 11           NOV                     O          0.16140553           0.51478328E—0     1   2.99 '4359
 12           DEC                     0          0.1707566            0.55114114 1E—0 1     3.09 703
 13           TREND                   o         —O.7922855E-.02       0.1403018 5E—) 3      —19. 6537




DEEN!DENT VARIABLE                               M
'ROM 1279— 3 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS                              514         7EGREES OF FREEDOM     51
                          0 .9 35 '4 '4 993                          0.92026158
SSR            0.11466152c5E01                        SEE        0.16955'SlE—Ol
DURBIN—TA'T'SON 0.799514922
Q(    214):    68.52141        SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL O.365011E-05
NO.       LABEL           LAG       COEFFICIENT   STkND. ERROR                                  T-STATITIC
**          *******                                        ** *                              ,*******            t,**
   1      JAN              o     0.22562914      0. 1598577E—0 1                             114.26512
   2                       0     0.20514531      0. 15997214E—0 1                            12.85107
   3      MAR              0     0.2302053       0.15 16920E—O 1                             15.175814
   14     AP               0     0.23521431      0. 15 27 19 4E—0 1                          15.140351
     5        MAY                     0           0.20144677          0. 157U87E—0 1         13 .2983
     6        JUN                     O           0.201461417         0. 15147797E—0 1       13.22149
     7        JUL                     O           0.2110367           0. 1528102E—O1         13.81032
     3        AU                      0           0.2190300           0. 152136EO 1          14.23797
              SEP                     o           0.22211100          0. 15149183E—0 1       14.3149143
 10           OCT                     0           0.2292073           0.155825 2E—O 1        14.707142
 11           NOV                     0           0.1628722            0. 1568314OE—0 1      10.33507
 12           DEC                     0           0.1922106            0. 157 814149E—0 1    12.17713
 13           TREND                   0           0.29714901E—02       0 • 115 3ScgE—03      25   .786S
                                           Table 5 (contjriuej

DEPENDENT VARIABLE                       Y Ti
FROM 197')- 3 UNTIL 19914— 5
OBSERVATIONS             514                    DEGREES OF FREEDOM        51
                         0.'580376              RBAR**?        —0.014283065
SSR                 0.15261720                  SEE        0.51473369L1E_0 1
DUR3IN—WATSON 0.06591519
Q(        214)=     2814.0147          SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0 .000000E+00
NO.           LABEL              LAG       COEFFI dENT      STAND. ERROR                          T_STATIT:C
***         *******
      1       JAN                 o        14672145                    0.5125 313E—0 1          96. Q 15') 3
     2                            O                                    0.5158r)S1E_O      1     97.00351
     3        MAR                 O        5.0114591                   0.149914121501           102.14.515
     14       APR                 o        5.0O20Y                     O.!I92727OE0       1     101.5191
     S        MAY                 3        5.001639                    O 149 50147 RE—0 1       100.3293
     6        JUN                 O        5.028293                    0 149937  14 1 E — 1
                                                                                                103,691')
     7        JUL                 0                                    O.149302?2E—O I                .8030
     9        AUG                 O       5.0O'433                     0.4°6257279 1            100 . 8 '415
     9        SEP                 o       5.025181                     0.'49914''3qE—o 1        100.501414
 10                              0        5.017233                     0.50 2 147 1'E—O 1       Q'),79 630
 11          NOV                  0                                    0.506D073E—0 1           08.   67236
 12                               0      '4.95259                      O.50927E—0         1      97.1414292
 13           TREND               o     —O.20(D627E—Oc                 0.3722115E—03          —0 .35q8gu3E_32




DEPENDENT VARIABLE                       YF
FROM 1979— 3 UNTiL 19914— 6
OBSERVATIONS             514                    DEGREES OF FREEDOM                   51
R**2           O.85914914s3                     913 A H *2              0.325 19913
559        o.'490'59985—o1                      SEE                 o.3oq398q7E—o 1
DU913IN—'1ATSON 1.0'c1493225
Q( 214'1:   55.14S14                   SIGNI'ICANCE LEVEL 0.25 0605—O 3
NO.     LABEL                   LAG           CO E F? I C I E ! T       STAND. ERROR             T—STATISTIC
***         *******
     1       JAN                 O       0.3931258E—O1                 0.29031420E—0 1          1.351400')
     2                           O       0.1'I3091                     0.2921966E—O 1           5.109352
     3       MAR                 O       0.11462151                    0.277214535_O 1          5.273853
     14      APR                 o       0.1323057                     0.2701 232E—O 1          14.71400143
     5                           o       0.10171492                    O.28100113E—0 1          • .620913
     6       JUN                 O       0.116114714                   0.28288855—01            14.105765
  7          JUL                 o      O.21417028E_O2                 0.27929035—01          —0.85514 175E—O 1
     8       AUG                 0      —O.58730148E—O1                0.281 1.29E—O1          —2.089139
     9       SEP                 0       0.114314978                   0.28295935—01            5.070969
 10          OCT                 O       0.11120963                    0.281479955—01           '4.9893414
 11          NOV                 O       0.17762514                    0.285611345—01           6.195736
 1.          DEC                 O       0.126145U3                    O.28814909E—0 1          14.3836149
 13          TREND               0      —O.13'9651E—0'                 0.21085275—03           _14 .97 8530
                                Table A6
                 Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Woo Specification
                           Second Subsample




DEPEMD!NT V&8IABLE                N
non 1979—1) INIIL    1984- 5
OBSERVATIONS                56         DER!ES OF FREEDOR       5)
R*'2            0.36595332             B8ARS2          0.3025435
SSR         0.$2930263D—02             SRI        ).12878685D'Ol
ooaaIl-NATSOM 2.07983336
Q( 21) 23,7678- LA3 SIWIFI&NE  LEVEL 0. 304443
O.      LABEL            CO!?FECIET
                       S..
                                      ST&8D. EflOR                              r—srArIsrI
                                      ..e...e..ssa        *...S****3*.        SS 5$ SI
  1    M                1         0.5531918              3.1398928            3. 954397
  2    M                2         3.1563791$—31          0.1413066           0.1104544
  3                     1        —0.1645611              3.1342416           —1. 226603
  4    YU               2         0.1838479              0.1384012            .1. 328369
  5    YF               1        —0.70435723-03          0.39370203—31      —3.78374950-02
  6    YF               2        —3.62515220-32          3.88531198D-01     —0 .70 610 7 6D—3 1




DEPENDENT VARIABLE                YU
FR33 1979—13 UNTIL 19816- 5
OBSUVATIOIS                 56          DEGREES 0? FREEDON             50
S$2             0.95671947             8849*02            0.9523914k
$58         0.59428777D—02             SI!            0. 109021310—31
DU3 BIN—WATSON 2.09380102
3( 21)a 3.94789                  sIGNIfl:LN:1 LEVEL 0.979580
13.   LABEL            LAG           :3e?Fr:LEwr     5FAND. 88131              T- STATISFI:
S.. *5*5*5*            5*$         *5*S 5*5 0* *5 5                           0* 5* 5* S *5* *5
  1    H                1        —0.95359030—31          3.118162311        —0.8053144
  2    H                2        —0.63265710"02          3.1196201          —0. 52888860-01
  3    YU               1             1.514461           0.1136394            13. 3 26 90
  16   YU               2 -3.5819325                     0.11716 07          —4 .9 6 69 61
  S    YF               1         0.1524899              0.7607773)01         2.004396
  6    YF               2        —0.1015794              3 • 716947433.01   —1. 356677
                                   Table A6 (continued)




DEPENDENT VUIABLF             YF
?R)   1979—10 ØW?IL 1984- 5
DBSERVIT.I0NS            56         DEGREES 3? PEUD3N
                0.49025602          RBAR**2         0.4392 816
SSR         0.20292473D—01          SE!        3.23 1457060—31
DUR8IN—WATS3I 1.93404629
( 21 13.8874               SIGNIFICANCE LEYEL 3.964935
$0.  LABEL           LAG       :oEprr:LENr     StUD. ERR3R
*** *•*****                                                          T-STATISrI:
                                                                    ** ** .* * *** **
 1     M              1       0.1736991
  2    N
                                                     3.2188299     0.7937180
                      2    -0.3205sU                 3.2213t112    —1.450155
 3     YU                     3.22119397
       YU
                      1                              0.2099897      1.071194
                      2       0.74931890-02          0.216965      3.34611130-01
 )     YF             1       0. 3616629             3.1405810      2. 57 26 30
 6     YF             2    —0.24278750—01            0.1394324    —0. 1753075
                                    Table A7
                 First Stage Regressions -- Meese Specification
                                  Whole Sample
DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS             35       DEGREES OF FREEDOM          123
R**2           0.10216970         RBAR**2          0.02187593
SSR        0.13875913             SEE          O.335875L13E—O1
DURBIN-WATSON 1.79771311
Q( 33)—    27.2209          SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.7149935
NO.    LABEL          LAG        COEFFI C lENT     STAND. ERROR             T—STATISTIC
***   *******
   1   JAN             0     —0. 201 50514E—01    0.101 2703E—01       —1 .989778
  2    FEB             0      0.1511887OE—O1      0.101 2703E—01        1   .52914142
   3   MAR             0     —O.52142652E—02      0.101 2703E—01      —0.5176892
  14   APR             0     —0.60032014E—03      0. 96 95 888E—02    —0.6191 14914E—01
  5    MAY             0     —O.66214253E—02      0. 9695888E—02      —0.6832023
  6    JUN             0      0.5618378E—02       0.9695 888E—02       0.57914599
  7    JUL             0     —O.75803141E—02      0.101 2703E—01      —0.71485260
  8    AUG             0     —0.9217217E—02       0.101 2703E—01      —0.91016014
  9    SEP             O      0.1)472035E—01      0.101 2703E—01        1 .1453571
 10    OCT             0      0.1167631E—01       0.101 2703E—01        1.152986
 11    NOV             0     —0. 736801 4E—02     0.101 2703E-01      -0.7275596
 12    DEC             O      0.1139897E—01       0.101 270 3E—01       1 .125599




DEPENDENT VARIABLE              EM
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS            135          DEGREES OF FREEDOM       123
R**2            0.70898068           RBAR**2          0.68295456
SSR        O.321437673E—O1           SEE        0.1 6239'486E—01
DURBIN—WATSON 2.39272750
Q( 33)—  21.9080         SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0. 9296 28
NO.     LABEL           LAG          COEFFICIENT     STAND. ERROR           T-STATISTI C
***    *******          ** *                                            * ****** * * * * *

  1     JAN              O      0.2990533E—O1       0. 14896389E—02     6. 107629
  2     FEB              o     —0.15881455E—01      0. 14896389E—02    —3.21414136
  3     MAR              o      0.1635110E—01       O.14896389E—O2      3.339420
  14    APR              O      O.71219614E—02      0. 4687936E—O2      1.519211
  5     MAY              O     —O.21885147E—01      0.14687 936E—02    —14.   6681467
  6     JUN              O     —O.11236675E--02     0.1468793 6E—02   —0.9037399
  7     JUL              o      O.3138739E—02       0. 14896389E—02    0.61410313
  8     AUG              0      O.3318208E—02       0. 14896389E—02    0.67768146
  9     SEP              O      0.8235952E—02       0. 14896389E—02     1.6820146
 10     OCT              0      0.1200389E—01       0. 14896389E—02     2.1451581
 11     NOV              0     —0.63L12501E—01      O.14896389E—02     —12.953143
 12     DEC              0      0.3029750E—01       0. 14896389E—02     6.187723
                                 Table A7 (continued)


DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS            135        DEGREES OF FREEDOM      123
R**2            0.833124817        RBAR**2         0.818226246
SSR         0.13119637             SEE        0.32659141 2E—O1
DURBIN-WATSON 2.1414397263
Q( 33)—       51.8380
                   --
                              SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.1 958214E—01
NO.     LABEL           LAG       COEFFI CIENT    STAND. ERROR          T-STATISTIC
***    *******
  1     JAN              0      O.9267329E—O1     0.981471 83E—02      9.14111147
  2     FEB              0     —O.49734142E—O1    0.981471 83E—02    —5.0506214
  3     MAR              0     —O.71461809E—O2    0.98147 1 83E—02   —0.7577607
  14   APR               0     —O.99t15O5E—02     0. 9142796OE—O2    -1.05141470
  5    MAY               0      O.2236103E—01     O.91427960E—02       2.371778
  6    JUN               0      0.1 635935E—O1    O.9142796OE—O2       1.735195
  7     JUL              O     0.10914062         0.9814 71 83E—02     11 .   110141
  8     AUG              O      O.7214O9141E—O1   0.981471 83E—02       7.353312
                                                                      —
  9     SEP              O     —0.1567971         0.981471 83E—02       15.923014
 10    OCT               O     —O.1172921E—O1     0.98147 1 83E—02    —1.1911214
 11     NOV              0     —O.7262021E—01     0.981471 83E—02     -7.3714720
 12     DEC              0      O.1838053E—O1     0.98147 1 83E—O2     1.866577
                                       Table A8
                        Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Meese Specification
                                     Entire Sample




 DEPENDENT VARIABLE
 FRON 197(4— 1 (INIL 19011— 5
 OBSERVATIONS           125      D!3PEES 0? FREEDOM      117
 R**2          0. 130683111      RBAR**2          0.07867273
SSR       ).26126653D—01         SEE         3.149433840-01
DØRBIN—VATSON 2.04308680
Q( 33)= 20.8424            SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.950416
NO.   LABEL           LA       COEFFICINI I      STAND. EaloR
.* sees...             5**                                                       • T—STATISrI:
      1                        1     —0.21400201           0.9 08 56 19 D—O I
   2                                                                              —2.6(41759
           tM                  2      0.14866310—31       0.92881480-01           0.1 600567
   3                           3      0.   119 1779       3.92496660- 01           1. 2884 56
   (4                          11    0.1l682567DO3        0.91571960-01          —0.51135 39D—02
   S                                 —0 .6178461D.O1
   6
                               1                          0.49391 14D—01         —1. 250 925
                            2        '0.66*3259D—01       0.52606 770-01         —1.2629 111
   7       AY                  3      0.22926380-01       0.5 24 10790-01
   3                                  0. 117693 7
                                                                                 0.4374363
                               (4
                                                          0.14 90186 2D—0 I       2.400999




DEPENDENT VARIABLE
P101 19711— 1 tJN?IL 1984- 5
OBSERVATIONS               125             DE3REES or FREEDOM          117
                    0. 20139786            RBAR**2          0.15361825
SSR             0.867*01520-01             SEE         3.272280890-01
DD!BEN-WATSOR 1.98094685
Q( 33)a   25.866*                   sIGwIFr:Ae LEVEL      0 • 807035
NO.   LABEL               LA           COUPE dEN T
5*5       *5*50*          *5*                              STAID. UlOR             T—STATIS! !
  1         I4                                             *$*******s **
           EM
                           I        —0.39561550—01        0.16551175            —0. 23897 39
  2                        2         0.2833 1151
  3                                                       0. 1692378              * .67*2*3
                           3         0.2820246            3.1 685366              1. 673373
  (4
                           4        —0.1668521            0.1668517              —1. 000003
 S                         I        —0.3*06139
 6                                                        0.8999*76D—0 I         —3. 784820
                           2        —0.17111965           0 .958539200 1         —1.78914*
 7                         3
 9
                                    —O.*333082D01         0.95119681001         —0.453 10
                           4        —0.1724652            0.89316000—01          —1.930955
                                            Table A9
                       First Stage Regressions -— Meese Specification
                                       First Subsample
DEPENDENT VARIABLE              ts
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS               78       DEGREES OF FREEDOM               66
R**2            0.20777806          RBAR**2             0.075714107
SSR        0. 69327L1214E-O1        SEE            0.3214101 114E-01
DURBIN-WATSON 1 .703861409
Q( 214)    28. 14299          SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.2142327
NO.    LABEL            LAG        COEFFI CIENT         STAND. ERROR              T-STATISTI C
***   *******                    * **** * *** * **      ** ** * ** * * * * *
   1   JAN               O     —0.5119039E—02          0.13231 37E—O1          —0.3868865
  2    FEB               O      0.2136931E—O1          0.13231 37E—01            1.6150149
     3       MAR               O       O.55631492E—O2      0.13231 37E—O1       0.1420)4773
     14      APR               0      —0.2238173E—O2       0.1 224987E—01      —0.1827099
     5       MAY               0      —O.685L599E—O3       0.1 2214987E-01     —O.55956149E-O1
     6       JUN               O       0.2250513E—O1       0.1 2214987E—O1       1 .837173
     7       JUL               O       O.2292313E—03       0.1 2214 987E—01     0. ,871 296E—O1
     8       AUG               o      —0.10552147E—O1      0.1 2214987E—01     —0.861143149
     9       SEP               O       0.15714U4OE—O1      0.1 2214987E—O1       1.285271
 10          OCT               0       O.3171382E—01       0.13231 37E—01        2.396866
 11          NOV               O      —0.2295614LIE—O1     0.13231 37E—01       —1.735001
 12          DEC               O       O.2191650E-O1       0. 13231 37E—O1       1 .65614014




DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1973- 14 UNTIL 1979- 9
OBSERVATIONS              78              DEGREES OF FREEDOM        66
R**2             0.697035514              RBAR**2        0.61465141146
SSR         0.16871O50E—O1                SEE        0.159881 82E—01
DURBIN-WATSON          2.1420149607
Q(        214)     16.21478           SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL   0. 87 8923
NO.          LABEL            LAG         COEFFICIENT       STAND. ERROR          T—STATISTIC
***        *******            ***
     1       JAN               o       O.23665O4E—01       0.65271 48E—02        3.625632
     2       FEB               0      —O.1395385E—O1       0.65271 148E—02      —2.137817
     3       MAR               O       0.1366276E—02       0.65271 148E—02      0.2093220
     14      APR               O       O.9760811E—02       0. 6042965E—O2        1.615235
     5       MAY               O      —0.183i41450E—01     0. 6O42965E—02       —3. 035679
     6       JUN               O      —0.8O45394E—O2       0. 6042965E—02       —1.331365
     7       JUL               O      —0.1765309E—014      0. 60142965E—02     —0. 2921 263E—02
     8       AUG               0      —0.21466725E—02      0. 60142965E—02     —0.14081978
     9       SEP               0       0.1031 229E—O1      0. 6O'42965E—02       1.7061495
 10          OCT               O       O.1363663E—O1       0.65271 118E—02       2.089217
 11          NOV               0      —O.63147696E—O1      0.65271 148E—02      —9.725069
 12          DEC               O       0.2861766E—O1       0.65271 148E—02       14.38141405
                                              Table A9 (continued)

DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1973— 14 UNTIL 1979— 9
OBSERVATIONS                          78        DEGREES OF FREEDOM     66
R**2                    0. 873 601 914          RBAR**2        0.85253559
SSR        0.55771401 2E—O1                     SEE        0.29O69929E—O1
DURBIN-WATSON 2.85585792
Q(        214)—     53.89914               SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL      O .   L1396O5E-O3
NO.           LABEL             LAG            COEFFI CIENT         STAND. ERROR            T -STAT 1ST IC
***         *******                           ** **   ***** * **
     1       JAN                 0           0.9235623E-O1         0.11 86775E—O1       7.782119
     2       FEB                 0          —0.30580141 E—O1       0.11 86775E—O1      —2.576766
     3       MAR                  O         —O.1325639E—O1         0.11 86775E—01      -1.117010
     14      APR                 O          —O.28228014E—01        0.1 O98724OE—O1     —2.569128
     5       MAY                  0          0.1719107E—01         0.1 O98714OE—O1      1.5614617
     6       JUN                 0           0.13145882E-01        0.1 O9874OE—O1       1 .2214932
     7       JUL                 0           0.1218618             0.1 O987140E-O1      11.09105
     8       AUG                 0           0. 6O914873E—O1       0.1 O987140E—O1      5.51471147
     9       SEP                 O          —0.11428875            0.1 098714OE—O1     —13.002467
 10          OCT                 0          —O.16891429E—01        0.11 86775E—O1      —1.1423546
 11          NOV                 O          —0.81435571E—O1        0.11 86775E—01      —7. 107979
 12           DEC                0           O.1590093E—O1         0.11 86775E—O1       1
                                                                                            .3398143
                                    Table AlO
                  Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Meese Specification
                                First Subsample




DEPENDENT VARIABLE
F83M 1974— 1 !JNTIL 1979- 9
OBSERVATIONS            69            DEGREES OF FREEDOM        65
R**2            0.09902869            RB&R*2          0.057414514)
SSR        0. 13103390D—01            SEE        0. 114 198261D—3I
DUaBIL4—WATSON 1.98021598
3( 2i4)   12.82914        SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL          0 .9688f49
13.      LABEL           LAG       CD! FF1 I EN?       S?AID. fEB31
***     *******                                         ***$.**** p
                                                                                   T— S TA T ISP 1
                                                                              ****** ******
   2
                          1
                          2
                                —0.21147633
                                 0.1123568
                                                      3.1231881
                                                      0 .t220968
                                                                            -l. 7143381
                                                                            0.9202272
   3                      I      0.7632679D—01        0.7 07 1436 10—0 1     1.078845
   '4                     2     -3.13191814D—01       0.72153 '49D-O1      -0.1828303




DEPENDENT VARIABLE               AY
FROM 19714— 1 (JNTIL 1979- 9
3BSEEV&TIONS              69          D!PEES 3F FREEDON            65
R*S2             0.214159804          RBAB**2          0.206591487
SSR         0.38018223D-01            SE!          3.2'4184618D—31
DYRBIR-VATSON 1.914534114
Q( 214)z      25.1142          SIGNIFICAI:1 LEVEL 0.399575
NO.     LABEL           LAG        COEFFICIENT    STAID. maoR                  T—STATISTI:
***     •***e**
  I                       1    —0.114580914D—01       0. 2098326           —O.69'48844D—01
  2                       2     0.18611455            3.2079736             0.8950436
  3                      1     —0.5105021             0.1205397             -'4.   237021
  1$
         LY               2    —0.9480232D—O1         0. 12027             —0. 7713608
                                          Table All
                       First Stage Regressions -- Meese Specification
                                      Second Sub8ample
DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1979— 3 UNTIL 1984— 6
OBSERVATIONS            64                     DEGREES OF FREEDOM     52
R**2           0 .19966327                     RBAR**2        0.03036127
SSR                0. 52376627E—01             SEE        O.31737O89E-01
DIJRBIN-WATSON 1.77630185
Q(        24)—     20.3702              SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.675539
NO.          LABEL            LAG           COEFFICIENT     STAND. ERROR                   T-STATISTI C
***         *******                        ** **   * ** * ** * *
             JAN               O         —O.3818833E—Ol            0.141 9326E—O1        -2.690597
     2       FEB               O          O.843196OE—02            0.1 141   9326E—01    0.5940821
     3       MAR               O         —0.1 6514603E—01          0.1 295661E—O1        —1.277033
     14      APR               O         —0.13682855—02            0.1295661 E—01       -0.1056052
     J       MAY               0         —0.133331 8E—Ol           0.1295661 E—Ol        —1 .0290614
     6       JUN               0         —0.8611397E—02            0.1295661 E—01       —0. 6646334
     7       JUL               0         —O.1661631E—Ol            0.1 41    9326E—01    —1 170719
     8       AUG               0         —0.4553269E—02            0.141 9326E—01       —0. 3208051
     9       SEP               O          0.1968720E—01            0.1 i419326E—0l        1.387081
 10          OCT               0         —0.1236870E—Ol            0.1 4l9326E—O1       —0.8714488
 11          NOV               0          0.11338105—01            0.1 1419326E—01       0.7 988369
 12          DEC               0         —O.1222063E—02            0.141 93265—01       —0.86101 67E—01




DEPENDENT VARIABLE                        AM
FROM 1979— 3 UNTIL 1984— 6
OBSERVATIONS                       64          DEGREES OF FREEDOM      52
R**2                   0.79503134              RBAR**2         0.75167259
SSR      0.11835911E—O1                        SEE         O.15O86871E-O1
DURBIN-WATSON 2.47717303
          24)—    42.4501               SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.11 4851 E—O1
NO.           LABEL          LAG            COEFFICIENT     STAND. ERROR                   T-STATISTIC
     1       JAN              O           O.3739368E—O1            O.67Z170514E—02        5.542224
     2       FEB              O          —0.1820140E—01            0. 67 470 54 E—02     —2. 697681
     3       MAR              O           O.3098135E—01            0.61591 89E—02         5.030102
     4       APR              O           O.8012692E-02            0.61 591 89E—02        1 . 300933
     5       MAY              O          —O.2780041E—O1            0.61591 89E—O2        —14.513647
     6       JUN              O           O.311$88146E—02          0.61 591 89E—02       0.5112436
     7       JUL              O           0.1055045E—O1            0. 67i47O54E—02        1.563712
     8       AUG              O           O.1096818E—O1            0. 6747054E—02         1.625626
     9       SEP              O           O.608'4961E—02           O.6711705'4E—O2       0.90186914
 10          OCT              O           0.10014461E—O1           0. 674 70 514 E—02     1 .488740
 11          NOV              O          —O.6336267E—01            0. 674 70 54E—02      —9.391162
 12          DEC              O           0.3231331 E—O1           0. 6747054E—02         11.7892147
                               Table All (continued)


DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROM 1979— 3 UNTIL 19814— 6
OBSERVATIONS              6       DEGREES OF FREEDOM        52
R**2              0.85060257      RBAR**2          0.81899927
SSR          O.60357975E—01       SEE         0.3140691492E-0l
DURBIN-WATSON 2.06587579
Q(   214)—   21.8286         SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL O.589499
NO.      LABEL          LAG      COEFFICIENT       STAND. ERROR           T-STAT ISTI C
***    *******
                             O.9305375E—Ol
        JAN
                                                                    —6.107356
                        O                       0.1 52363'4E—0l
  2     FEB             O   —O.7271923E—O1      0.1 52363'4E—O1       .7727149
  3     MAR             O   —O.14728581E—02     0.1390881 E—01      —0.3399702
  14    APR             0    O.21412861E—02     0.1390881 E-01       0.17314771
  5    MAY              0    O.3115063E—Ol      0.1390881 E—01        2.239633
  6    JUN              o    O.1328258E—01      0.1390881 E—01       0.95149761
  7    JUL              O    O.9262199E—O1      0.1 523 6314E—01     6.079018
  8    AUG              O    O.91859148E—O1     0. 15236314E—01      6.028973
  9    SEP              o   —0.18031453         0.1 523634E—01      —11.83652
 10    OCT              O   —O.553112OE—02      0. 15236314E—01     —0.3630216
 11    NOV              O   —O.5853762E-O1      0.1 5236314E—O1      —3.8'41   9714
 12    DEC              0    O.2135605E—O1      0.   15236314E—01     1   .1401652
                                       Table A12
                     Fundamentals Autoregressions —— Meese Specifications
                                  Second Subsample




 DEPENDENT VARIABLE
FROB 1979—10 N?IL 1984— 5
OBSERVATIONS                    56        D!REIS 0? FREEDOM        52
R**2                0.2723438             RBAR**2          0.2303623i
SSR             3.77773896D-02            SEE         3.12229685D.01
DIJRBIK-gATSON 1.885621143
Q(       21) 12.7608             SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.916772
NO.
***        ****,
            LABRL          LA        CON??! CIEN T   STAND. UIOR               T—STATIS? I:
                                                                              es **   * **. * *
                            1        —0.3372538          0.1228882           —2. 74 4396
     2                      2        —0.3370285          0 • 123 1 769       —2.736133
     3                      I        —0.9233363D.01      0.64025170-01       —1. *4 21*7
     4                      2        —0.1782546          0.6427569D—01       —2. 773282




DEPENDERT VARIABLE
PEON 1979—10 UNTIL 1984— 5
OBSERVA?ION$            56                DEGREES 0? ?REND3N       52
R$e2            3.11815268               RBAI*2            0.06727687
SSN        0.311308680D—01                SEE         O.25686223D—31
DUIDIN-VATSO* 2.10797283
3(       21p—   13.6633          SIGIIFI:&R1 LEVEL 0.88362;
NO.        LAB!!.         LAG           COEFFICIENT       SIAND. ERROR
p.,                                                                            T—STA TISTI
  1
  2
                           I
                           2
                                     ' 0. 218938*       0.2531042
                                                                      p
                                                                            —0.8*82556
                                      0.3883969         0.2587107            1. 50 1279
  3                        1         —0.1386*48         0. 134 4132         —1.33 10 22
                           2         —0.20849*3         3.1349994           —1.54111110
                                           —32—




                                        Table 1
                                     Parameter Estimates



                                                                   *
                               0                              a            a
                                                               1               2



 Equation (14):


  (1) 1974:1 — 1984:5      1.3340           .1968           .2951       .0935
                           (.2122)         (.1635)         (.2771)     (.0922)

  (2) 1974:1 — 1979:9       .1759           .1853           .3253      1.4410
                           (.2152)         (.2025)         (.2383)     (.1747)

  (3) 1979:10 — 1984:5      .5319           .4944          1.3371       .8662
                           (.2789)         (.2119)         (.4203)     (.1804)




Equation (14)':
  (4) 1974:1 — 1984:5       .4687           .5000
                           (.3321)

  (5) 1974:1 — 1979:9       .4921           .5000
                           (.2557)

 (6) 1979:10 — 1984:5       .2379           .5000
                           (.5407)




 Notes:

    1. Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses.
    2. Symbol, defined in the text.
                                                 —33—



                                                 Table 2

                                            Variability Measures

                                    (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)


                            R.h.s. of (8)
                                               cY Or c7,u0       (1) —     (2)   mm cI or          (1) —    (4)

  (1) 1974:1 — 1984:5            1.895           16.830            —14.934           1.556           .339
                                                                    (4.195)                        (2.990)

 (2) 1974:1 —     1979:9        2.584           650.340         —647.756            82.751     -80.166
                                                                (1172.419)                    (260.921)

 (3) 1979:10 — 1984:5           9.665            53.019            —43.354           4.885          4.781
                                                                   (41.473)                        (4.011)




 (4) 1974:1 — 1984:5            3.710            55.610            —51.900            .014          3.696
                                                                   (42.530)                         (.998)

 (5) 1974:1 — 1979:9.           2.926            38.438            —35.512           1.582          1.345
                                                                   (17.700)                        (7.945)

(6) 1979:10 —     1984:5        3.113           131.500         —128.387              .216         2.902
                                                                (297.648)                          (4.662)




Note.:
   1. Line. (1) to (3) are based on equation         (14),   line. (4) to (6) on equation (14)',
           as   described
                        in the text.
   2.    Asynptotic standard errors in parentheses
   3. Synbols defined ii      the   text.
   4. All figures are tine.
