                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          TAXATION AND THE INTERNATIONAL MOBILITY OF INVENTORS

                                           Ufuk Akcigit
                                        Salomé Baslandze
                                        Stefanie Stantcheva

                                       Working Paper 21024
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21024


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




We thank Jeremy Greenwood, Dirk Krueger, Jim Poterba, Emmanuel Saez, Ivan Werning, participants
at the MIT Public Finance lunch and the Penn \Growth Reading Group" for useful comments and feedback.
We thank Olof Ejermo, William Kerr, Francesco Lissoni, Ernest Migu elez, Valerio Sterzi, Myriam
Mariani, Alfonso Gambardella for sharing their data. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges financial support
from Ewing M. Kauffman Foundation and from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth. We thank Jacob R. Dorabialski
for help with the analysis. We especially thank Nina Roussille for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ufuk Akcigit, Salomé Baslandze, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors
Ufuk Akcigit, Salomé Baslandze, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 21024
March 2015, Revised October 2015
JEL No. F22,H21,H24,H31,J61,O33,O38

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effect of top tax rates on inventors' international mobility since 1977. We put
special emphasis on “superstar” inventors, those with the most abundant and most valuable patents.
We use panel data on inventors from the United States and European Patent Offices to track inventors'
locations over time and combine it with international effective top tax rate data. We construct a detailed
set of proxies for inventors' counterfactual incomes in each possible destination country including,
among others, measures of patent quality and technological fit with each potential destination. Exploiting
the differential impact of changes in the top tax rate on inventors of different qualities, we find that
superstar top 1% inventors are significantly affected by top tax rates when deciding where to locate.
The elasticity to the net-of-tax rate of the number of domestic superstar inventors is relatively small,
around 0.03, while the elasticity of the number of foreign superstar inventors is around 1. Inventors
who work in multinational companies are more likely to take advantage of tax differentials. On the
other hand, if the company of an inventor has a higher share of its research activity in a given country,
the inventor is less sensitive to the tax rate in that country.


Ufuk Akcigit                                        Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Chicago                               Littauer Center 232
1126 East 59th Street                               Harvard University
Saieh Hall, Office 403                              Cambridge, MA 02138
Chicago, IL 60637                                   and NBER
and NBER                                            sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
uakcigit@uchicago.edu

Salomé Baslandze
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104
salomeb@sas.upenn.edu
1        Introduction
In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone, and created the Bell Telephone Company
one year later. By 1886, more than 150,000 people in the United States owned telephones. In 1916,
James L. Kraft patented a pasteurization technique for cheese and established his company, Kraft
Foods Inc., that would grow into a conglomerate responsible for creating some of the United States’
most popular food products and employing more than 100,000 people. In 1968, Ralph Baer created
a TV game unit that allowed players to control on-screen action with paddle controls. Today, the
video gaming industry is worth $66 billion. In the early 1970s, Michael Ter-Pogossian developed
the positron emission tomography (PET) scanner, used today in countless medical examinations.
In the mid-1970s, Samar Basu, through a series of patents, invented the technology that allowed
the lithium ion batteries used in innumerable consumer products to be recharged multiple times.
In 1981, Charles Simonyi started developing some of Microsoft Office’s most profitable products.
In addition to being very prolific inventors, these innovators had something else in common: they
were all immigrants.
        According to World Intellectual Property Organization data, inventors are highly mobile geo-
graphically with a migration rate around 8%.1 But what determines their patterns of migration?
In particular, how does tax policy affect migration? The fear of a “brain drain” and the exodus of
economically valuable agents in response to higher taxation has led to a vivid public debate regard-
ing the taxation of high income people. For instance, in response to the New York Times’ (Feb,
2013) article entitled “The Myth of the Rich Who Flee From Taxes,”2 following Gerard Depardieu’s
Russian exodus for tax purposes, Forbes issued an article entitled “Sorry New York Times, Tax
Flight of the Rich Is Not a Myth.”3 In this paper, we study the effects of top income taxes on the
international migration of inventors, who are key drivers of technological progress.
        While an important issue, international migration responses to taxation have remained under-
explored due to the lack of a large-scale international panel dataset. One important exception is
the study of the migration responses of football players, a set of economic agents very different
from inventors, by Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013). In our analysis, we use a unique international
panel data on all inventors from the U.S. and European patent offices in an unusual way, namely to
track the international location of inventors since the 1970s. The benchmark data is a panel data
from the Disambiguated Inventor Data by Lai et al. (2012), based on inventors who patent with
the United States Patent Office (USPTO). The focus is on the 8 OECD countries that represent
the bulk of USPTO patents for the period 1977-2000: Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain,
Italy, Japan, Switzerland, and the United States. The new disambiguated European inventor data
is from Coffano and Tarasconi (2014). The U.S. and European patent offices together account for
a very large fraction of worldwide patents, so that our sample contains most of the universe of
    1
     For a recent study using this data, see Miguelez and Fink (2013). High skilled workers are in general more mobile
that low skilled workers, with inventors being among most high-skilled immigrants.
   2
     Article by James B. Stewart, published February 15, 2013.
   3
     Article by Paul Roderick Gregory, published February 17, 2013.


                                                          1
                                                                                   Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

inventors who patent. We combine this inventor data with international effective marginal top tax
rate data from Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2014).
       Particularly interesting are “superstar” inventors, namely those with the most abundant and
most valuable innovations. The distribution of inventor quality, as captured by the citations that
an inventor’s patents receive– an often-used measure of the economic value of patents – is highly
skewed:4 As can be seen in Figure 1, while the median and mean inventors have, respectively, 11
and 42 lifetime citations, the average top 1% superstar inventor has 1019 citations.

                    Figure 1: Distribution of citations-weighted patents
                     .025




                                                                                Shunpei Yamazaki 53,7801patentsF
                                                                                The1most1prolific1inventor1until12008
                     .02




                                                                                Born:1Japan
                                                                                Works:1Japan

                                                                          Salman Akram 57131patentsF
                     .015




                                                                          Micron1Technology
                                                                          Born:1Nigeria
                                                                          Works:1U.S.
                     .01




                                                                   Edwin Herbert Land155351patentsF
                                                                   Founder1of1Polaroid
                                                                   Born:1U.S.
                                                                   Worked:1U.S.
                     .005
                     0




                            0                      200                     400                                          600
                                                    Citations−weighted Patents

                                        Top 10% Inventors                 Top 5% Superstar Inventors
                                        Top 1% Inventors



Notes: This figure plots the distribution of citations-weighted patents (see formula (1)) across inventors in the U.S.
Patent Office data 1977-2000 from 8 countries: Canada, Great Britain, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, Switzerland,
and the United States. For the sake of visual clarity, the x-axis is truncated at 600 citations. For a detailed description
of the data, see Section 2.3.

       There are three major challenges that arise when studying the migration responses to taxation.
These challenges come in addition to the aforementioned usual obstacle of lack of international
panel data – a hurdle we are able to resolve in this paper thanks to the use of the patent data.
First, conceptually, migration decisions should depend on the counterfactual income that an agent
expects to receive in each potential location, which is naturally not observed. Second, migration
decisions should depend on the counterfactual average tax rate that the agent expects to pay in each
potential location, which itself depends on the (unknown) counterfactual income earned. Finally,
average tax rates may be endogenous to other factors in a country and in a given year.
       Our strategy to study mobility proceeds in three steps in order to address these three chal-
   4
       See Section 2.3 for references to the literature studying patent citations.


                                                              2
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

lenges, making use of some unique features of the patent data. First, we construct detailed proxies
for inventors’ counterfactual earnings in each potential destination country, which include, among
others, measures of inventors’ qualities. Indeed, the patent data provides us with a rare opportu-
nity to directly measure inventor productivity and quality. Our benchmark measure of quality is
citations-adjusted patents, but we also consider the number of patents, average citations per patent,
the maximum citations per patent, as well as measures of the breadth of patents and breadth of
impact of an inventor.5 We focus on inventors who are employees of companies and, hence, not the
owners of their patents.
    The quality measures based on citations, are important determinants of inventors’ incomes,
directly and indirectly. Directly, more citations mean a higher economic value of the patent (Tra-
jtenberg, 1990) and companies would typically reward inventors through bonuses or “fair-share”
agreements. Indirectly, employers should try to promote and retain their star employees, as char-
acterized by high patent qualities (see also the papers reviewed in Section 2.4 which document the
link between patent citations and income).
    In addition to inventor quality, we also proxy for counterfactual earnings through a variety of
variables, such as inventors’ technological field, their technological fit with each potential destina-
tion country, their tenure, and ability-technological field-country specific trends. We also exploit
information about what type of institution the inventor works for, notably whether he is employed
by a multinational, and the share of the innovative activity of his company performed in each
potential destination country.
    Based on our benchmark quality measure (and for each of the other measures), we construct
a corresponding quality distribution, conditional on region of origin and year, and determine the
rank of each inventor in this distribution.6 We define superstar inventors as those in the top 1%
of the quality distribution, and similarly construct the top 1-5%, the top 5-10%, and subsequent
quality brackets.
    Second, regarding the counterfactual average tax rate, we focus on the elasticity of migration
to the top marginal income tax rate. The resulting elasticity is a reduced form parameter and our
estimates are not necessarily interpretable as the “elasticities of migration to net-of-tax income,”
for several reasons. First, top marginal tax rates are not equal to effective top average tax rates
because of the nonlinearity of the tax system. This should be a minimal concern in the case of
very high earners who are well above the top tax bracket. Second, there are other potentially
relevant taxes for inventors, such as capital or corporate taxes.7 To minimize the latter concern,
   5
     See Section 2.3 for a detailed description of how we construct quality measures for inventors and for alternative
definitions of “superstars.”
   6
     The three benchmark regions used to construct the per region and year quality distributions are based on
comparable patenting intensities. They are i) the U.S., ii) European countries and Canada, and iii) Japan, but we
also use per-country rankings for robustness checks (in Appendix Table A16).
   7
     Note however that we are not trying to understand the effects of the taxation of direct patent income (such as
royalties or corporate income). We are instead interested in the taxation of salary and bonus earnings, for which
personal income taxes are the main consideration. Appendix Table A14 shows that the effect of capital gains taxes
on migration is insignificant once income taxes are controlled for.


                                                          3
                                                                            Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

we restrict our benchmark sample to those inventors who are employees of companies and who are
not the assignees of the patents – this ensures that personal ordinary income tax should be the
main tax affecting decisions.8 Furthermore, firms’ decisions and institutional factors (such as the
visa system) influence the response to taxes. Incidentally, the estimated elasticity to the top tax
rate may also be interesting per se as it captures the effects of a “success” tax.
       Third, turning to the identification, the simplest strategy is to exploit variation in top marginal
tax rates across time and countries, controlling for country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and
country specific linear trends to filter out longer-term country-specific evolutions in innovation,
incomes, and migration. We do this analysis merely as a first pass as there may be other factors
correlated with top marginal tax rates which vary at the same time in a given country. Instead,
our preferred identification filters out all country-year level variation and exploits the differential
impact of changes in the top marginal tax rate on top superstar inventors and slightly lower quality
inventors within a given country and year. Top 1% inventors and those of slightly lower qualities are
similar enough to be subject to the same country-year level policies and economic effects. However,
only inventors who are actually in the top bracket are directly affected by the changes in top tax
rates. The evidence presented suggests that top 1% superstar inventors are well in the top tax
bracket. While the top 1-5% are still very likely to be in the top bracket, the likelihood of being
in the top tax bracket declines sharply as we move down through the top 5-10% to the top 10-25%
or below top 25% inventors.9 Hence, the lower quality, top 5-10%, top 10-25%, and below top 25%
groups serve as control groups for the top 1% group.10
       We perform the analysis at three, successively more detailed levels. We start by documenting
some stylized macroeconomic facts about the relation between mobility and top tax rates. Since
the 1970s there is a negative correlation between the top tax rate and the share of top quality
foreign inventors who locate in a country, as well as the share of top quality domestic inventors
who remain in their home country.
       Delving deeper into three specific case studies, we exploit the quasi-experimental variation
provided by migration or tax reforms. First, we consider the special case of Russian inventors–

   8
      We also check that our results hold for the full sample which includes non-employees in Appendix Table A16.
   9
      As explained in Section 5.1, “below top 25%” refers here to a relatively high quality group of inventors who at
some point have been or will be in the top 25%, but are not currently in the top 25%.
   10
      Conceptually, this main identification strategy is akin to a “fuzzy regression discontinuity design,” where the
quality ranking generates a fuzzy threshold above which inventors are “treated” by the top tax rate changes. The
design is fuzzy because we do not know counterfactual income and use quality rankings instead. This is similar in spirit
to papers using the differential impact of tax changes across income tax brackets (Eissa, 1995) or across households
with different non-labor income and family size (Eissa and Hoynes, 2006) rather than quality brackets like we do.
It is most closely related to the differential propensities of being “treated,” as in Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
or Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) who multiply Food Stamp program introduction by propensity to participate
(proxied by group-level food stamp participation): in our case, we interact the top tax rate with the inventor’s quality
ranking (which proxies the propensity of being in the top bracket). When choosing the control group for top 1%
inventors, there is a trade-off between maximizing comparability (i.e., choosing a group very close in quality e.g., the
top 5-10%) and minimizing the control group’s propensity of being treated (i.e., choosing a group further down the
quality distribution, e.g., the below top 25%). We therefore report the estimated coefficients for all inventor quality
groups and the implied elasticities relative to three different choices of control group.


                                                           4
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

a group whose migration opportunities were severely restricted before the collapse of the Soviet
Union. We show that, in accordance with our main identification strategy, top quality Russian
inventors, relative to lower quality Russian inventors, tended to migrate to lower top tax countries
after the Soviet Union collapsed. We then exploit two large tax reforms, namely the U.S. Tax
reform Act of 1986 and Denmark’s “Researchers’ Tax” reform of 1992.
   Finally, we estimate a full-fledged multinomial location choice model to obtain the micro elas-
ticities to top tax rates for foreign and domestic inventors. We use the two identification strategies
previously described exploiting, first, country-by-year variation in top tax rates and, second, the
differential effective impact of top tax rates on inventors of different qualities.
   We find that the superstar top 1% inventors are significantly affected by top tax rates when
choosing where to locate. As explained in the text, we provide the effects relative to several possible
control groups for the top 1% inventors. At the lower end, using the top 5-10% as a control group
yields an elasticity of the number of domestic superstar top 1% inventors to the net-of-tax rate of
0.02, which, as explained below, may be a lower bound. Using the top 10-25% or the below top 25%
as control groups yields elasticities of, respectively, 0.02 and 0.03. On the other hand, the elasticity
of the number of foreign top 1% superstar inventors to the net-of-tax rate is much larger, with
corresponding values of 0.63, 0.84, and 1. To put these numbers into perspective, the elasticity of
the number of domestic football players in Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) to the net-of-tax rate
ranges from 0.07 to 0.16 depending on the specification, and the elasticity of the number of foreign
players ranges from 0.6 to 1.3. We also find some evidence consistent with sorting by ability and
general equilibrium wage effects.
   The type and structure of companies seems important for the migration decision: Inventors
who have worked for multinationals in the previous period are more likely to take advantage of tax
differentials. On the contrary, they are much less sensitive to the tax rate in a given country if
their company has a significant share of its innovative activity in that country.
   We then perform extensive robustness checks on these benchmark results. First, we consider
five different measures of inventor quality, both static and dynamic, and alternative proxies for
earnings. Second, we contrast short-term and long-term mobility in response to taxation. Third,
we address potential selection based on patenting behavior by estimating a Heckman selection
model that exploits a 1994 reform effectively expanding patent protection in the U.S. Finally, we
reproduce the analysis on the disambiguated inventor data from the European Patent Office and
find very similar elasticities of the number of domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors to
the net-of-tax rate of, respectively, 0.02 and 0.76.

Related Literature: That high skilled migration and its drivers are important considerations
has been highlighted in the literature (see the paper by Kerr (2013) and the extensive references
therein). High-skilled immigrants account for roughly 25% of U.S. workers in innovation and
entrepreneurship and contribute disproportionately to patents or start-ups. Immigrants account
for a majority of the net increase in the U.S. STEM workforce since 1995. There seems to be a

                                                   5
                                                                           Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

positive selection among immigrants, as documented by Grogger and Hanson (2011) for foreign
Ph.D. students who stay in the U.S. and by Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) for Mexican immigrant
workers.
    In turn, not just the receiving, but also the sending country is affected. It could either be
suffering from a “brain drain,” by losing highly skilled people or gaining from a “brain gain,” if
people invest in human capital more with the prospect of immigration or from remittances. Indeed,
oversea diasporas have been studied as important determinants of knowledge flows (Foley and Kerr,
2013). Inventor migration and the formation of geographical knowledge clusters and their spillovers
have also received attention (Miguelez and Moreno (2014), Miguelez (2013), Breschi, Lissoni, and
Tarasconi (2014) and the references therein).
    Our paper adds to a recent literature that studies the international migration of people in
response to taxation. Most closely related are the papers by Kleven, Landais, Saez, and Schultz
(2014) and Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013). Kleven, Landais, Saez, and Schultz (2014) find
very high elasticities of the number of high income foreigners in Denmark using a preferential tax
scheme on high-earning foreigners implemented by Denmark in 1992 that reduced top tax rates for
3 years.11 Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) study the migration of football players across European
clubs. While we find somewhat lower elasticities for domestic inventors, Kleven, Landais, and Saez
(2013) themselves conjectured that football players might be substantially more mobile than other
high-skilled workers, because they earn most of their lifetime income over a short period and their
profession involves little country-specific capital. In addition, their sample exclusively considers
migration across European countries, while we also include the United States, Canada, and Japan.
Expanding the study to other continents might, one would expect, reduce the tax elasticities of
migration. Other related papers consider migration within countries. Bakija and Slemrod (2004)
use Federal Estate Tax returns to show that the effect of higher state taxes on the migration of
wealthy individuals across states in the U.S. is very small.12 Moretti and Wilson (2014) consider
aggregate state level effects of adopting subsidies for biotech employers –such as increase in R&D
tax incentives– on the inflows of star scientists. Very complementary to our paper is the recent
creative paper by Moretti and Wilson (2015) which considers the effects of state taxes on the
migration of star scientists across U.S. states and also finds highly significant effects of taxes on
migration.
    Estimating the elasticity of migration to the tax rate is also important for the theoretical
literature of optimal taxation with migration, as it enters the optimal tax formulas (Mirrlees, 1982;
Wilson, 1980, 1982).13 Our paper can shed some light on how big the proposed modifications to
standard optimal tax formulas have to be empirically in order to account for migration.14
  11
     By contrast, Young and Varner (2011) study the effects of a change in the millionaire tax rate in New Jersey on
migration and find small elasticities.
  12
     Liebig et al. (2007) study mobility within Switzerland, across cantons and find small sensitivities to tax rates.
  13
     See also the more recent papers by Simula and Trannoy (2010) and especially Lehmann et al. (2014) who consider
optimal nonlinear income taxation in the presence of migration.
  14
     The same applies for the macro structural literature that includes migration channels and needs to calibrate the


                                                          6
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the setting and data, as well
as a simple model of inventor migration. Section 3 shows some stylized macro facts on the relation
between top tax rates and superstar inventors’ migration. Section 4 presents quasi-experimental
evidence based on three country case studies. Section 5 describes the multinomial location model
estimation and the main results. Section 6 contains several robustness checks and extensions.
Section 7 repeats the analysis on inventors who patent with the European Patent Office. Section 8
concludes.


2     Setting, Data, and Strategy
This section provides some background information on inventors, patents, and our various datasets.
We explain how we use the unique features of patent data for the study of the effects of taxation
on inventor mobility with the help of a simple location choice model.


2.1    Inventors and patents: Background

Inventors are the authors of innovations. They can be employees of companies, work for research
institutions, or be self-employed “garage inventors.” Patents protect the intellectual property of the
innovation. They are legally granted to an assignee. The assignee is either an individual (possibly,
but not necessarily, one of the inventors on a given patent), a national, local, or state government,
an institute, a hospital or medical institute, or a university.
    Inventors seem to be more mobile than the general population, which is consistent with a
positively documented relation between skill and mobility. As summarized in Miguelez and Fink
(2013), the global migration rate in 2000 for the population above 25 years old was 1.8%, ranging
from 1.1% for the unskilled to 5.4% for those with tertiary education. In our benchmark sample,
2.3% of inventors move at least once over their lifetime in the sample (an average of 12 years) and
4.6% of the superstar inventors move over the same duration.


2.2    A Simple Model of Inventor Migration

To motivate our empirical analysis, consider the following very simple model of inventor migration.
There are C countries, labeled as c ∈ {1, ..., C}. The wage of inventor i in country c0 at time t is
denoted by wci 0 t . Let w̃ci 0 t denote the corresponding marginal product. Index i allows the marginal
product to depend on several inventor characteristics, such as his technological class, his age, as
well as characteristics of the firm or employer he works for. If the international labor market is
perfectly competitive, each inventor is paid his marginal product, so that w̃ci 0 t = wci 0 t , ∀c0 , t, i.
    Suppose that in country c, an inventor with home country hi has to pay a tax rate τchi t on his
total income at time t. The tax rate is allowed to depend on the country of origin because foreigners
migration elasticities (see Cosar, Guner, and Tybout (2010)). The migration channel could also further bolster recent
findings that the room for higher tax revenue through more progressive taxes is limited in Guner et al. (2014).


                                                         7
                                                                           Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

can sometimes face different tax regimes in different countries. For instance, U.S. citizens are taxed
on their worldwide income.
    In addition to the income earned, there is also a net utility benefit denoted µict from locating
in country c at time t for inventor i. This benefit is person-specific and can include, among others,
a home bias, technological strengths and characteristics of the country, language differences, or
distance to the home country. It can also capture country-specific characteristics of the company
the inventor works for, such as the share of innovative activities the company performs in country
c at any given time.
    Total utility from choosing country c at time t for inventor i is given by:

                                         i       i
                                                    (1 − τchi t ) + µict
                                                                           
                                        Uct = u wct

    If to a first order there are no adjustment costs of moving, the decision of where to locate
every period is history-independent. Hence, country c will be chosen in period t if and only if
    i (1 − τ           i                i                       i
                                                                  
u wct       chi t ) + µct ∈ argmaxc0 u wc0 t (1 − τc0 hi t ) + µc0 t .
    This dispenses us from having to make potentially unrealistic assumptions about the expecta-
tions of future tax rates, on which there is little empirical evidence and which could be country-
specific. Note that for any two countries, none of which is the home country of the inventor, the
utility from living in one of these countries does not depend on the other country – this is the
sense in which there are no adjustment costs. However, the utility from living in any country
does depend on the home country, for instance, through a home bias, geographical distance to or
language differences with the home country (which are the factors we control for in the estimation).
In that sense, the home country plays a special role because it enters as a time-invariant individual
characteristic through the index i.
    The model highlights that, conceptually, it is the average tax that should matter for the supply
of inventors in a country. The probability that inventor i locates in country c will normally depend
on the full vector of tax rates in all countries, (τ1hi t , ..., τchi t , ...., τChi t ). However, for the empirical
analysis, we make the assumption that the tax rate of any other country only has a negligible
impact on the supply of inventors in country c. This is a good approximation if there are many
possible origin and destination countries and each is relatively small. Hence, to a first order, the
probability that inventors from country k locate in country c will depend only on τckt and the
relationship should be negative.
    Note that the personal location preferences captured by µ could be so strong that they com-
pletely dominate any considerations of tax differences. As a result, strong location preferences
unrelated to net income will reduce the observed sensitivity to tax rates. In the empirical analysis,
we will explore such factors related to the type of job and company the inventor works in, in addition
to the standard factors such as home bias, language differences, and geographical distances.
    If the labor market for inventors is not perfectly flexible, and employers instead have a rigid
demand for inventors, the wage need not be equal to the marginal product and may be a function

                                                         8
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

of the tax system. This type of general equilibrium effects can be one of the potential reasons for
endogeneity of top tax rates. We return to this issue in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.


2.3     The Inventor Data

Our main data source is the Disambiguated Inventor Data (hereafter, DID) by Lai et al. (2012),
which identifies unique inventors in the U.S. Patent Office (USPTO) data. The USPTO data
contains 4.2 million granted patents and 3.1 million inventors for the period 1975-2010, which
represents 18% of worldwide direct patent filings and 26% of all patents.15
    We limit the sample to the 8 major countries which account for 89% of all patents granted by
the USPTO.16 The U.S. accounts for 55% of the USPTO patents, Canada for 2.3%, Great Britain
for 3%, Germany for 7.6%, Italy for 1.2%, Japan for 19.6%, France for 2.9%, and Switzerland
for 1.3%. These representation differences reflect the different propensities that countries have for
filing a patent with the USPTO: 58% of U.S. patent filings, 48% of Canadian filings, 19% of British
filings, 16% of German filings, 20% of Italian filings, 13% of Japanese filings, 17% of French filings,
and 12% of Swiss filings are filed with the USPTO.17
    But filing propensities and representation in the patent data are not necessarily correlated
with migration propensities. Indeed, while it is true that the largest migration corridors are the
Great Britain-U.S. and Canada-U.S. corridors, other migration corridors such as the Japan-U.S.
and Switzerland-U.S. ones are very small, although these countries have a high propensity of filing
patents in the U.S..
    The DID contains inventors’ disambiguated names and residential address, which allows us to
track the location of the inventor over time. Each of the inventor’s patents has a patent number,
application year, grant year, and assignee name. In addition, to get information on each patent’s
characteristics, such as citations or technological class, we merge the inventor data to the NBER
patent data. Because of the truncation issue for patents’ citations (more recent patents mechanically
have less time to accumulate citations), we limit the sample to the years 1977-2000. Table 1 provides
some summary statistics for the inventor data.
    Only very recently has an effort of disambiguation similar to that done for the DID been
undertaken for the European patent data (Coffano and Tarasconi (2014), Breschi, Lissoni, and
Tarasconi (2014)). Despite the fact that there has been less work on this data and that the
disambiguation algorithm is still less-well established, it offers some good advantages. The biggest
of these is that the U.S. is less represented and European countries are more represented. We
analyze inventor mobility using this data as well in Section 7.
    For the macro stylized facts in Section 3 and the case studies in Section 4, we also use a third
   15
      Patents can be filed with several offices and a direct patent filing is one of these recorded filings, while a patent
is a given, unique invention.
   16
      Appendix Table A16 shows that our results persist if we do not limit the sample to those countries.
   17
      Source: Authors’ calculations based on WIPO data available at: http://ipstats.wipo.int/ipstatv2/index.
htm?tab=patent.


                                                            9
                                                                          Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva


                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable                                                                                          Average
Patents of Superstar (Top 1%) Inventors                                                              54
Patents of Superstar (Top 5%) Inventors                                                             29.3
Patents of Non-superstar (Below Top 5%) Inventors                                                    3.5
Average patents per year while in sample                                                             1.5
Max citations per patent of Superstar (Top 1%) Inventors                                             147
Max citations per patent of Superstar (Top 5%) Inventors                                             100
Max citations per patent of Non-superstar (Below Top 5%) Inventors                                    24
Number of Patents (per country per year)                                                           12,454
Number of Inventors (per country per year)                                                         17,275
Number of Co-Inventors (per patent)                                                                  1.2
Number of immigrants (per country per year)                                                          102
Number of immigrants per year to the U.S.                                                            439
Number of immigrants per year to CA                                                                 71.2
Number of immigrants per year to CH                                                                 50.3
Number of immigrants per year to DE                                                                 78.6
Number of immigrants per year to FR                                                                 37.9
Number of immigrants per year to GB                                                                 87.3
Number of immigrants per year to IT                                                                12.12
Number of immigrants per year to JP                                                                 34.5
% Superstar (Top 1%) Inventors who move over life in sample                                         4.6%
% Superstar (Top 5%) Inventors who move over life in sample                                         3.6%
% Non-superstar (Below 5%) Inventors who move over life in sample                                   0.7%
Average duration of stay in years conditional on move (benchmark sample)                             5.3
% of inventors who are employees                                                                   83.2%
% of employees who work for multinationals                                                          75%
Average years between first and last patent (benchmark sample)                                       12
Notes: Summary statistics are based on inventor and patents data set described in Section 2.3 for the period 1977-
2000. The data includes inventors in 8 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Switzerland,
and the United States. The sample contains 4,154,792 observations with 1,868,967 unique inventors. The benchmark
estimation sample contains all inventors who have ever been in the top 25%.



alternative data source on inventors’ locations. This dataset is described in detail by Miguelez and
Fink (2013) and extracted from patent applications that are filed under the Patent Cooperation
Treaty (PCT), a treaty administered by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) that
offers some advantages for seeking international patent protection. The PCT data contains 54% of
all international patent applications, but accounts for only 8% of worldwide patent filings. However,
there has been no inventor name disambiguation and it is not yet possible to track inventors by
name over time in a panel. As a result, we cannot construct dynamic quality measures for inventors
as will be described below. The migration counts could be somewhat biased as, for instance, every
inventor could be counted several times as a migrant. However, the great advantage of this dataset
is that it contains nationality information. In addition, many smaller countries which are essentially


                                                        10
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

non-existent in the DID are better represented in the PCT data, which allows us to provide results
for a larger set of countries than our benchmark 8 countries. Thus, this data serves as a robustness
check on the results using our benchmark data, while also providing an independent and different
angle for the analysis.

Constructing quality measures for inventors: Citations received have traditionally been used
as measures of the economic and technological significance of a patent (see Pakes (1986), Pakes and
Schankerman (1986), Trajtenberg (1990), Harhoff et al. (1999), Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001),
Bessen (2008), Kogan et al. (2012), Moser et al. (2012), Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak (2013)). We
construct four different dynamic measures of the inventor’s quality, which place different importance
on the quantity versus value of an inventor’s patents. Let pij be the number of truncation-adjusted
forward citations received by patent j of inventor i. Note that this does not depend on time t, as it
counts all the forward citations that patent will ever receive, not the citations received until time
t. The truncation adjustment, which takes into account the fact that more recent patents have
                                                                                             i
less time to accumulate citations, is described in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). Let Pt−1 be
the set of patents of inventor i by the end of period t − 1. Our benchmark measure is the lagged
citations-weighted dynamic patent stock of the inventor. Formally, we denote this measure by q1it
and it is equal to:
                                                           X
                                                q1it =            pij                                          (1)
                                                            i
                                                         j∈Pt−1

Measure q1 takes into account both the quantity and the quality of an inventor’s patents, focusing
on citations accumulated as a measure of one’s influence. Our second measure, denoted by q2it is
the lagged patent count of the inventor namely:

                                                  q2it = |Pt−1
                                                           i
                                                               |                                               (2)

        i | is the cardinality of the set P i . This measure ignores the quality of patents and
where |Pt−1                                t−1
purely focuses on their quantity and is hence not our preferred measure.18 The third measure, q3it ,
is the lagged mean number of citations per patent:
                                                       P
                                                              i
                                                          j∈Pt−1 pij
                                              q3it =         i |
                                                                                                               (3)
                                                          |Pt−1

which measures the average quality of an inventor’s inventions to date. The fourth measure, q4it ,
is the max number of citations ever received on a patent by inventor i:

                                                q4it = max pij                                                 (4)
                                                            i
                                                         j∈Pt−1


 18
    Many patents have no real economic value and are never cited by any subsequent patent (see for instance Abrams,
Akcigit, and Popadak (2013)).


                                                         11
                                                                         Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

which captures the best an inventor has ever achieved and whether he ever had a “home-run”
invention. The additional results for our non-benchmark measures q2, q3, and q4 are in Section 6.
    Based on these quality measures, we can define a ranking for inventors and, in particular, identify
“superstar” inventors. We could in principle use a worldwide ranking of inventors. However, the
patenting intensity is quite different for different countries and thus the quality measures are not
necessarily directly comparable at a global level. This is why we group our 8 countries into 3
regions based on comparable patenting intensity: 1) the U.S., 2) Japan, 3) European countries and
Canada. The U.S. and Japan stand out as the biggest patenting countries with 55% and 26% of all
granted patents in the sample period (1977-2000).19 We assign each inventor to a region based on
whether his “home” country is in that region. Since we do not observe actual nationality in this
data, we call home country the country in which the inventor is first observed in our sample. We
define superstars at time t as those in top 1% of the regional quality distribution at time t. The
top 5%, top 10%, and top 25% are calculated in a similar way. These are dynamic measures in
the sense that they can change over an inventor’s life, depending on where he falls in the regional
distribution of quality in any given year.20 Henceforth, we use the notation “top 1-5%” to denote
inventors who are in the top 5% excluding the top 1%, and, similarly the top 5-10% and top 10-25%
to respectively denote inventors in the top 10% excluding the top 5%, and in the top 25%, excluding
the top 10%. Whenever we write “below top 25%” we refer to the inventors who have been or will
be in the top 25% during their lifetime, but are not currently in the top 25%.

2.4    Making use of the Inventor and Top Tax Rate Data
There are three main challenges when studying migration: Proxying for the counterfactual earnings
in each potential destination, measuring the counterfactual tax rate, and finding exogenous variation
in the tax rate. Accordingly, we take a three step approach.
Step 1: Proxying for counterfactual earnings. Our model highlighted that migration decisions
should conceptually depend on the income an inventor expects to earn in each potential destination,
which is a counterfactual, unobservable variable.21
    Fortunately, the patent data gives us a rich set of measures that can proxy for an inventor’s
counterfactual earnings. Among them are the previously described quality measures, q1 − q4, in
formulas (1)-(4). Patent quality to date is a composite, dynamic statistic that takes into account an
inventor’s past achievements. In that sense, it is a measure of inventor ability or earnings potential,
and a reflection of the inventor’s “resume.”
    Patent quality and citations should increase inventors’ incomes in both a direct and an indirect
way. First, there are direct rewards and bonuses for specific innovations, driven potentially by legal
  19
     The other countries each account from 1.16% to 8.85% of patents. Furthermore, the mean number of patents per
inventor in the U.S., Japan and the rest of the countries is, respectively, 3.95, 4.7 and 3.3.
  20
     As a check, we also defined the reference distribution and ranking separately for each country, instead of by
region, and the results, available on demand, were virtually unchanged.
  21
     Grogger and Hanson (2015) show that high ability immigrants are more likely to stay where there is a high
premium for high skill workers. Hence, proxying well for the counterfactual wage is crucial.


                                                       12
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

or contractual arrangements, such as “fair share” agreements in many countries.22 These rewards
depend on the value of the patent to the company, and patent citations are a clear marker for the
economic value of patents (Trajtenberg, 1990; Hall et al., 2001).
    Second, and most relevant for our purposes, there can be indirect compensation for an inventor’s
ability. An employer could pay a higher salary or promote star innovators, with a stellar track record
of patent quality, in order to both attract and retain crucial talent with the best patenting and
innovation ability (Chesbrough, 2006).23 For a lot of companies, patent licensing is also a major
source of revenues, justifying the need to hire the best innovators. For instance, IBM collects more
than $1 billion in licensing revenues (Ryder and Madhavan, 2014). The importance of “stars,” who
play a crucial role in the formation or transformation of many industries, has been emphasized by
Zucker and Darby (2014). Note that we are not just trying to measure the income flow from any
given patent but rather to proxy for an inventor’s full earnings using quality measures based on his
patents.

Link between income and citations: Whether it arises from the direct or indirect channel,
there appears to be a strong link between the value and quality of patents and the inventor’s
income. The distribution of rewards for patents seems to be highly skewed towards high quality
inventors. Toivanen and Väänänen (2012) find that Finnish inventors receive a temporary reward
equal to 3% of earnings for any patent grant. This hides important heterogeneities based on patent
quality: moderately cited patents (with 20 to 30 citations) generate a premium of around 20% in
annual earnings, while highly cited patents receive an earnings premium of 30% three years after
the grant. Harhoff and Hoisl (2007) use data for Germany, where the employer has the right to
claim the invention and, if he does, needs to reasonably compensate the employee in proportion to
the value of the invention. They also find that the share of the salary received as a compensation
for an invention is highly skewed with a few top inventions doubling the inventor’s salary. Top 5%
inventors receive a 20-50% increase in their salary per invention. Similarly, as a compensation for
all inventions, the top inventors’ salaries can be multiplied by a factor of 5. Giuri et al. (2007) find
in the PatVal European inventors survey that 42% of inventors receive a monetary award for their
patents, and that for 4% of the respondents, these monetary rewards are permanent. In Swedish
administrative data, numbers provided to us by Olof Ejermo show that the most cited inventors
earn 60% more than the less cited ones.Bell et al. (2015) find using administrative data covering
the population of patent applicants in the U.S. that the distribution of income is highly skewed
towards superstar inventors with many citations. In their data, the mean income at ages 40-50
is close to $700,000 for inventors with 300 citations, and around $350,000 for inventors with 100
citations.
  22
     From our own calculations and reading of the legal rules, 14% of patents in our data come from legislations where
by law the employer owns the patent, 30% come from legislations where the employee owns the patents, and the rest
come from legislations where ownership is determined by contractual agreements.
  23
     Chesbrough (2006) states that “R&D managers often use the number of patents generated (...) as a metric to
judge the productivity of (...) [a] person or organization.”


                                                         13
                                                                           Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

    As described in detail in Section 5.1, we will allow the ability of the inventor to be rewarded
differently in different countries and we will introduce ability and country specific trends in com-
pensation. Additional characteristics used to control for the counterfactual wage are described
there as well (such as quality measures, technological field, goodness of fit with the destination,
tenure/experience, ability-technological-field-country-specific trends, etc.).

Step 2: Using the effective top marginal tax rate. We use the effective top marginal tax
rate as our tax measure.24 The estimate obtained is not necessarily interpretable as “the migration
elasticity to net-of-tax income” for several reasons. First, the average tax rate is not equal to the
marginal tax rate because the tax system is not linear. Nevertheless, the top marginal tax rate
is likely a good approximation to the average tax rate for top earners.25 In addition, conditional
on being in the top tax bracket, the top tax rate is exogenous to earnings, unlike the average tax
rate. The estimate is also interesting per se since the top marginal tax rate can also be viewed as
a “success tax.”
    Second, the estimated response will combine firm and worker responses (more on this in Section
5.4) and will be a function of institutional features (e.g., visa regulations, as illustrated starkly for
the case of Russian inventors in Section 4.1), both of which prevent an easy mapping from the
reduced form estimates to behavioral primitives.
    Finally, there are other taxes which may influence migration decision, such as corporate taxes
or capital gains taxes. However, we limit the sample to inventors who are employees and who
hence receive the bulk of their income as ordinary personal income. These inventors innovate
within companies and, typically, their employers are the owners of the patents obtained. To a first
order, this allows us to abstract from other forms of taxation such as capital taxation, corporate
taxation, or royalties’ taxation, and instead focus on personal income taxation. We do control for
capital gains and corporate taxes in Appendix Table A14 and check our results on the full sample,
including non-employees in Appendix Table A16.
    There are certainly some complications with foreign tax rules and regimes across different
countries, which we are not able to account for given our data. For instance, an inventor living
temporarily in the UK but domiciled abroad can choose to some extent how to be taxed on his
income earned abroad (on an “arising basis” or on a “remittance basis”). Depending on the
inventor’s (unobservable) legal arrangements and future plans, this might lead to somewhat different
effective marginal tax rates. In the analysis, we assume that, to a first order, the inventor pays the
taxes of the country he physically resides in. The exception is for U.S. inventors who are taxed on
  24
     One way to interpret the obtained elasticity is as a reduced form estimate, where the top marginal tax rate can
act like an instrument for the top average tax rate. The implicit “first-stage” is indeed significant: from our own
computations, we see that changes in the top marginal tax rate are very strongly correlated with changes in the
average tax rate on the top 1% of the income distribution.
  25
     Reassuringly, Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) show that the elasticities obtained for football players using the
marginal top tax rate versus actual average tax rates are very similar. This hinges on the fact that those football
players considered are well above the top tax bracket in terms of earnings. In our data we find a very strong
correlation between the average tax rate on top earners (evaluated using the tax codes for different countries) and
the top marginal tax rate.


                                                         14
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

their worldwide income.26
    The effective top marginal tax rate is computed including all relevant taxes on labor income:
the individual local, state, and national tax rates, the uncapped payroll taxes, and value-added
taxes. These series come from Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2014). For U.S. citizens, who are
taxed on worldwide income, a special top tax rate is computed for each possible location choice,
taking into account the Foreign Tax Credit formula.27 We drop people in the years in which they
are observed in different countries within the same year, as it is not clear what tax rate their yearly
income was subject to in those years.28

Step 3: Identification using different quality inventors. As Appendix Figure A1 shows,
there have been many, both small and large, top tax rate changes in our sample. The simplest
identification strategy exploits these variations across countries and time (i.e., country-by-year
variation) in top marginal tax rates. In this case, it is still important to control for country fixed
effects, year fixed effects, as well as for country specific linear trends to filter out longer-term
country-specific evolutions in innovation, incomes, and migration. We view this strategy only as
a first pass, as there may be other factors correlated with top marginal tax rates which vary at
the same time in a given country, such as the business friendliness of the environment or research
stimulating policies. If there are general equilibrium effects of top taxes at the country-year level,
these will also be loaded on the estimated coefficient of top taxes.
    Our main and preferred identification instead filters out all variation at the country-year level
and exploits the differential impact of changes in the top marginal tax rate on the top superstar
inventors and slightly lower quality inventors. The idea is that the top 1% inventors and those
of slightly lower qualities should be subject to the same country-year level policies and economic
effects because they are all very high quality inventors. However, only inventors who are actually
in the top bracket are directly affected by the changes in top tax rates. The evidence presented
below suggests that top 1% superstar inventors are well in the top tax bracket. While the top
1-5% are still very likely to be in the top bracket, the likelihood of being in the top tax bracket
declines sharply as we move down through the top 5-10% to the top 10-25% or the below top 25%
of inventors.29
    Conceptually, this main identification strategy is akin to a “fuzzy regression discontinuity de-
sign” where the quality ranking generates a fuzzy threshold above which inventors are “treated” by
the top tax rate changes. The lower quality, top 5-10%, top 10-25%, or below the top 25% groups
serve as control groups for the top 1%. The top 1-5% is treated as a buffer group, and not as a
  26
     Incidentally, in Section 6.3, we consider long-term mobility, which potentially allows a clearer equivalence between
geographical location and tax residency, since it is harder to shift income abroad when residing long-term in a different
location.
  27
     Given the Foreign Tax Credit rules for U.S. citizens, we set the tax rate for U.S. citizen abroad equal to the U.S.
tax if and only if the foreign tax rate is smaller than the U.S. tax rate: this was frequently the case before 1985 for
the 8 countries under consideration, but not the case anymore after 1985.
  28
     Less than 0.2% of the observations are dropped for this reason.
  29
     As explained in Section 5.1, the “below top 25%” group refers to inventors who have been or will be in the top
25% at some point during their life in the sample, but are not currently in the top 25%.


                                                           15
                                                                  Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

good control group, since inventors in this group are too likely to also be treated.
   The discontinuity is fuzzy because tax brackets differ across countries and because we do not
know counterfactual income and have to instead use quality rankings. We hence establish in two
steps, by reference to the literature, that, first, quality is highly positively related to income and
that, second, inventor’s income distributions are such that the top income inventors are in the top
bracket (this is done further below). A useful way to think about this is that the quality groups
capture the propensity to be “treated” by the top marginal tax rate.
   When choosing the control group, there is a typical trade-off between maximizing comparability
(i.e., choosing a group very close in quality e.g., the top 5-10%) and minimizing the control group’s
propensity of being treated (i.e., choosing a lower quality group such as the below top 25%). For
instance, the top 1% (the treatment group) and the top 5-10% are likely extremely comparable
groups along all dimensions. However, the top 5-10% may still include quite a few “treated”
inventors in the top bracket. In addition, inventors in the top 5-10% may still feel the indirect
motivational effect of the “success tax.” As a result, we may underestimate the “treatment” effect
of the top tax rate if comparing only to the top 5-10% group. We therefore find it useful to show
the estimated coefficients for all inventor groups and to compute the elasticities for different choices
of control group. We hence include in the regression the full set of interactions of the retention rate
with indicator variables for being in the top 1%, the top 1-5%, the top 5-10%, the top 10-25%, and
the below top 25%. To reiterate, this identification allows us to include country-year fixed effects
in the estimation in order to filter out other contemporaneous changes in the country.
   Our strategy is similar in spirit to that in other studies which exploit the differential impact
of tax changes across income tax brackets, using lower income brackets as control groups for top
brackets (Eissa, 1995), or across households with different non-labor income and family size (Eissa
and Hoynes, 2006). We are most closely inspired by a strategy that captures the differential
propensities of being “treated,” as in Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) or Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2012) who multiply Food Stamp program introduction by propensity to participate (proxied by
group-level food stamp participation): in our case, we interact the top tax rate with the inventor’s
quality ranking (which proxies the propensity of being in the top bracket). Note that we are
unable to compute an actual propensity to be treated as in Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009). The
problem for doing this is bigger than just the fact that we do not have data on inventor income
distributions conditional on quality: we do not know counterfactual income (and there is no dataset
that contains it) and so we would not be able to know the inventor’s actual propensity to be treated
in each potential destination country in each year.
   For this identification, we may worry that changes in top tax rates are correlated with changes
in the average tax rate of the slightly lower quality groups. Historically, this does not seem to
have been the case in our setting. There have overall been 218 top tax rate changes in our sample.
For only 7 of these have the top marginal tax rate and the tax rate in the bracket below both
increased, and for only 14 have they both decreased. Note here that we would mostly be worried
about situations in which the top marginal tax rate and the rate in the bracket below would move

                                                  16
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

in the opposite direction, which is the only case that would lead us to overestimate the effect of
the top MTR with this identification strategy. Fortunately, this has never occurred in our sample.

Inventors’ income distributions: Because of our identification strategy, we need to check that
the top quality inventors are in the top income tax bracket, while the propensity of being in the
top bracket declines for lower quality inventors. This is done in two steps. First, recall that we
established a very significant positive link between citations and income above. We now focus on
the income distribution of inventors – keeping this link in mind– to show which percentiles of the
inventors’ income distribution are in the top bracket and which ones are below.
    Using data from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates public-use microdata from the
NSF (NSF, 2003), Figure 2 shows that 44% of inventors are in the top 10% of the U.S. income
distribution, 18% are in the top 5%, and 1% are in the top 1% of the U.S. income distribution.
A more reliable source is the administrative data used in Bell et al. (2014) which shows that, in
terms of income, the top 1% inventor earns $1.6 million and the top 5% earns $500,000. The
median inventor earns $114,000 and the mean inventor earns $192,000. The top 1% highest quality
inventors are hence quite likely to be very high up in the income distribution. The top 1-5%
inventors by quality are still very high up and have a large propensity of being in the top bracket.
The top 5-10% by quality have a lower propensity.

    Figure 2: Distribution of Inventor Earnings in the NSF Survey 2003
                  0.239
                  0.159
                  0.080




                                 100000         200000        300000         400000        500000
                                                    Earnings in $

                                Income Threshold Top 10%               Income Threshold Top 5%
                                Income Threshold Top 1%

Notes: The data is from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates public-use microdata from NSF (NSF, 2003).
The earnings represented are those of the college graduates with at least one patent and who report being currently
employed. The sample size is 3142.

    Turning to European countries and Japan, Figure 3 uses inventor survey data, and plots the
income distribution relative to the top bracket. It highlights that the top 1% of inventors in terms

                                                        17
                                                                            Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

of income are clearly comfortably in the top income tax brackets, and the top 1-5% or the top
5-10% are still quite likely to be in the top tax bracket. Below the top 10% the propensity to be
treated seems sharply lower.30



3     Stylized Macro Facts

We start by providing some stylized macroeconomic facts about the correlations between top re-
tention rates and migration at the country-year level. This evidence is suggestive that, even at an
aggregate level, there is a significant correlation between inventor migration and top taxes, which
is concentrated on top quality inventors.


3.1    Macro correlations in the inventor data

Figure 4 considers the relation between migration and top tax rates where each dot represents one
country in a given year. In all panels, the outcome variable is adjusted for a country’s GDP, patent
stock, country fixed effects and year fixed effects, thus filtering out time invariant cross-country
variation.31
    Panel A focuses on the fraction of domestic inventors who remain in their home country. Figure
4a shows that the decision to remain in the home country is significantly affected by top tax rates,
with an elasticity of 0.08. On the other hand, there is no significant relation between top tax
rates and the fraction of low quality inventors in Figure 4b as should be expected given that these
inventors are not in the top tax bracket. Panel B turns to the number of foreign inventors as a
fraction of all inventors in a country. Figure 4c again shows that top quality foreigners exhibit
a significant elasticity of 0.47, while the elasticity of low quality foreigners in Figure 4d is not
significant. Table 2 columns (1) and (2) summarize these elasticities.


3.2    Cross-check using the PCT data

As an additional piece of macro evidence we use the alternative data source from patents filed
under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), described in Section 2.3.
    Figure 5a plots the average share of domestic inventors in each country against the average
top retention rate over the period 1980-2004. There is a significantly positive relationship, with an
   30
      In Swedish administrative data matched to the patent data, even more lower quality inventors seem to be treated.
We can see that in 2000, the top 10% inventor earns SEK 648,400, the top 5% inventor earns SEK 775300 and the
top 1% earns close to 2 times more at SEK 1,171,000. The median inventor earns SEK 355,200. The top tax bracket
threshold in that year was SEK 374,000. Olof Ejermo kindly provided us with these numbers from the Swedish
administrative tax data.
   31
      In these partial residual plots, for any outcome Y we regress log(Y ) on country GDP, patent stock, country
fixed effects, year fixed effects, and the top log retention rate, clustered at the country level. We then construct the
adjusted outcome as log(Y ) from which we subtract all covariates (except the log retention rate) times their estimated
coefficients.


                                                          18
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors


                           Figure 3: Income Distributions of Inventors

                         (a) Switzerland                                                  (b) Germany
                                                         146k€                                                                   189k€
   0.4




                                                                  0.4
   0.3




                                                                  0.3
   0.2




                                                                  0.2
   0.1




                                                                  0.1
   0




                                                                  0
         <10k€   10k€      30k€        50k€      70k€    >100k€         <10k€   10k€       30k€        50k€      70k€      >100k€
                 <30k€     <50k€      <70k€     <100k€                          <30k€      <50k€      <70k€     <100k€
                               Earnings in €                                                   Earnings in €

                                     Top 20%                                                         Top 10%




                           (c) France                                                   (d) Great Britain
                                                         150k€                                                               189k€
                                                                  0.4
   0.4




                                                                  0.3
   0.3
   0.2




                                                                  0.2
   0.1




                                                                  0.1
   0




                                                                  0




         <10k€   10k€      30k€        50k€      70k€    >100k€
                 <30k€     <50k€      <70k€     <100k€                  <10k€   10k€       30k€        50k€      70k€      >100k€
                               Earnings in €                                    <30k€      <50k€      <70k€     <100k€
                                                                                               Earnings in €
                           Top 20%             Top 10%
                            Top 5%                                                         Top 20%             Top 10%




                            (e) Italy                                                      (f) Japan
                                               75k€                                                                      122k€
   0.4




                                                                  0.4
   0.3




                                                                  0.3
   0.2




                                                                  0.2
   0.1




                                                                  0.1
   0




                                                                  0




         <10k€   10k€      30k€        50k€      70k€    >100k€         <10k€   10k€       30k€        50k€      70k€      >100k€
                 <30k€     <50k€      <70k€     <100k€                          <30k€      <50k€      <70k€     <100k€
                               Earnings in €                                                   Earnings in €

                           Top 20%             Top 10%                                     Top 20%             Top 5%


Notes: Survey data from Gambardella et al. (2014). The number of respondents for each country are: Switzerland:
457, Germany: 3403, France: 1307, Italy: 966, Great Britain: 551, Japan: 2927. The black vertical line represents the
top income tax bracket threshold for individuals. The bins are constrained by the data we have available: these are
the income brackets that the survey asked about. We are19
                                                        hence unable to see the exact cutoffs for all the percentiles
we are interested in.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva


  Figure 4: Top taxes and % of domestic and foreign inventors 1977-2000
                                                                            Panel A: Fraction of domestic inventors in home country
                                                                  (a) Top quality inventors                                                                                                                                        (b) Low quality inventors
                                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                           Elasticity= .08 (.009)                                                                                                                          Elasticity= -.01 (.022)




                                                                                                                        Log fraction of low quality domestic inventors
  Log fraction of top quality domestic inventors
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                        -.1




                                                                                                                                              -.1
          -.2




                                                                                                                                -.2
                            -.3




                                                                                                                                                  -.3
                                                      -2                -1.5                      -1         -.5                                                            -2                                                           -1.5                      -1              -.5
                                                                          Log Top retention rate (1- τ)                                                                                                                                    Log Top retention rate (1- τ)




                                                                                              Panel B: Fraction of foreign inventors
                                                                   (c) Top quality inventors                                                                                                                                          (d) Low quality inventors
                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                           Elasticity= .47 (.084)                                                                                                                                                 Elasticity= .22 (.19)
                                                                                                                                                                             Log fraction of low quality foreign inventors
  Log fraction of top quality foreign inventors
                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.5
        -1




                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                            -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1.5




                                                      -2                -1.5                      -1         -.5                                                                                                             -2                  -1.5                      -1            -.5
                                                                          Log Top retention rate (1- τ)                                                                                                                                            Log Top retention rate (1- τ)




Notes: Each outcome variable at the country-year level is regressed (in logs) on the country’s patent stock, GDP per
capita, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and the log retention rate, weighted by the number of inventors in
that country and year. The elasticities are reported in each panel with standard errors clustered at the country level.
Each dot represents the adjusted log outcome variable, namely the log outcome from which we subtract all covariates
(except the log retention rate) times their estimated coefficients. Regression lines are depicted in red. In panel (a),
the outcome is the fraction of top 25% inventors working in their home country (number of top 25% inventors working
in their home country divided by the total number of top 25% inventors from that country). Panel (b) considers
the fraction of low quality bottom 50% inventors who work in their home country. Panel (c) considers the fraction
of top 25% foreign inventors (the number of top 25% foreign inventors over the number of all inventors residing in
the country). Panel (d) considers the fraction of low quality bottom 50% foreign inventors. Top retention rates are
significantly correlated with the shares of top quality domestic and foreign inventors, but not with the shares of lower
quality inventors.

                                                                                                                   20
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors


                                                     Table 2: Macro elasticities by inventor quality
                                                                                       Benchmark DID                                                                                                PCT
                                                                       Top quality inventors    Low quality inventors                                                                           All inventors
                                                                                (1)                     (2)                                                                                          (3)
   Domestic Elasticity                                                              0.080∗∗∗                                                              -0.013                                  0.074∗
                                                                                     (0.009)                                                             (0.022)                                  (0.038)
    Foreign Elasticity                                                              0.473∗∗∗                                                               0.222                                  0.984∗
                                                                                     (0.084)                                                             (0.190)                                  (0.483)
(Domestic) Observations                                                                 192                                                               192                                       244
 (Foreign) Observations                                                                 191                                                               188                                       238
Notes: The table reports the elasticities of the number of domestic and foreign inventors to the top net-of-tax
rate. Each outcome variable is at the country-year level. We regress the log outcome on the log top retention rate,
the country’s patent stock, GDP per capita, country fixed effects, and year fixed effects, weighted by the number
of inventors in that country and year. Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parenthesis.
Columns (1) and (2) correspond to the outcomes from the DID, as represented in Figure 4. Column (3) corresponds
to the PCT data from Figure 5. The “domestic elasticity” is the elasticity of the number of domestic inventors who
remain to work in their home country. The “foreign elasticity” is the elasticity of the number of foreign inventors
who work in a country. As confirmed by the micro level results in Section 5, top quality inventors are sensitive to
top tax rates and the foreign elasticity is larger than the domestic one. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




 Figure 5: Top Taxes and % of domestic and foreign inventors in the PCT
      (a) Fraction of domestic inventors in home country                                                                                         (b) Fraction of foreign inventors
                          .25




                                                                                                                              2
                                          0
        Log fraction of domestic inventors




                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             Log fraction of foreign inventors
                                -.25




                                                                                                                                   0
                        -.5




                                                                                                                       -1
               -.75




                                                                                                            -2
       -1




                                                                              Elasticity= .07 (.038)                                                                                  Elasticity= .98 (.483)
                          -1.25




                                                                                                                              -3




                                              -1.5                      -1                      -.5                                               -1.5                          -1                        -.5
                                                        Log Top retention rate (1- τ)                                                                           Log Top retention rate (1- τ)




Notes: In both panels, the outcome variables at the country-year level are adjusted for the country’s patent stock,
GDP per capita, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, as described in the note to Figure 4. The elasticities are
reported in each panel with standard errors clustered at the country level. The regressions are weighted by the
number of inventors for each country-year observation. In panel (a), the outcome is the fraction of inventors working
in their home country divided by the total number of inventors from that country. Panel (b) considers the number
of foreign inventors over the number of all inventors residing in the country.



elasticity that is extremely close to the one obtained in the DID. Figure 5b confirms that foreign
inventors exhibit a much higher elasticity than domestic inventors.

                                                                                                       21
                                                                                                                                                         Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

4                                Country Case Studies

We now turn to specific country case studies which exploit large historic breaks due to migration
or tax reforms.


4.1                                   Russian inventors’ migration and the Soviet Union collapse

Our first case study concerns Russian inventors, a group of inventors whose migration was essentially
impossible before the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
                                We use two sources of data, starting with the PCT data which has actual nationality infor-
mation. As a first pass, Figure 6, plots the average number of Russian immigrants in different
countries as a function of the average top retention rate before and after the collapse of the Soviet
Union. Before 1991 (in panel 6a), the relationship is flat at zero, since Russian nationals were not
able to react to tax differentials because of stark migration restrictions. By contrast, after 1991 (in
panel 6b), a significantly negative relationship between Russian inventors and top tax rates rates
appears.

                                                   Figure 6: Russian inventors’ migration in the PCT data
                                           (a) Pre Soviet Union collapse                                                                           (b) Post Soviet Union collapse
               .004




                                                                                                                                                    US
                                                                                                                         .004




                                                         Elasticity= 0.00 (0.000)                                                                              Elasticity= 2.01 (1.107)
                         .003




                                                                                                                                  .003
  Share of Russian Inventors




                                                                                                            Share of Russian Inventors




                                                                                                                                                          CA

                                                                                                                                                                        CH        ES
                                                                                                                                                                                       FI
             .002




                                                                                                                      .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE
                                                                                                                                                                             IE
                                                                                                                                              NZ

                                                                                                                                                           AU      GB
                                                                                                                                                                         IT                 NL           FR
                                                                                                                                                                                            DE NO
.001




                                                                                                          .001




                                                                                                                                                                                                         DK




                                                                                                                                                                                  JP
                                 US   CA   ES
                                           NZ
                                            CHAU          GB    FI
                                                                 DE IEIT        FR
                                                                                 NL
                                                                                 DKJPNO        SE
               0




                                                                                                                         0




                                 .5                 .6                .7                  .8        .9                                   .4               .5                .6                      .7        .8
                                                            Top marginal tax rate τ                                                                                Top marginal tax rate τ




Note: Based on the PCT data that contains nationality information. Each dot represents one country’s average
outcome over the period. AU= Australia, AT=Austria, BE=Belgium, DK=Denmark, UK=England, FR=France,
DE=Germany, FI= Finland, GR=Greece, IE = Ireland, IT=Italy, JP = Japan, NL=Netherlands, NO=Norway,
ES=Spain, SE=Sweden, CH=Switzerland. Panel (a) is the pre-Soviet Union collapse period (1977-1991) and panel
(b) is the post-Soviet union collapse period (1992-2003). The elasticities reported (with standard errors in parenthesis)
come from an OLS regression of the log outcome on log(1 − τ ) where τ is the top marginal tax rate on the x-axis (for
the pre-period, the number of Russian inventors is zero so we use the level of the outcome in the regressions). When
migration was allowed post 1991, a negative correlation between Russian migration and top tax rates appeared.

                                Next we move beyond correlations and exploit our main identification strategy, which consists
in comparing the effects of the top tax rate on top quality relative to lower quality inventors. For
this, we turn to our main DID, which has detailed quality measures for inventors. We combine the

                                                                                                         22
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

DID with the ethnicity data by Kerr (2008), to circumvent the problem of the lack of nationality
information. Kerr (2008) uses an ethnic names database to assign inventors’ ethnicities, so we know
which inventors have Russian ethnicity. Hence, there are of course inventors of Russian ethnicity
abroad even before 1991 (unlike for the pure nationality measure from the PCT).
                            We can now exploit the differential impact of the top tax rate on higher versus lower quality
inventors. Low quality Russian inventors can here serve as a control group that shares similar
affinities with each potential destination country as higher quality inventors, and would hence filter
out reasons unrelated to taxes (but potentially correlated with them) for which Russian inventors
may want to move to specific countries. Low quality Russian inventors, however, should not be
directly affected by top tax rates.
                            In Figures 7a and 7b, we plot the ratio of foreign top 1% inventors over bottom 50% inventors as
a function of the top tax rate, pre and post 1991. Each dot represents a country-year observation.
We can see the clear differential effect of the top tax rate on top quality Russian inventors relative to
low quality Russian inventors. Pre-1991 there is a slightly positive (insignificant) relation between
the relative number of foreigners in the top 1% versus the bottom 50% and top tax rates, but this
relation becomes negative and significant post-Soviet Union collapse.

            Figure 7: Top quality versus low quality Russian inventors’ migration

                                            (a) Top 1% over Bottom 50% inventors pre-1991                                               (b) Top 1% over Bottom 50% inventors post-1991
                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                        .2
   Top 1% relative to Bottom 50% Russian inventors




                                                                                                         Top 1% relative to Bottom 50% Russian inventors
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                          .15
                               .3




                                                                                                                                 .1
                      .2




                                                                                                                  .05
  0        .1




                                                                                                        0




                                                       .3   .4   .5           .6         .7   .8                                                             .4   .5              .6           .7   .8
                                                                 Top earnings tax rate                                                                                 Top earnings tax rate




Note: Based on DID, combined with ethnicity data from Kerr (2008). Kerr (2008) uses an algorithm that identifies
Russian ethnicity inventors. The figures represent the ratio of top 1% superstar Russian inventors relative to the
bottom 50% low quality Russian inventors. Each dot represents a country-year observation. Before 1991 there is
some ethnic Russian diaspora abroad, which is not significantly correlated with top tax rates (coefficient of 0.105,
with standard error 0.09). Post Soviet Union collapse, there is a significant negative correlation between superstar
top 1% Russian inventors relative to lower quality Russian inventors and top tax rates (the coefficient is -0.111, with
standard error 0.028). Analogous regressions with additional controls for log GDP per capita, log number of patents
and country and year fixed effects produces coefficients for pre-1991 of -0.09, with standard error 0.075, and for
post-1991 of -0.199, with standard error 0.092.

                            Table 3 shows the elasticity estimates for inventors of different quality. It confirms that while top
1% superstar inventors’ migration was unsurprisingly not related to top tax rates before the collapse

                                                                                                   23
                                                                              Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

of the Soviet Union, there is a very significant elasticity to top tax rates post 1991. The same effect,
but much weaker, is visible for top 1-50% inventors. The elasticity of the top 1% superstar Russian
inventors matches quite closely the elasticity of foreigners in the micro estimation in Section 5.32

          Table 3: Elasticity of Russian inventors to top retention rates
                                              (1)                    (2)                        (3)
                                            Top 1%                Top 1-50%                 Bottom 50%
Pre Soviet Union collapse                    0.0878                 0.0779                     0.368∗∗
                                            (0.193)                 (0.131)                    (0.143)
Post Soviet Union collapse                  1.154∗∗∗                0.398∗∗                    0.347∗
                                            (0.263)                 (0.191)                    (0.186)
Observations                                  192                     192                        192
Based on DID, combined with ethnicity data from Kerr (2008). OLS regression of the log number of Russian inventors
in a country each year on the log of the top retention rate. Each column reports results for a subset of inventors,
namely those in the top 1%, the top 1-50%, and bottom 50% as ranked by the benchmark measure of citations-
weighted patents computed according to formula (1). The coefficients are the elasticities to the top retention rate of
Russian inventors in each quality group. All regressions control for year fixed effects, country fixed effects, GDP per
capita, and country’s patent stock. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



4.2       United States Tax Reform Act 1986
Next, to dig deeper into the identification of the effects of top tax rates, we exploit the quasi-
experimental variation provided by two large tax reforms: the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986 and
Denmark’s 1992 preferential tax scheme for foreigners.
       To study the effects of these reforms on inventor migration, we use the synthetic control method
by Abadie et al. (2010). It consists in building a synthetic control country that is a weighted average
of other countries in the sample. The weights are chosen to minimize the pre-reform distance
between the country under consideration (i.e., U.S. or Denmark) and the synthetic country along
dimensions of interest. The synthetic country plausibly represents what would have happened in
the control country absent the reform. Appendix D provides the details.
       To estimate the elasticities to top tax rates, we regress at the country-year level the log of each
outcome variable on the log retention rate, a dummy for the post-reform period and a dummy
for country (there are two “countries” here, namely the treated country and the synthetic control
country), where the log retention rate is instrumented by the interaction of the country dummy
and the post-reform period dummy.
       The U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced top marginal tax rates from 50% to 28%.33 The
corresponding change in average tax rates was very concentrated at the top of the income distri-
  32
     Note that because Kerr (2008) assigns ethnicity (not nationality), it is expected to see some ethnic Russian
inventors abroad in the Soviet Union era. What matters here is how the elasticity changed in the post collapse
period. For low bottom 50% Russian inventors, as expected, the correlation between migration and top tax rates did
not change post-Soviet Union collapse.
  33
     There is still a debate about the extent to which the decrease in marginal tax rates was offset by base broadening,
which was one of the goals of the reform. Gravelle and Hungerford (2012) argue that the tax base of the individual
income tax was not widely broadened. Bakija and Steuerle (1991) find an overall modest increase in the tax base of
3.8%.


                                                          24
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

bution. According to our own calculations, average tax rates decreased by a large 7.6% for the top
1%, decreased by only 2% for the top 5% of inventors, and actually increased by 0.7% for the top
10% of the income distribution.
              Figure 8 plots the number of foreign inventors in the U.S. and in its synthetic counterpart,
normalized by a base year (1986).34 We again use our preferred identification (and the differential
impact of top tax rates on inventors of different qualities), and show the effects of this reform
separately for top quality (top 1%) and slightly lower quality (here, top 10-25%) inventors.35

           Figure 8: The 1986 Tax Reform Act and Foreign Inventors in the U.S.


                                          (a) Foreign Top 1% inventors                                                                                                        (b) Foreign Top 10-25% inventors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.15
               2.5




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      -.1




                                                                                                                                        Foreign top 10-25% inventors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.2
  Foreign Top 1% Inventors




                                                                                                            Top tax rate differential




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Top tax rate differential
                      2




                              Elasticity= 2.99 (.649)




                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                      -.2

                                                                                                                                                                        Elasticity= -.59 (.764)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.25
            1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.3
                                                                                                      -.3




                                                                                                                                               1
    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.35
                                                                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4
               .5




                                                                                                                                                       .5




                             1982         1984          1986           1988    1990            1992                                                                    1982         1984          1986            1988    1990            1992

                                                               Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                           U.S.                               Synthetic U.S.                                                                                          U.S.                               Synthetic U.S.
                                           Top tax rate differential                                                                                                                  Top tax rate differential




Notes: The 1986 Tax Reform Act (implemented during the fiscal year represented by the grey vertical area), lowered
top tax rates in the U.S. In each panel, the fraction of foreign inventors in the U.S. versus the fraction of foreign
inventors in the synthetic control country are depicted. The weights on countries forming the synthetic country are
set to minimize the distance to the U.S. in the pre-reform years (see the text and Appendix D for details). Panel 8a
shows the number of top 1% foreign inventors in the U.S., while panel 8b displays the number of top 10-25% foreigners
in the U.S. Both are normalized by a base year (1986). The red line shows the top tax rate differential between the
U.S. and the synthetic control country (on the right axis), i.e., τU S /τsynthetic −1. We report the difference-in-difference
elasticity estimates described in the text.

              Indeed, the differential effect of the top tax rate change on the foreign superstar top 1% inventors
is visible in two ways. First, purely exploiting the logic of the synthetic control method, we can
show that the number of foreign top 1% superstar inventors increased drastically relative to a
scenario with no reform (as proxied by the synthetic control), while this was not the case for the
lower quality top 10-25% foreign inventors. In panel (a), the red line (on the y axis) is the top tax
                                                                                                                                                                                       τU S
differential between the U.S. and the synthetic country, defined as                                                                                                                 τsynthetic    − 1. While top tax rates
  34
     Some normalization is necessary because the U.S. is the largest country in the data and it would not make sense
to try and match levels. It would also not make sense to look at the fraction of foreigners, since the reform was not
preferentially targeting foreigners (unlike Denmark’s reform discussed in the next Subsection).
  35
     Recall that the top 1-5% group still has a very high propensity of being treated and is hence not a good control
group. The results described next naturally also hold if we consider even lower quality inventors, e.g., the below top
25%, etc., subject to the trade-offs involved in choosing the control group, as described in Section 2.4.


                                                                                                                              25
                                                                          Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

were about the same in the U.S. and in the control country, they diverge sharply post reform.36 The
pre-reform trends are extremely close in the U.S. and the synthetic country. However, the series for
top 1% foreign superstar inventors diverge exactly at the time of the U.S. tax reform between the
U.S. and the synthetic control country. When we repeat the analysis for the lower quality group
of inventors (the top 10-25%), we do not see such an effect: there is no break in the trend post
reform and, if anything, the U.S. series for the top 10-25% foreign inventors fall a bit relative to
the synthetic control. Hence, the lower quality top 10-25% foreign inventors, fare similarly in the
U.S. (which decreased its top tax rates) and in the other countries (which did not decrease top tax
rates).

    The second way to see the differential effect of the reform on foreign superstar top 1% inventors
is to directly consider the structural break in their series relative to that of foreign top 10-25%
inventors. Naturally, all the series for foreigners are growing due to the general growth in patents,
inventors, and innovation over time, but we can directly compare what happened to the growth
rates of the top 1% foreign inventors and of the top 10-25% foreign inventors after the 1986 reform.
Comparing the two solid black lines in panels (a) and (b), we see that while the top 10-25% group
was growing faster before the reform, it is the top 1% that started growing much more rapidly
post reform. More specifically, pre-reform, the top 10-25% series was growing on average at 12.7%
per year, while the top 1% was growing at only 6.8% per year during the same period. On the
other hand, after the reform, the top 10-25% was still growing at about the same rate (11.3% per
year), while the top 1% drastically accelerated to 16.4% per year. As a result, the composition of
foreign inventors in the U.S. dramatically changed after the 1986 reform, and the ratio of the top
1% foreigners to the top 10-25% foreigners drastically increased.


4.3       Denmark’s 1992 reform

Next, we consider the Danish 1992 reform, studied in Kleven et al. (2013) and Kleven et al. (2014).37
The Danish tax reform created a preferential tax scheme for foreign researchers and high-income
foreigners. Instead of the usual top tax rate (of 60%), foreigners were taxed for 3 fiscal years at a flat
rate of 30% for their 1991-1995 income and then at another reduced rate of 25% after 1995. Since
our inventors would typically qualify as “researchers,” we can study whether they were affected by
this tax scheme.

    We revert to using the PCT data, since Denmark is essentially not represented in the USPTO
data. Recall that in the PCT data, we do not have inventor quality measures since it is not a
panel data. Looking at the effect on all inventors is likely to give us a lower bound of the effects of
  36
     The approach puts significant weight on Canada and on Switzerland for the top quality series and on Canada,
Great Britain, and Japan for the lower quality series (see Appendix D and Appendix table A12)
  37
     Unfortunately, other such reforms, such as the Spanish law of 2004 studied by Kleven et al. (2013) took place
too late given our sample years (and the problem of truncation of patent citations) and cannot be studied well in our
setting.


                                                         26
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

the reform on the high-quality, high-income inventors. In addition, we cannot track who is eligible
under the 3-year rule. Overall, this should give us a diluted, or lower-bound effect.38

    In Figure 9 we plot the fraction of foreign inventors in Denmark and in the synthetic country
(again normalized by a base year (1985)), as well as the top tax rate differential on foreigners. We
here use as an outcome variable the fraction of foreigners (foreign inventors over all inventors in
Denmark), since this allows us to see the differential effect on foreigners (affected by the reform)
relative to domestic inventors (not affected by this reform). The synthetic control algorithm puts
a large weight on Switzerland and some small weights on Canada and Portugal (see Appendix
D), which are the countries in the PCT sample that best match Denmark’s pre-reform share of
foreign inventors. The effects of the Danish reform on the inflow of foreigners is clear relative to the
synthetic control. The implied elasticity is 0.7, which is a bit lower than our preferred elasticity of
foreigners in the micro analysis based on the DID in Section 5, but almost identical to the elasticity
of foreigners based on the EPO data in Section 7.


           Figure 9: Denmark’s 1992 Tax Reform and Foreign Inventors




                                                                                                                            .4
                                            4




                                                                                                  Elasticity= .7 (.242)
                           Norm. share of foreign inventors




                                                                                                                            .2

                                                                                                                                  Top tax rate differential
                                                     3




                                                                                                                            0
                                          2




                                                                                                                            -.2
                               1




                                                                                                                            -.4
                                                                                                                            -.6
                                            0




                                                              1985       1990              1995    2000              2005

                                                                                           Year

                                                                     Denmark                      Synthetic Denmark
                                                                     Top tax rate differential




Notes: The 1992 Danish reform (implemented during the fiscal year represented by the grey vertical area), lowered
top tax rates for high income foreigners and foreign researchers coming into Denmark for the first 3 years. The figure
depicts the fraction of foreign inventors in Denmark versus the fraction of foreign inventors in the synthetic control
country (normalized by a base year (1985)). We here use as an outcome variable the fraction of foreigners (foreign
inventors over all inventors in Denmark), since this allows us to see the differential effect on foreigners (affected
by the reform) relative to domestic inventors (not affected by this reform). The weights on countries forming the
synthetic country are set to minimize the distance to Denmark in the pre-reform years (see the text and Appendix D
for details). The red line shows the top tax rate differential between Denmark and the synthetic control country (on
the right axis), i.e., τDK /τsynthetic − 1. We report the difference-in-difference elasticity estimate described in the text.



 38
    The fact that we are obtaining a lower bound effect is confirmed through the comparison to Kleven et al. (2014),
who are able to focus on top quality, high earning agents only and find an elasticity of foreigners between 1.5 and 2.


                                                                                             27
                                                                         Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

5       Location Choice Model Estimation

In this section, we present the specification of and the results from the multinomial location model
estimation that exploits our two identification strategies.


5.1     Specification and Estimation

Utility specification and controls: To model the location choice of inventors, we adopt a
multinomial discrete-choice model. Recall from section 2.2 that inventor i in country c at time t
obtains utility:
                                         i                     i
                                                                    + µict
                                                                  
                                        Uct = u (1 − τchi t ) wct                                              (5)

    For the empirical specification, we assume log utility of consumption (which allows us to rewrite
utility as additively separable in pre-tax earnings and the tax rate). Our benchmark sample for
the multinomial analysis contains inventors who, over their lifetime in the sample, have ever been
or will ever be classified in the top 25% inventors (according to the ranking defined previously).39
Recall that we restrict the sample to the 8 countries which account for around 90% of all patents
in the USPTO. Hence, in each year, inventors face a choice between the United States, Canada,
Germany, Great Britain, France, Japan, Italy and Switzerland.40
    An important part of the analysis is to model as detailed and flexibly as possible i) the id-
iosyncratic preference component µict and ii) the counterfactual wage wct
                                                                       i . We consider them in

turn.

Controlling for the idiosyncratic preference component: The innovator’s idiosyncratic pref-
erence for any given country at time t is assumed to depend on:
    i) Individual-level characteristics xti : These include the inventor’s age, his dynamic quality
measure, his technological field, and whether he works in a multinational. In addition, we include
indicator variables for whether the inventor is in the top 1%, top 1-5%, top 5-10%, top 10-25%,
or below top 25% of inventors as ranked by quality and explained in section 2.3. The benchmark
measure used is the citations-weighted patents to date, but we consider all of the measures q1 − q4
from formulas (1)-(4). The effect of these individual characteristics is allowed to vary by country
(i.e., they are all interacted with country fixed effects). We assign one of six technological fields to
the inventor based on the field in which he has most patents. These six fields that come from Hall
et al. (2001) include chemical, computer and communications, drugs and medical, electrical and
electronics, mechanical and others. Using finer classifications did not change our results.
   39
      This is to reduce the computational burden of the multinomial logit with many fixed effects on a very large
sample. Each inventor-year observation will be duplicated 8 times for each of the 8 potential country choices, thus
drastically scaling up the data size.
   40
      Note that the sample cut is based on a static measure of inventor quality, namely those who have ever been in
the top 25% in their lifetime, while the ranking within that sample is dynamic and can change for a given inventor
from year to year. Table 9 considers how the results change if we also rank inventors by the static measures.


                                                        28
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

    ii) Country-level covariates, denoted by xct : These depend on the identification used. In the case
in which we identify off country-by-year variations in the tax rate (identification 1), these covariates
include the country’s patent stock and GDP per capita, as well as country fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and country-specific time trends.41 For the identification using inventors of different qualities
as treatment and control groups (identification 2), we replace the country’s patent stock and GDP
per capita by country × year fixed effects.
    iii) Controls for inventor-country pairs, denoted by xcti that capture the goodness of fit of a
“match” between country c and inventor i at time t. First, we introduce a home dummy hci equal
to 1 if country c is the home country of inventor i in order to capture a potential home bias.
Second, these include the patent stock of country c at time t in the inventor’s technological field,
which proxies for the quality of professional fit between the inventor and the potential destination
country. Third, we include the distance between the inventor’s home country and the destination
country, and a dummy for whether the home and destination country have a common language.
These could all affect the ease of moving.
    In Section 5.4 that focuses on the role of companies in the migration decision, we also con-
sider other country-inventor specific covariates such as the share of the innovative activity of the
inventor’s company in each destination country.

Controlling for the tax rate: As explained in Section 2.3, we use the top marginal tax rate as
our tax measure. We include the log of the top retention rate interacted with indicator variables
for the inventor’s quality rank at time t, denoted by rit , where rit can be the top 1%, top 1-5%,
top 5-10%, top 10-25% or below the top 25%. In the case of identification 1, which uses country-
by-year variation in the top marginal tax rate, this simply allows for differential effects of the top
tax rate on different quality inventors. In the case of identification 2, this captures the propensities
of different quality groups of being “treated” by the top tax rate.

We hence obtain the econometric specification for a discrete choice model at the individual inventor
and year level. For each potential country choice c:

               Ucti = αrit log 1 − top MTRict + α log (wcti ) + βc xti + ζxct + ηxcti + vcti
                                             
                                                                                                                    (6)

where xct includes GDP per capita, patent stock, country fixed effects and country-specific time
trends in the case of identification 1 and country fixed effects and country × year fixed effects in
the case of identification 2. “top MTRict ” is the effective top marginal tax rate at time t in country
c which depends on inventor i: if inventor i is a U.S. citizen, then we apply the foreign tax credit
rule for U.S. citizens. Otherwise, it is just the marginal top tax rate of country c at time t without
any modification. αrit is a coefficient on the top marginal tax rate that depends on the inventor’s
quality rank rit (equivalent to interacting the top retention rate with rank dummies).
  41
     Note that including year fixed effects does not change anything since the multinomial logit already filters out all
variables which do not vary by country.


                                                          29
                                                                             Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

      For our preferred identification 2, to compute the effect of the top tax rate on the top 1%
inventors, we need to pick a control group. As explained previously, given the fuzzy design, it is
not a priori obvious which group is the best control group. This is why we provide the results for
three choices of control groups, the top 5-10%, the top 10-25%, and the below top 25%. Bear in mind
that in this estimation sample, the “below top 25%” refers to a still relatively high quality group
of inventors, which have been or will at some point be in the top 25%, but are not currently there.
If we consider group g as the control group, where g ∈ {top 5-10%, top 10-25%, below top 25%},
then the corresponding effect on the top 1% will be computed as ∆αg = αtop 1% − αg .

Controlling for the counterfactual wage: As explained earlier, a crucial challenge is to control
for the counterfactual wage wcti that inventor i would receive in any country c at time t. Part of the
wage variation is well absorbed by the aforementioned controls (i)-(iii), which capture aggregate
effects at the country-year level and the technological class level. In addition, we consider three more
benchmark specifications that progressively add the following, more detailed proxies for log(wcti ).
Overall, we estimate the following four specifications:
      1) Including only controls (i)-(iii).
      2) Adding the quality of the inventor at time t, interacted with country fixed effects. This
controls for aggregate country-specific effects that vary by ability. Our benchmark measure is,
as explained in Section 2.3, citation-weighted patents to date (measure q1). Alternative quality
measures are considered in the robustness checks in Table 9.42
      3) Adding country and ability specific trends, i.e., controlling for year trend times country fixed
effect times the ability measure, in order to capture differential evolutions over time in the wage
premium in different countries.
      4) Adding country, ability and technological field specific trends by controlling for year trend
times country fixed effects times ability times technological field dummies.
                                    i > U i , ∀c0 ) the probability of inventor i to locate in
Estimation: Denote by Pcti ≡ P rob(Uct   c0 t
                                        i has a type I extreme value distribution, this model can
country c at time t. If the error term vct
be estimated as a multinomial logit.

Computing Elasticities: To go from the coefficients on the retention rate to elasticities, we follow
the computations in Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) that we present only very briefly here. In
the multinomial model, the elasticity of the probability of inventor i of locating in country c at
                                    i ), denoted by εi , is:
time t to the net of tax rate (1 − τct               ct

                                                   d log Pcti
                                       εict ≡                 i)
                                                                 = ∆αg (1 − Pcti )
                                                d log(1 − τct

where ∆αg is the effect, defined above, relative to control group g ∈ {top 5-10%, top 10-25%, below top 25%}.
The authors then define the elasticity of domestic players in country c, εcd , and the elasticity of
 42
      Note again that the ability measure for an individual is dynamic and changes over life.


                                                            30
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

foreign players in country c, εcf . Letting Ic and Icf be the set of all, respectively, domestic and
non-domestic inventors from country c:

                                      d log( i∈Ic Pcti )   ∆αg i∈Ic Pcti (1 − Pcti )
                                             P                P
                              εcd   ≡                    =     P          i
                                                                                                                  (7)
                                        d log(1 − τct )          i∈Ic Pct

Similarly:
                                        d log( i∈I f Pcti )                         Pcti (1 − Pcti )
                                              P                         P
                                                                  ∆αg       i∈Icf
                              εcf   ≡               c
                                                              =                                                   (8)
                                                                                        Pcti
                                                                        P
                                          d log(1 − τct )                       i∈Icf

       Average domestic and foreign elasticities, εd and εf , then are defined as the weighted average
elasticities across all countries:

                               d log( c i∈Ic Pcti )   ∆αg c i∈Ic Pcti (1 − Pcti )
                                      P P                P P
                          εd ≡                      =     P P          i
                                                                                                                  (9)
                                   d log(1 − τct )         c  i∈Ic Pct

Similarly:
                                d log( c i∈I f Pcti )                                        Pcti (1 − Pcti )
                                      P P                               P P
                                                                  ∆αg       c
                                                                          i∈Ic           f
                                                    c
                         εf ≡                                 =                                                  (10)
                                                                                                Pcti
                                                                        P P
                                        d log(1 − τct )                         c       i∈Icf


5.2      Results using country-by-year variation

The first identification exploits country-by-year variation in the top marginal tax rate. In this
case, the regressions includes country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific year
trends, in addition to the main controls listed above, but no country-year fixed effects. To allow
for heterogeneous effects of the top tax rate for different qualities of inventors, the top marginal
retention rate is interacted with dummies for the quality ranking.
       Table 4 column 1 contains the controls i) - iii) described in Section 5.1. Below the regression
estimates, the table reports the values and the standard errors of the elasticities to the net of tax
rate of, respectively, the number of top 1% superstar domestic and foreign inventors, as computed
from formulas (9) and (10).43
       The subsequent columns add the remaining controls for the counterfactual wage listed as 2) -4)
in Section 5.1: Column 2 introduces the ability of the inventor interacted with country fixed effects.
Column 3 adds country and ability specific trends and column 4 adds country, ability and tech field
specific trends. The effects of the top tax rate are very stable across the different specifications,
which provides some reassurance about the controls for the counterfactual wage.
       The top 1% of inventors and the top 1-5% of inventors are significantly sensitive to the top tax
rate. The elasticity of domestic superstar top 1% inventors is (in the most detailed specification)
0.024 and that of foreign top 1% superstar inventors is 0.8. Note that these match very well the
  43
    The gap between the domestic and the foreign elasticity comes from the multinomial specification, combined
with the fact that most inventors remain in their home country (see how the average probability of remaining in the
home country scales the elasticities in formulas (9) and (10)). It does however fit very well with the correlations in
Section 3 which showed a much higher elasticity for foreigners.


                                                              31
                                                                               Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva


Table 4: Exploiting country-by-year variation and general equilibrium ef-
fects
                                                       (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                          0.894∗∗∗          0.895∗∗∗          0.969∗∗∗         0.955∗∗∗
                                                      (0.206)           (0.208)          (0.210)          (0.212)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                        0.443∗∗∗          0.452∗∗∗          0.522∗∗∗         0.502∗∗∗
                                                      (0.133)           (0.134)          (0.133)          (0.134)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                           0.148            0.162           0.233∗∗           0.209∗
                                                      (0.114)           (0.114)          (0.111)          (0.112)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                         -0.123           -0.0987          -0.0222          -0.0460
                                                     (0.0934)          (0.0933)         (0.0890)         (0.0895)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                   -0.405∗∗∗         -0.349∗∗∗         -0.267∗∗         -0.278∗∗
                                                      (0.113)           (0.119)          (0.119)          (0.120)
Quality× Country FE                                    NO               YES               YES              YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                            NO               NO                YES              YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                       NO               NO                NO               YES
Domestic elasticity                                     .02               .02             .024             .024
s.e                                                  (.0047)           (.0047)           (.005)           (.005)
Foreign elasticity                                      .75              .754             .811             .811
s.e                                                   (.174)            (.175)           (.177)           (.177)
Observations                                        8644280           8616336           8616336          8616336
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. Regres-
sions are based on the disambiguated inventor data (DID) described in Section 2.3 for the period 1977-2000. The
data includes inventors located 8 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Switzerland,
and the United States. All columns contain the following controls also listed in the text. In terms of country-level
controls, we include country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends, country patent stock,
country GDP per capita. In terms of country-inventor pair controls, we include a home country dummy, the patent
stock of the country in the inventor’s technological field, the distance between the inventor’s home country and the
country, and a dummy for whether the country shares a common language with the inventor’s home country. The
following inventor-level variables are all included and interacted with country fixed effects: inventor age, technological
field of the inventor, a dummy for whether the individual works in a multinational firm. All columns also contain
indicator variables for whether the inventor is in the top 1%, top 1-5%, top 5-10%, top 10-25% or below the top
25% of inventors as ranked by quality and explained in section 2.3. Column 2 contains in addition the inventor’s
citations-weighted patent stock to date (measure q1) interacted with country fixed effects. Column 3 contains quality
and country-specific time trends. Column 4 contains quality, country and technological field specific time trends.
The first row reports the coefficient on the log retention rate interacted with an indicator variable for being in the top
1% of inventors, while the second row reports the standard error. The subsequent row pairs report, respectively, the
coefficients from the retention rate interacted with being in, respectively, the top 1-5%, top 5-10%, top 10-25% and
below the top 25% of inventors, as well as their standard errors. “Domestic elasticity” is the elasticity of domestic top
1% superstar inventors with respect to the top net-of-tax rate (one minus the top tax rate), while “Foreign elasticity”
is the elasticity of foreign top 1% superstar inventors with respect to the top net-of-tax rate. They are computed
according to formulas (9) and (10) with ∆αg = αtop 1% .∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



estimates using the below top 25% as a control group in Section 5.3 and Table 5.


    It is interesting that the top 10-25% and below the top 25% are actually negatively driven by
top tax rate decreases, which can be due to the presence of sorting and general equilibrium effects.
Indeed, the lack of country × year fixed effects here means that sorting and general equilibrium

                                                             32
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

effects could be loaded on the estimated coefficients on the log retention rate. The migration of
some inventors can have general equilibrium effects and spillovers on other inventors, depending on
the structure of the labor market. For instance, if demand for inventors by companies in different
countries is rigid, a lower top tax rate could lead to sorting by higher quality inventors, to the
detriment of lower quality inventors.44 A high influx of top 1% and top 5% inventors may displace
lower quality inventors.45


5.3      Results exploiting the differential effects on inventors of different qualities

Table 5 contains the estimation results for our main identification that compares the effect of the
top tax rate on the top 1% inventors relative to lower quality inventors. The coefficient on the
retention rate for the top 1% inventors is significantly positive and large. The top 1-5% inventors
still exhibit a very significantly positive effect of top tax rates, as can be expected since inventors
in this group have a very high propensity of being treated. The top 5-10% inventors also show a
positive effect, albeit insignificant, since their propensity to be treated is lower. The coefficients
decline monotonically as we move down the quality distribution due to the declining propensities
of being treated by the top tax rate.
       The lower panel in the table reports the elasticities of domestic top 1% superstar inventors and
foreign top 1% superstar inventors for different choices of the control group g, computed according
to formulas (9) and (10) for g ∈ {top 5-10%, top 10-25%, below top 25%}. Depending on the
control group chosen, the estimated elasticities of domestic and foreign inventors will be different.
As already discussed above, a control group such as the top 5-10% may give a lower bound estimate,
since inventors in this group may still be partially treated. A control group such as the below top
25%, while still a relatively high quality group, has a lower propensity of being treated and will
hence yield a larger estimated effect of the top tax rate on superstar top 1% inventors. For the
control group consisting of, respectively, the top 5-10%, the top 10-25%, and the below top 25%,
the estimated domestic elasticities are, respectively, 0.02, 0.02, and 0.03 (and are all statistically
significant at the 1% level). The corresponding elasticities on foreign inventors are, respectively,
0.63, 0.84, and 1.04.
       For comparison, Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) find that, depending on the specification,
the domestic elasticity of football players is between 0.07 and 0.16, while the foreign elasticity
is between 0.6 and 1.3. The authors suggested that their elasticities might be upper bounds, as
football players are highly mobile individuals. In addition, they only consider the European football
market, while we also include mobility between different continents.
       To roughly illustrate these elasticities, suppose that the average country decreases its top tax
  44
    Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) also explore sorting effects in a rigid demand model for football players.
  45
    Another possible interpretation of the negative coefficient on lower quality inventors, is that there are direct
aggregate effects of the top tax rate through tax revenue, which benefits lower quality inventors. However, controlling
for total tax revenue per capita in country c and time t leaves the effects of the top tax rate on different quality
inventors entirely unchanged.


                                                          33
                                                                           Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva


      Table 5: Effect of the top retention rate on innovators’ mobility
                                                                (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                                    1.376∗∗∗     1.508∗∗∗         1.451∗∗∗        1.404∗∗∗
                                                              (0.478)       (0.486)          (0.489)         (0.489)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                                  0.926∗∗      1.065∗∗          1.004∗∗         0.950∗∗
                                                              (0.449)       (0.455)          (0.458)         (0.457)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                                   0.629       0.773∗            0.713           0.654
                                                              (0.449)       (0.455)          (0.457)         (0.456)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                                  0.357        0.511            0.454           0.396
                                                              (0.441)       (0.447)          (0.448)         (0.447)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                              0.0775        0.263            0.210           0.166
                                                              (0.444)       (0.451)          (0.449)         (0.449)
Quality× Country FE                                             NO           YES              YES             YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                                     NO           NO               YES             YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                                NO           NO               NO              YES
Control: Top 5-10                Domestic elasticity             .02           .02             .02             .02
                                 s.e                           (.005)        (.005)          (.005)          (.005)
                                 Foreign elasticity              .63           .62             .62             .63
                                 s.e                            (.18)         (.18)           (.19)           (.19)
Control: Top 10-25               Domestic elasticity             .03           .02             .02             .02
                                 s.e                           (.005)        (.005)          (.005)          (.005)
                                 Foreign elasticity              .85           .84             .83             .84
                                 s.e                            (.18)         (.18)           (.18)           (.18)
Control: Below Top 25            Domestic elasticity             .03           .03             .03             .03
                                 s.e                           (.005)        (.005)          (.006)          (.006)
                                 Foreign elasticity             1.09          1.05            1.04            1.04
                                 s.e                           (.190)        (.196)          (.201)          (.203)
Observations                                                  8644280       8616336         8616336         8616336
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. See the
explanatory notes to Table 4. All regressions contain the same covariates as Table 4, column 4, except that the
country specific time trends, country GDP per capita and country patent stock have been replaced by country × year
fixed effects. “Domestic elasticity” is the elasticity of top 1% superstar domestic inventors with respect to the top
net-of-tax rate (one minus the top tax rate), while “Foreign elasticity” is the elasticity of top 1% superstar foreign
inventors with respect to the top net-of-tax rate. They are computed, respectively, according to formulas (9) and (10)
for three different control groups g ∈ {top 5-10%, top 10-25%, below top 25%}. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



rate by 10 percentage points from 60% (the average value of the top tax rate in the sample in year
2000) to 50%. Extrapolating from these elasticities and choosing the below top 25% group as a
control group, the average country would be able to retain 1% more domestic top 1% superstar
inventors and would be able to attract 26% more foreign superstar top 1% inventors.46
    We can also compute the elasticities of domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors country
by country, as in formulas (7) and (8). To avoid carrying too many numbers, let us pick the estimates
obtained using the below top 25% of inventors as a control group. In Table 6, columns 1 and 2

  46
     Of course, the percent difference here is due to the very different bases: there are many more domestic inventors
in a country than foreign inventors.


                                                         34
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

show, respectively, the elasticity of domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors to the top
net-of-tax rate. The U.S. and Japan stand out with their relatively low elasticities of both foreign
and domestic top 1% superstar inventors, while superstar inventors from Great Britain and Canada
are particularly elastic. France, Italy and Switzerland have moderately elastic domestic top 1%
superstar inventors. Columns 3 and 4 compute the percent change in, respectively, domestic and
foreign top 1% superstar inventors for a 10 percentage point top tax rate reduction from the actual
level in each country. The differences in the percent changes are due to the different elasticities in
the first two columns, but most importantly, to the very different bases on which they are computed
(i.e., there are very different absolute numbers of domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors in
the various countries). At the low end of the spectrum, the U.S. would retain 0.1% more domestic
superstar inventors, Japan 0.2%, and Germany 1.4%. At the high end of the spectrum, Great
Britain and Canada would retain, respectively, 8.1% and 6% more domestic superstar inventors.
At the same time, the US would attract 18.3% more foreign superstar inventors, while France would
attract 43.5% more superstar foreign inventors.47

                   Table 6: Migration Elasticities across Countries
Country                Domestic          Foreign              % change                        % change
                       elasticity       elasticity       in domestic inventors           in foreign inventors
United States            0.003             0.97                    0.1%                          18.3%
Great Britain             0.37             1.23                    8.1%                          27.1%
Canada                   0.31              1.23                    6.0%                          23.6%
Germany                   0.05             1.21                    1.4%                          33.8%
France                    0.12             1.23                    4.4%                          43.5%
Italy                     0.13             1.23                    3.0%                          27.4%
Japan                     0.01             1.23                    0.2%                          25.2%
Switzerland               0.18             1.23                    4.1%                          27.9%

Notes: Elasticities per country are calculated for the year 2000. The control group chosen is the below top 25% of
inventors from Table 5. To compute the percent change in domestic inventors and the change in foreign inventors
for each country, we consider a 10 percentage points decrease in taxes from their actual level in that country in year
2000. Similar changes can of course be computed for any other percentage point change in taxes.


Economic Gains from Lower Taxes: A back of the envelope calculation can reveal the yearly
economic gain from lower taxes through the channel of inventor migration. Suppose that top
retention rates in country c change by d(1 − τct ). We compute the economic value gained from
attracting more domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors as:

                                     d(1 − τct )
                            dVct =               × (εcd × Ncd + εcf × Ncf ) × Np × Vp                            (11)
                                      (1 − τct )

where εcd and εcf are as defined in equations (7) and (8), Ncd and Ncf are the number of, respectively,
 47
    Note that the heterogeneous elasticities of migration to tax rates across countries could be another reason for
why some countries can tax more than others (Kleven, 2014).


                                                         35
                                                                          Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

domestic and foreign top 1% superstar inventors who live in country c, Np is the average number
of patents per year of top 1% superstar inventors (2.7 in our sample), and Vp is the average value
per patent.
       To assign an average value per patent, we use estimates from the literature. Pakes (1985) finds
that the average value of a patent is $ 810,000 (in 1972 dollars), which represents $ 2.7 million
in 2000 dollars.48 Naturally, this is likely to be a lower bound on the value of the patents from
superstar top 1% inventors. Superstar inventors are by definition those who create the most valuable
breakthrough patents. Indeed, while the median patent in our sample receives 8 citations, the most
valuable top 1% patents receive on average 171 citations, which is 21 times higher. Hence, we can
perform a second calculation, supposing that the value per patent of superstar top 1% inventors
is close to the value of the top 1% most valuable patents (which could be approximated by 21
times the average value of $ 2.7 million, i.e., $ 57 million.49 ) The potential gains in economic value
from top tax decreases are shown in Table 7 for a 5 percentage point and a 10 percentage point
top tax decrease. Naturally, these are only the gains through the migration channel of top 1%
inventors and there are of course many other economic gains or losses from reducing the top tax
rate through other channels in the rest of the economy.50 These effects could also be a lower bound
of the economic value lost if there are positive spillovers from having superstar inventors locally
(as documented in the papers cited in the Introduction and in Section 2.3). As we show in Section
6.1, superstar inventors also have more patent breadth and breadth of impact, above and beyond
pure citations, which may imply that their patents are even more valuable.
       The economic gains per country from decreasing top tax rates depend on the domestic and
foreign elasticities (in Table 6), but also on the size of the inventor base. The U.S. has the largest
economic gain, despite the small elasticities, while Italy has the smallest economic gains, which is
a combination of a relatively low elasticity of domestic inventors and a relatively small inventor
base. To a first-order we could imagine that these yearly gains would scale up for a tax decrease
that lasts several years.


5.4      The Role of Companies

What is the role of employers in determining inventors’ mobility? One might expect that role to
be important. Indeed, large companies often recruit internationally. In the U.S., Qualcomm Inc.
and Microsoft have ratio of foreign inventors to total inventors in the company of, respectively,
51% and 57%. In Switzerland, Alstom Technology Ltd. and Syngenta Participation AG both have
immigration rates of 67%.51 There are two related questions when talking about the role of the
  48
     We use the GDP deflator provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to adjust the nominal numbers.
  49
     Assuming that the value of patents scales approximately linearly in citations.
  50
     Because this is clearly just a very small fraction of all the effects that lower top tax rates could have, these
numbers are not meant to be compared to the lost tax revenue. They are just meant to illustrate the “dollar value”
of the elasticities estimated.
  51
     WIPO report available at http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/941/wipo_pub_941_2013.
pdf.


                                                         36
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors


     Table 7: Yearly Economic Gains Across Countries (in million USD)
                                Small Patent Value                             Large Patent Value
                          5% points              10% points             5% points              10% points
Country
                          tax change             tax change             tax change             tax change

United States                 58.0                  116.1                  1,225.5                2,451.0
Great Britain                 16.4                  32.7                    345.5                  691.0
Canada                        17.6                  35.1                    370.6                  741.3
Germany                       17.7                   35.4                   373.2                  746.5
France                        10.9                  21.7                    229.1                  458.3
Italy                          3.0                   5.9                    62.7                   125.3
Japan                         8.5                   17.0                    180.0                  360.0
Switzerland                   5.5                   11.0                    116.0                  232.0

Notes: All numbers are in millions. Elasticities per country are calculated for the year 2000. The control group
chosen is the below top 25% of inventors from Table 5. To compute the change in domestic inventors and the change
in foreign inventors, we consider a 5 and 10 percentage points decrease in top tax rates from the actual tax rate in
each country. The economic gain per year is computed as in formula (11). Columns 1 and 2 assume a patent value
per superstar top 1% inventor equal to the average patent value of $ 2.7 million. Columns 3 and 4 assume a large
patent value equal to $ 57 million. These values are obtained using patent value estimates from Pakes (1985) and
our own calculations provided in the text. These effects could be underestimating the economic value lost if there
are positive spillovers from having superstar inventors locally (as documented in the papers cited in the Introduction
and in Section 2.3).



employer. The first is whether employer characteristics, in particular whether it is a multinational
company and how concentrated it is in some countries, matters. The second is whether the employer
contributes to the decision of where to locate and, as a result, the estimated elasticity is a mix of
employee and firm responses.
    Regarding the latter question, the top personal income tax rate affects the surplus available
from a firm-employee match. Depending on the bargaining setup between firms and employees, the
firm should internalize to varying degrees the level of the personal income tax rate. In the limit, if
the firm had to pay full compensating differentials for higher top tax rates to star workers, it should
perfectly internalize personal income tax rates. At the same time, the company might bring to the
table other considerations for relocating the worker, which are orthogonal to the personal income
tax rate. In this latter case, the observed sensitivity to the top personal income tax rates should
be lowered relative to a case where workers and firms decide unitarily. To sum up, any observed
response to personal income taxes may be driven by the employee or by the firm, depending on the
bargaining and wage setting process.
    Regarding the role of the type of employer, in theory, the effects on international mobility
of working for a multinational company are ambiguous. On the one hand, it might make an
international move easier for the worker either directly within the company, or by giving him
access to a wider international network built over the course of his career in a multinational. Of
course, workers more likely to take advantage of tax differentials in the future could also simply

                                                         37
                                                                            Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

self-select into a multinational with the expectation to move in response to tax rates. On the
other hand, multinationals may be more able to relocate their workers internationally for strategic
corporate reasons, rather than because of personal income tax rates, which would tend to dampen
the estimated elasticity to top personal tax rates. The role of companies for inventor mobility is
studied in Table 8.


               Table 8: The Role of Companies for Inventor Mobility
                                                                            (1)                    (2)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                                               1.400∗∗∗                 0.980∗
                                                                         (0.500)                 (0.537)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                                              0.868∗                  0.548
                                                                         (0.473)                 (0.493)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                                              0.514                  0.199
                                                                         (0.473)                 (0.491)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                                             0.181                 -0.0974
                                                                         (0.468)                 (0.481)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                                         -0.254                  -0.560
                                                                         (0.472)                 (0.485)
Log Retention Rate × Not Multinational                                   -0.216∗
                                                                         (0.129)
Log Retention Rate × Activity abroad                                                            -1.470∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.137)
Quality× Country FE                                                        YES                    YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                                                YES                    YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                                           YES                    YES
Control: Top 5-10                      Domestic elasticity                  .018                   .011
                                       s.e                                (.0045)                (.0047)
                                       Foreign elasticity                   .809                   .420
                                       s.e                                 (.201)                 (.154)
Control: Top 10-25                     Domestic elasticity                  .024                   .016
                                       s.e                                (.0045)                (.0046)
                                       Foreign elasticity                  1.113                   .579
                                       s.e                                 (.197)                 (.151)
Control: Below Top 25                  Domestic elasticity                  .034                   .027
                                       s.e                                (.0047)                (.0049)
                                       Foreign elasticity                  1.511                   .828
                                       s.e                                 (.211)                 (.159)
Observations                                                             7059856                6168504
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. See the
explanatory notes to Table 5. All regressions contain the same covariates as Table 5, column 4. Column 1 adds an
interaction term of the log retention rate with whether the inventor was employed by a non-multinational company
in the last period observed. Employees from non multinationals appear significantly less sensitive to the tax rate,
which can indicate that they are less able to move internationally to take advantage of lower taxes. Column 2 adds
as a control the share of innovative activity of the inventor’s company that takes place in the destination country
and an interaction of the activity share with the top retention rate. Inventors are significantly less sensitive to the
top tax rate in any destination country if their company has a large share of its innovative activity in that country.
∗
  p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                          38
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

    Column 1 of Table 8 reports the results from the benchmark specification, adding the interaction
of the top retention rate with a dummy equal to 1 if the inventor did not work for a multinational
company in the previous period during which he was observed in the sample. Inventors who are not
in multinationals are significantly less sensitive to the top tax rate. It seems, then, that working
for a multinational company facilitates taking advantage of tax differentials.
    Next, we compute the share of innovative activity of the inventor’s company that takes place in
each potential destination country, defined as the fraction of yearly patents of the company assigned
to inventors from that country. Column 2 shows that if the company of the inventor has a higher
share of its innovative activities in some destination country, the inventor is less sensitive to the
retention rate in that destination country. The elasticity for those inventors whose company has
no share of activity in the foreign country is very large, but declines very rapidly in the share of
activity abroad.
    This does not give us much indication as to who (the employee or the firm) ultimately takes
the decision where to locate the worker. Indeed, a higher activity share abroad might mean that
the idiosyncratic preference µ of the inventor is large for that destination country, due to career
concerns, and this difference is sufficiently large to outweigh tax differentials. But it may instead be
the company that wants to relocate inventors to high activity places for strategic corporate reasons
unrelated to the personal income tax. Both scenarios would generate the reduced elasticity to tax
rates observed in column 2.
    While companies may or may not be relocating workers due to personal tax considerations,
we can at least provide some evidence that they do not relocate inventors in our sample based on
corporate taxation. Appendix Table A14 reports the results from regressions identical to those in
Table 4, to which we add the corporate tax as an explanatory variable. The corporate tax rate has
no explanatory power for inventors’ location decisions.
    Overall, even though we cannot ultimately detect who makes the decision to move, we showed
that employer characteristics matter for the elasticity of migration to top tax rates.


6     Robustness to Alternative Specifications and Extensions
This section provides an extensive series of robustness checks on our benchmark results and several
extensions.

6.1   Alternative inventor quality measures
Our measure of inventor quality and the corresponding ranking of inventors is central to our analysis.
Therefore, we explore here how the results change if we consider different quality measures.

Static versus dynamic measures, wage formation and employer expectations: Recall
that our benchmark quality measure is dynamic citations-weighted patents. This means that an
inventor could be classified as a superstar today (if he is ranked in the top of the regional quality

                                                  39
                                                                   Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

distribution in that year), but may not have been a superstar yesterday and may also no longer
be a superstar tomorrow. I.e., dynamic superstar rankings can change over time and it is assumed
that only the current quality ranking matters for income. This corresponds to a situation in which
the employer has no foresight at all about the inventor’s future potential or there are no job search
and matching frictions that would prevent firms from firing a worker and hiring a better one in a
future period in which information about the inventor’s quality is revealed. Symmetrically, it also
implies that, conditional on the current value of the quality measure and rank, past rankings do
not matter.
   Of course, the wage setting process is a complicated one and might depend both on past
performance and future expectations, which provide the employer with additional information
about the inventor’s productivity not necessarily reflected in his current patents to date. To take a
concrete example from academia, a university might hire a promising young Ph.D. graduate without
any publication or patent record, based on his revealed skills during conversations and seminars.
This new hire may have a high marginal product as measured by his impact on graduate students
and colleagues that is not yet reflected in his publication record. Alternatively, a senior professor
with several very high impact publications, but who is no longer producing at a level that would
classify him in the current top 1% of researchers is probably still highly paid based on his past
record.
   If these situations apply in practice, a more appropriate component of the income of an inventor
would be based on a lifetime, static quality. In particular, we can redefine an inventor as being in the
top 1% of inventors if, over the course of his life in the sample, he has ever been or will ever be in the
top 1%. The results for this alternative quality measure are in column 1 of Table 9. The elasticity
measures are very close to the benchmark (column 4 in Table 5). In reality, wages are probably set
to some extent based on current marginal product and to some extent based on potential future
information and on realized past information, especially if there are search and matching frictions
that make the employer want to lock in promising employees. It is hence reassuring that even a
fully static measure still maintains our main result.
   We also consider the case in which an inventor is defined as a superstar if he has ever been
in the top 1% in the past (even if he currently no longer is in the top 1%). This corresponds to
the case in which an inventor is always rewarded for past success, even independent of his current
performance, but is not rewarded in anticipation of future success, or there is no advance, lead
information about the inventor. The results are almost perfectly identical to the static measure in
column 1 of Table 9 and hence not reported to save on space.

Patent quality versus quantity measures: As described in section 2.3, there are several pos-
sible quality measures based on patents and citations that put different emphasis on the quality
versus the quantity of patents. The correlations of these various measures, although significantly
positive at the 5% level, are not always large. For instance, the correlation between measure q1
(citations-weighted patents) and q2 (number of patents) is 0.70, the correlation between q1 and q3

                                                   40
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors


                                    Table 9: Robustness Checks
                                                        Alternative quality Measures            Imputing location
                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)              (5)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                        1.363∗∗∗      0.326    2.559∗∗∗   1.696∗∗∗         1.532∗∗∗
                                                  (0.475)      (0.518)    (0.498)    (0.489)          (0.434)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                      1.131∗∗       0.489    2.097∗∗∗   1.313∗∗∗         1.153∗∗∗
                                                  (0.455)      (0.454)    (0.456)    (0.455)          (0.402)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                       0.700       0.476    1.398∗∗∗     0.738          0.940∗∗
                                                  (0.460)      (0.445)    (0.452)    (0.454)          (0.397)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                      0.415       0.594     0.738∗      0.328           0.747∗
                                                  (0.450)      (0.441)    (0.446)    (0.448)          (0.390)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                 -0.0895     1.441∗∗∗     0.183      0.123          0.810∗∗
                                                  (0.512)     (0.444)     (0.445)    (0.448)          (0.389)
Quality× Country FE                                 YES         YES        YES        YES              YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                         YES         YES        YES        YES              YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                    YES         YES        YES        YES              YES
Control: Top 5-10          Domestic elasticity       .013       -.001       .011       .021             .015
                           s.e                      (.004)    (.0042)     (.0024)    (.0055)          (.0054)
                           Foreign elasticity        .552       -.134      1.118        .84             .506
                           s.e                      (.167)     (.249)      (.262)     (.224)           (.188)
Control: Top 10-25         Domestic elasticity       .019       -.003       .015       .028             .019
                           s.e                     (.0038)    (.0042)     (.0024)    (.0052)          (.0053)
                           Foreign elasticity        .788       -.241      1.752      1.199             .672
                           s.e                      (.162)     (.249)      (.254)     (.212)           (.182)
Control: Below Top 25      Domestic elasticity       .029       -.018       .021       .034             .018
                           s.e                     (.0061)    (.0045)     (.0023)    (.0051)          (.0054)
                           Foreign elasticity       1.209      -1.008      2.286      1.378             .617
                           s.e                      (.258)      (.27)      (.248)     (.207)           (.185)
Observations                                      8616336     8616336    8616336    8616336         17173520
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. See the
notes to Table 5. All regressions contain the same covariates as Table 5, column 4. Column 1 uses the lifetime
measure of inventor ranking (“has ever been or will ever be in the top 1%,” etc..). The next three columns use three
alternative quality measures to rank inventors into the top 1%, top 1-5%, etc.. Column 2 uses the patent count
to date (measure q2 as defined by formula (2)). Column 3 uses the inventor’s average citations per patent to date
(measure q3 as defined in (3)). Column 4 uses the max citations per patent of an inventor to date (measure q4 as
defined in (4)). Column 5 is based on a balanced panel, where an inventor’s location for years in between patents is
imputed according to the procedure described in the text. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



(average citations per patent) is 0.32 and the correlation between q2 and q3 is only 0.05 (see the
full correlation matrix in Appendix Table A1).

    We may be worried that our benchmark quality measure (citations-weighted patent, q1) is
correlated with the likelihood of observing an inventor in the sample, and, consequently, with the
likelihood of observing a move. Therefore, we provide three more tests by using patent counts (q2),
average citations per patent (q3), and max citations per patent (q4) as alternative measures to show
that it is really the quality of an inventor that matters, rather than the pure quantity of patents.

                                                        41
                                                                 Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

Column 2 of Table 9 reassures us that the results are not artificially driven by observing people with
more patents more frequently. Using simple patent counts, the coefficient on the top retention rate
becomes much smaller and insignificant for top 1% inventors, while positive and significant for the
below top 25% inventors. On the other hand, using purely quality driven measures such as average
citations per patent (in column 3) or max citations per patent (in column 4), maintains or even
strengthens our benchmark results. Hence, the relation is not mechanically driven by frequency of
observation.

Patent breadth and breadth of impact measures: Another way to assess an inventor’s impact
is through the breadth of his innovations, and the extent of his new and original ideas. We hence
construct two additional quality measures. The first measure, which we call “breadth of impact”
considers the number of technology classes that end up building on an inventor’s patents. Formally,
we take the set of patents of an inventor until time t − 1 and count the number of technological
classes which contain patents that ever cite those patents. The second measure, called patent
breadth, is the dynamic claims-adjusted patent stock, i.e., the number of claims on all patents
received by the inventor by time t − 1 (constructed exactly as our benchmark measure q1, but using
claims instead of citations). It is common in the literature to use patent claims to proxy for patent
breadth (Lerner, 1994; Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004). In Appendix Table A10, we show that,
as expected, superstar inventors according to our benchmark definition, also have significantly more
patent breadth and breadth of impact. The results using the breadth of impact and the patent
breadth as quality measures are, respectively, in columns 1 and 2 of Table 10.


6.2   Accounting for potential selection
One problem about using the patent data to track inventors’ locations is that we only observe
inventors in years in which they patent, but not in the years between consecutive patents. We
perform two analyses to address this problem. First, we make sure that the results do not change
much when we impute the inventors’ locations for missing years. Second, we estimate a selection
model.

Imputing location for missing years: To impute observations for years in which inventors do
not patent, we use the following imputation algorithm: if the inventor is seen in country A in
year X and in country B in year Y > X, we assume that he has been in country A until year
X + (Y − X)/2 and in country B thereafter and until year Y . We do not impute years before the
first or after the last patent. Column 5 of Table 9 shows that the elasticities are slightly smaller,
but still very similar when we use the imputed data.

Binary Selection Model: To check for selection based on the number of patents, we also use a
formal selection model. To simplify the computational burden, we only study the mobility between
the U.S. and Canada. The U.S.-Canada corridor is very large and among inventors who migrate
within this corridor, very few also migrate to another country. Among 863,406 U.S.-born inventors,

                                                 42
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors


                   Table 10: Breadth of Impact and Patent Breadth
                                                                           (1)                   (2)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                                              1.335∗∗∗              1.113∗∗
                                                                        (0.517)               (0.500)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                                            1.180∗∗               0.856∗
                                                                        (0.488)               (0.462)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                                           1.029∗∗                0.598
                                                                        (0.478)               (0.450)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                                            0.734                0.437
                                                                        (0.474)               (0.445)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                                         0.624                0.179
                                                                        (0.471)               (0.444)
Quality× Country FE                                                       YES                   YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                                               YES                   YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                                          YES                   YES
Control: Top 5-10                     Domestic elasticity                 .007                  .015
                                      s.e                               (.0047)               (.0068)
                                      Foreign elasticity                  .269                  .429
                                      s.e                                (.203)                (.205)
Control: Top 10-25                    Domestic elasticity                 .012                  .018
                                      s.e                               (.0047)               (.0068)
                                      Foreign elasticity                  .527                  .563
                                      s.e                                  (.2)                (.204)
Control: Below Top 25                 Domestic elasticity                 .015                  .026
                                      s.e                                (.005)               (.0074)
                                      Foreign elasticity                  .623                  .777
                                      s.e                                 (.22)                 (.22)
Observations                                                            8616336               8616336
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. See the
notes to Table 5. All regressions contain the same covariates as Table 5, column 4. Column 1 uses the breadth of
impact quality measure described in the text. Column 2 uses the patent breadth quality measure. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p <
0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



640 are observed only in Canada later, while 35 are observed both in Canada and some other
country. Among 44,321 Canada-born inventors, 946 are observed only in the U.S. later and 18 are
observed both in the U.S. and some third country.
    First, we estimate a simple probit model for the inventors born and observed only in Canada
or the U.S., where the dependent variable takes the value 1 if an inventor locates in the U.S.
The dependent variables are analogous to the ones described in Section 5.1, with some small
modifications. Again, we include the same set of controls i)-iii), and we consider progressively more
detailed specifications for the counterfactual wages, by adding quality measures, quality-country
specific trends and quality-country-field specific trends. The retention rate is the U.S. top retention
rate, interacted with inventor rankings (top 1%, top 1-5%, ..).
    Next, we perform a formal Heckman selection model with exactly the same controls and compare

                                                        43
                                                                           Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

its results with those from the simple probit model without selection. We exploit a reform enacted
in 1995 and introduced by the “Patent Term and Publication Reform Act of 1994” to synchronize
patent terms with requirements of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act. The main changes were
that the patent term of 17 years (counted from the patent grant year) was changed to 20 years from
the patent’s earliest application year. Given that on average the patent grant period is less than
3 years, this is typically an effective increase in the patent term. Indeed, the average lag between
the application and the grant was 2 years, which effectively implies that the reform has increased
the average duration of patent protection upon patent grant by 1 year to 18 years (=20 years −
2 years). Appendix Table A9 provides the average gap between the application and grant years
on average, as well as for inventors of different qualities and industries. This reform increased the
likelihood of patenting, and, hence, of observing inventors in the data (see Table 11 below), but
should not have affected location choices. Hence, we use a dummy for post-1994 in the first stage
of our selection model.
    Table 11 shows the results from the simple probit model and the corresponding selection model.
It confirms that the effects of top tax rates remain very similar after controlling for selection.


                  Table 11: Heckman Selection model on Canada-U.S
                                                               (1)                          (2)
                                                              Probit                     Selection

US log retention rate × Top 1                                 1.302∗∗∗                   1.303∗∗∗
                                                               (0.283)                    (0.283)
US log retention rate × Top 1 - 5                              0.281                       0.280
                                                              (0.201)                     (0.201)
US log retention rate × Top 5 - 10                             0.202                       0.199
                                                              (0.156)                     (0.156)
US log retention rate × Top 10 - 25                            0.171                       0.168
                                                              (0.121)                     (0.122)
US log retention rate × Below top 25                          -0.0314                     -0.0359
                                                              (0.120)                     (0.120)
First stage
Post reform (1994) dummy                                                                 0.0882∗∗∗
                                                                                         (0.0288)
Observations                                                  568749                     1160136
Notes: Estimation on a sample limited to the United States and Canada. Probit regression in column (1) with
dependent variable equal to 1 if the inventor locates in the United States. Heckman selection estimation in column
(2), using a dummy for post-1994 as an instrument. Robust t-statistics clustered at the inventor level in parentheses.
All columns contain the same covariates as column 3 of Table 5. The probit and selection models yield very similar
coefficients on the interaction of top 1% inventors and the U.S. top retention rate. The first stage of the reform is
highly significant. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

    To sum up, the results using imputed data showed that imputing missing years leaves the results
highly significant (Table 9, column 5). The results from section 6.1 using patent count as a quality

                                                         44
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

measure showed that the relation between patenting and moving was not mechanical. Combined
with the formal selection model results, this tends to show that selection based on patenting is
likely not the driver of our results.

Sample selection: One might be worried that the choice of patenting in the USPTO is not
innocuous for foreign inventors. First, it could be that inventors who plan to migrate to the U.S.
tend to patent more heavily with the USPTO. This would tend to make the observed sample more
mobile on average than a fictitious sample in which inventors are randomly assigned to patent offices.
On the other hand, however, conditional on appearing in the sample, those who had planned to
migrate to the U.S. (and, accordingly, had decided to patent with the USPTO) may not be driven
at all by tax considerations, which would tend to reduce the elasticity to taxes. To address this
issue we first repeat the analysis on inventors who patent with the EPO. Many more inventors in
the EPO data are Europeans. These results are presented in Section 7 and confirm our previous
results. Second, we drop all movers to the U.S. from both the USPTO and the EPO samples.
These results are reported in Appendix Tables A15 and A17. These tables show that the effect of
the top retention rate is still very significant on the superstar top 1% inventors.52


6.3    Long-term Mobility

The mobility of inventors has different economic implications if it is short-term versus long-term. In
this section, we consider the effects of taxation exclusively on long-term mobility. We define a long-
term move as a move that is never followed by a move back to the origin country during the time the
inventor is in the sample. Recall that the average time in the benchmark sample for an inventor is
12 years. On the one hand, long-term mobility may be much less sensitive to contemporaneous tax
rates, since people should normally re-optimize only once future tax changes happen. On the other
hand, long-term mobility could be even more strongly correlated with tax changes if tax changes
are highly persistent and people are aware of this fact, or if people overestimate the persistence of
tax changes and are then faced with moving costs that prevent them from moving back during the
average period of 12 years that we observe them. The results in column 1 of Table 12 show that
domestic inventors’ long-term mobility is slightly less sensitive to tax rates. For foreign inventors,
it is slightly more sensitive to tax rates. When it comes to long-term moves, it does not seem to
matter significantly whether the inventor works for a multinational (column 2). It still seems to
matter how concentrated the research activity of the employer is (column 3), although the effects
are weakened. This may indicate that for long-term mobility career concerns continue to matter.

  52
     Note that for the USPTO sample, overall the estimated coefficients are larger, but the elasticities for domestic
superstar inventors are a bit smaller and the elasticities of foreign superstar inventors are a bit larger. This is due
to the lower overall number of moves once we drop moves to the U.S. (see our discussion of how the elasticities are
derived from the multinomial logit as in (9) and (10) and related to the probability of staying in one’s home country).
For the EPO data described in Section 7, there is barely any change at all in the estimated elasticities of domestic
superstar inventors from dropping movers to the U.S., and an increase in the elasticity of foreign superstar inventors.


                                                          45
                                                                          Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva


                                  Table 12: Long-term mobility
                                                                 (1)               (2)               (3)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                                     2.600∗∗∗         2.285∗∗∗          2.168∗∗∗
                                                                (0.781)          (0.798)           (0.817)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                                   2.273∗∗∗         1.677∗∗           1.687∗∗
                                                                (0.749)          (0.772)           (0.742)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                                  1.705∗∗           1.265∗            1.296∗
                                                                (0.749)          (0.763)           (0.728)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                                   1.211            0.997             1.009
                                                                (0.742)          (0.760)           (0.721)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                                1.067            0.549             0.563
                                                                (0.741)          (0.767)           (0.726)
Log Retention Rate × Not Multinational                                            -0.148
                                                                                 (0.165)
Log Retention Rate × Activity abroad                                                              -1.636∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.190)
Quality× Country FE                                              YES              YES               YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                                      YES              YES               YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                                 YES              YES               YES
Control: Top 5-10                Domestic elasticity             .012              .011              .007
                                 s.e                           (.0042)           (.0032)           (.0038)
                                 Foreign elasticity              .777              .954              .458
                                 s.e                             (.27)            (.279)            (.218)
Control: Top 10-25               Domestic elasticity             .021              .013              .009
                                 s.e                           (.0041)           (.0031)           (.0037)
                                 Foreign elasticity             1.206             1.204               .61
                                 s.e                            (.254)            (.271)            (.215)
Control: Below Top 25            Domestic elasticity             .022              .019              .014
                                 s.e                           (.0041)           (.0033)           (.0038)
                                 Foreign elasticity             1.331             1.624              .846
                                 s.e                            (.259)            (.288)            (.223)
Observations                                                   8413144          6880848           6011504
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level in parentheses. See the
notes to Table 5. All regressions contain the same covariates as Table 5, column 4. The sample is restricted to
only include long-term movers, defined as inventors who move without coming back during their time in the sample.
Column 2 adds an interaction of the log retention rate with not having being the employee of a multinational firm in
the previous period. Column 3 adds as a control the share of activity of the inventor’s company in the destination
country and an interaction of the activity share with the top retention rate. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


7     European Patent Office Inventors
All our micro results until now used the DID, derived from the USPTO data. This data is naturally
heavily dominated by U.S. inventors. Therefore, it is very valuable to test whether the sensitivity of
superstar inventors to top tax rates also holds in the European Patent Office (hereafter, EPO) data.
The disambiguation of the EPO data has only recently been done and is the subject of on-going
research efforts (see Coffano and Tarasconi (2014), Breschi, Lissoni, and Tarasconi (2014)).
    In this data, the representation of the same 8 countries we used for our benchmark analysis is

                                                        46
Taxation and the International Mobility of Inventors

as follows: Canada accounts for 1.3%, Switzerland for 3.3%, Germany for 23.7%, France for 7.7%,
Great Britain for 6.2%, Italy for 3.8%, Japan for 16.4% and the U.S. for 27.5%. Hence, the biggest
difference is the reduced share of the U.S. in the data. The construction of all variables and the
sample is the same as for the benchmark analysis. For consistency, we also consider the exact same
8 countries. Appendix Table A11 provides some summary statistics for the European patent office
data. The sample period here is 1977-2007.
    Table 13 provides the counterpart of the benchmark results in Table 5 and the extended results
in Table 9 for the EPO data.

       Table 13: Inventor mobility in the European Patent Office data
                                                     Benchmark               Alternative quality Measures
                                                         (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)

Log Retention Rate × Top 1                            0.978∗∗∗       1.145∗∗∗    2.257∗∗∗     1.737∗∗∗      0.188
                                                       (0.320)        (0.285)     (0.358)      (0.313)     (0.317)
Log Retention Rate × Top 1-5                          0.954∗∗∗       0.944∗∗∗    1.626∗∗∗     1.054∗∗∗    0.492∗∗
                                                       (0.240)        (0.232)     (0.261)      (0.253)     (0.229)
Log Retention Rate × Top 5-10                         0.840∗∗∗       0.741∗∗∗    1.352∗∗∗     0.956∗∗∗    0.647∗∗∗
                                                       (0.230)        (0.243)     (0.247)      (0.243)     (0.219)
Log Retention Rate × Top 10-25                          0.295          0.347     0.888∗∗∗     0.445∗∗     0.989∗∗∗
                                                       (0.224)        (0.233)     (0.234)      (0.226)     (0.213)
Log Retention Rate × Below Top 25                       0.196         0.0189     0.00663      -0.0526     1.312∗∗∗
                                                       (0.264)        (0.593)     (0.228)      (0.248)     (0.256)
Quality× Country FE                                     YES            YES         YES          YES         YES
Quality × Country FE × Year                             YES            YES         YES          YES         YES
Quality×Country FE×Year×Field FE                        YES            YES         YES          YES         YES
Control: Top 5-10           Domestic elasticity          .001          .007         .004        .014         -.009
                            s.e                        (.0057)       (.0042)      (.0016)     (.0048)      (.0048)
                            Foreign elasticity           .136          .395         .902        .765         -.450
                            s.e                         (.273)        (.253)       (.311)      (.259)       (.268)
Control: Top 10-25          Domestic elasticity          .014          .012         .007        .021         -.014
                            s.e                        (.0054)       (.0038)      (.0016)     (.0047)      (.0047)
                            Foreign elasticity           .667          .780        1.366       1.269         -.782
                            s.e                         (.266)        (.235)       (.307)      (.247)       (.265)
Control: Below Top 25       Domestic elasticity           .02           .02         .012        .032         -.019
                            s.e                        (.0065)       (.0096)      (.0016)     (.0049)      (.0057)
                            Foreign elasticity           .763         1.102        2.242       1.756        -1.099
                            s.e                         (.308)        (.583)       (.302)       (.26)       (.319)
Observations                                          8461393        8461393     8461393      8461393     8461393
Notes: Multinomial logit regressions on data from the EPO. Robust standard errors clustered at the inventor level
in parentheses. See the explanatory footnote to Table 5. All columns contains the same covariates as Column 4
in Table 5. Column 1 corresponds exactly to column 4 from Table 5, but using the EPO data. Column 2 uses
the static or lifetime measure of inventor ranking (“has ever been or will ever be in the top 1%,” etc..). The next
three columns use three alternative quality measures to rank inventors into the top 1%, top 1-5%, etc.. Column
3 uses the inventor’s average citations per patent to date (measure q3 as defined in (3)). Column 4 uses the max
citations per patent of an inventor to date (measure q4 as defined in (4)). Column 5 uses the patent count to date
(measure q2 as defined by formula (2)). All these quality measures were described in detail in Sections 2.3 and 6.1.
∗
  p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                        47
                                                                Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva

    Column 1 contains the results using our benchmark quality measure of citations-weighted
patents (q1). We see the same pattern as in the DID with the superstar top 1% inventors very sig-
nificantly sensitive to top tax rates. The elasticities of both domestic and foreign superstar top 1%
inventors are somewhat smaller than in the DID. Indeed, in the EPO, even the top 5-10% inventors
are significantly sensitive to top tax rates, probably because top tax brackets are in general lower
in European countries (which are naturally more heavily represented in the EPO than in the DID).
Using the top 10-25% and the below top 25% as control groups, yields, respectively, elasticities of
domestic top 1% superstar inventors of 0.014 and 0.02 and elasticities of foreign top 1% superstar
inventors of 0.67 and 0.76.
    The next four columns consider the alternative quality measures already shown for the DID in
Table 9. Column 2 shows the static or lifetime quality measure (“has ever been or will ever be in
the top 1%,” etc...) as described in Section 6.1. Column 3 shows the average citations per patent
(measure q3), while column 4 shows the max citations per patent (measure q4). As was the case in
the benchmark DID as well, ranking inventors according to their max citations per patent (measure
q4) yields the strongest elasticities for domestic top 1% superstar inventors of, respectively 0.02
and 0.032 depending on the control group. Column 5 reports the results for the pure patent count,
for which, as explained in Section 6.1, it is a very good sign that the effects of the top retention
rate on superstar inventors are not significant.
    In Online Appendix Table A17, we provide the aforementioned results with the EPO data,
dropping all inventors who ever move to the U.S.. The effect of the top tax rate on superstar top
1% inventors remains strongly significant.
    Overall, the results using the EPO data are highly consistent with those using the benchmark
DID, which gives further confidence in our estimated effects of the top tax rate on superstar top
1% inventors.


8    Conclusion
In this paper, we consider the effects of taxation on the international mobility of inventors, who
are economically highly valuable agents and key drivers of economic growth. We put particular
emphasis on superstar inventors, those with the most and most valuable inventions. We use dis-
ambiguated inventor data, based on USPTO and EPO data, to track the international location of
inventors over time, and combine it with effective top marginal tax rate data. We exploit varia-
tions in the top tax rate across time and countries, as well as its differential impact on inventors
at different points in the quality distribution.
    We first provided stylized macroeconomic facts that highlight the responses of superstar inven-
tors to top taxes. We then presented quasi-experimental evidence from three country case studies
that exploited large changes in migration policies or tax policy. We estimate a multinomial lo-
cation model and find that the baseline elasticity of the number of superstar domestic inventors
to the top net-of-tax rate is small (around 0.03 in our preferred specification). This translates on

                                                   48
average into an increase of 1% in domestic superstar top 1% inventors at home for a 10 percentage
points decrease in top tax rates from a level of 60%. The elasticity of the number of superstar
top 1% foreign inventors to the net-of-tax rate is much higher, around 1, which translates into a
26% increase in foreign superstar top 1% inventors for the same 10 percentage points decrease in
top tax rates. Inventors who have worked for multinationals in the previous period are more likely
to take advantage of tax differentials, possibly because working for a multinational makes a move
abroad easier and grants the inventor international exposure. On the other hand, inventors whose
company has a research activity that is highly concentrated in a given country are less sensitive
to tax differentials in that country, presumably because career concerns (being located where the
company’s main research activity is) outweigh tax considerations. We also find evidence for sorting
effects by ability and negative spillovers from high quality to low quality inventors.
   We then perform extensive robustness checks on the measures of earnings and quality used,
the length of the migration spells studied, and potential selection based on patenting behavior. In
these extensions and robustness checks, our results persist. We also reproduce the analysis on a
new disambiguated inventor dataset based on European Patent Office patents and find baseline
elasticities to the net-of-tax rate of 0.02 for domestic top 1% superstar inventors and of 0.76 for
foreign top 1% superstar inventors.
   These results suggest that, if the economic contribution of these key agents is very important,
their migratory responses to tax policy might represent a cost to tax progressivity. Our estimates
could fruitfully be used to calibrate the models of optimal taxation in the presence of migration
cited in the Introduction. An additional relevant consideration is that inventors may have strong
spillover effects on their geographically close peers, making it even more important to attract and
retain them domestically.
   Because inventors are key determinants of economic growth, this paper speaks to the relation
between taxation and growth. An interesting direction for future research would be to include the
migration margin of inventors, together with their externalities, into a structural economic growth
model with taxation.


References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller, “Synthetic Control Methods
 for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program,”
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2010, 105 (490), 493–505.
Abrams, David, Ufuk Akcigit, and Jillian Popadak, “Patent Value and Citations: Creative
 Destruction or Strategic Disruption?,” Working Paper 19647, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search 2013.
Bakija, Jon and Eugene Steuerle, “Individual Income Tax since 1948,” National Tax Journal,
 1991, 44 (4), 451–475.
   and Joel Slemrod, “Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes? Evidence from Federal Estate
  Tax Returns,” Working Paper 10645, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2004.
Bell, Alex, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen, “The
 Lifecycle of Inventors,” Working Paper in progress, Harvard University 2014.
Bessen, James, “The value of U.S. patents by owner and patent characteristics,” Research Policy,
 2008, 37, 932–945.
Breschi, S., F. Lissoni, and G. Tarasconi, “Inventor Data for Research on Migration and
 Innovation: A Survey and a Pilot,” Economic Research Working Paper 17, World Intellectual
 Property Organization 2014.
Chesbrough, Henry, “Emerging Secondary Markets for Intellectual Property: US and Japan
 Comparisons,” Technical Report, National Center for Industrial Property Information and Train-
 ing 2006.
Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon H. Hanson, “International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
 Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 2005, 113 (2), 239–281.
Coffano, Monica and Gianluca Tarasconi, “CRIOS - Patstat Database: Sources, Contents
 and Access Rules,” Technical Report 1, Center for Research on Innovation, Organization and
 Strategy 2014.
Cosar, A. Kerem, Nezih Guner, and James Tybout, “Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and
 Wage Distributions in an Open Economy,” Working Paper 16326, National Bureau of Economic
 Research September 2010.
Eissa, Nada, “Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Women: The Tax Reform Act of 1986 As
  a Natural Experiment,” Working Paper 5023, NBER 1995.
   and Hilary Hoynes, “The Hours of Work Response of Married Couples: Taxes and the Earned
  Income Tax Credit,” in Jonas Agell and Peter Birch Sorensen, eds., Tax Policy and Labor Market
  Performance, MIT Press, 2006.
Foley, Fritz C. and William R. Kerr, “Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activ-
  ity,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (7), 1529–1544.
Gambardella, A. and Giuri, P. and Harhoff, D. and Hoisl, K. and Mariani, M. and
 Nagaoka, S. and Torrisi, S., “Invention Processes and Economic Uses of Patents: Evidence
 from the PatVal 2 Survey,” Technical Report 2014.
Giuri, Paola, Myriam Mariani, Stefano Brusoni, Gustavo Crespi, Dominique Francoz,
 Alfonso Gambardella, Walter Garcia-Fontes, Aldo Geuna, Raul Gonzales, Dietmar
 Harhoff, Karin Hoisl, Christian Le Bash Alessandra Luzzi, Laura Magazzini, Lionel
 Nesta, nder Nomaler, Neus Palomeras, Pari Patel, Marzia Romanelli, and Bart
 Verspagen, “Inventors and Invention Processes in Europe: Results from the PatVal-EU Survey,”
 Research Policy, 2007, 36 (8), 1107–1127.
Gravelle, Jane G. and Thomas L. Hungerford, “The Challenge of Individual Income Tax
 Reform: An Economic Analysis of Tax Base Broadening,” CRS Report for Congress 7-5700,
 Congressional Research Service 2012.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson, “Income maximization and the selection and sorting
 of international migrants,” Journal of Development Economics, 2011, 95 (1), 42–57.
   and , “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of Foreign Born PhDs in the US,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 2015, pp. 493–505.
Guner, Nezih, Martin Lopez-Daneri, and Gustavo Ventura, “Heterogeneity and Govern-
 ment Revenues: Higher Taxes at the Top?,” mimeo, Arizona State 2014.

                                              50
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER Patent Citations Data
 File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” Working Paper 8498, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2001.
Harhoff, Dietmar and Karin Hoisl, “Institutionalized Incentives for Ingenuity: Patent Value
 and the German Employees Inventions Act,” Research Policy, 2007, 36, 1143–1162.
  , F. Narin, F. Scherer, and K. Vopel, “Citation Frequency and the Value of Patented
  Inventions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81 (3), 511–515.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, “Consumption Responses to In-
 Kind Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program,” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 109–139.
   and , “Work incentives and the Food Stamp Program,” Journal of Public Economics, 2012,
  96, 151–162.
Kerr, William R., “The Ethnic Composition of U.S. Inventors,” Working Papers 08-006, Harvard
 Business School 2008.
  , “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Empirical Approaches and
  Evidence,” Working Papers 14-017, Harvard Business School 2013.
Kleven, Henrik, “How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 2014, 28 (4), 77–98.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez, “Taxation and Inter-
 national Migration of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market,” American
 Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1892–1924.
  , , , and Esben Schultz, “Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence
  from the Foreigners Tax Scheme in Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129
  (1), 333–378.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman, “Technological Innovation, Resource
 Allocation, and Growth,” Working Paper 17769, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.
Lai, Ronald, Alexander D’Amour, David M. Doolin, Guan-Cheng Li, Ye Sun, Vetle
  Torvik, Amy Yu, and Lee Fleming, “Disambiguation and Co-authorship Networks of the
  U.S. Patent Inventor Database,” Working Paper, Harvard Dataverse Network 2012.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman, “Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
  Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal, 2004, 114 (495), 441–465.
Lehmann, Etienne, Laurent Simula, and Alain Trannoy, “Tax Me if You Can! Optimal
  Nonlinear Income Tax between Competing Governments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
  129 (4).
Lerner, Josh, “The Importance of Patent Scope: An Empirical Analysis,” RAND Journal of
  Economics, 1994, 25 (2), 319–333.
Liebig, Thomas, Patrick A. Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza, “Taxation and Internal
  MigrationEvidence from the Swiss Census Using Community-Level Variation in Income Tax
  Rates,” Journal of Regional Science, 2007, 47 (4), 807–836.
Miguelez, Ernest, “Inventor Diasporas and the Internationalization of Technology,” Discussion
 Paper 1425, CReAM 2013.
  and Carsten Fink, “Measuring the International Mobility of Inventors: A New Database,”
  Working Paper 8, WIPO 2013.

                                             51
   and Rosina Moreno, “What Attracts Knowledge Workers? The Role of Space and Social
  Networks,” Journal of Regional Science, 2014, 54 (1), 33–60.
Mirrlees, James, “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, 1982,
 18, 319–341.
Moretti, Enrico and Daniel Wilson, “State Incentives for Innovation, Star Scientists and Jobs:
 Evidence from Biotech,” The Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming, 2014.
   and , “The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location of Top Earners: Evidence
  from Star Scientists,” Working Paper 21120, National Bureau of Economic Research 2015.
Moser, Petra, Joerg Ohmstedt, and Paul Rhode, “Patent Citations and the Size of Innova-
 tion ? Evidence from Hybrid Corn,” Working Paper, Stanford University 2012.
NSF, “NSF SESTAT, National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG),” 2003.
Pakes, Ariel, “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal of Political
 Economy, April 1985, 93 (2), 390–409.
  , “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent Stocks,” Econo-
  metrica, 1986, 54 (4), 755–784.
   and Mark Schankerman, “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European Countries
  During the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal, 1986, 96 (384), 1052–1076.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Optimal Taxation of Top
  Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  2014, 6 (1), 230–71.
Ryder, Rodney D and Ashwin Madhavan, Intellectual Property and Business: The Power of
 Intangible Assets, SAGE Publications, 2014.
Simula, Laurent and Alain Trannoy, “Optimal Income Tax under the Threat of Migration by
  Top-Income Earners,” Journal of Public Economics, 2010, 94 (2), 163–173.
Toivanen, Otto and Lotta Väänänen, “Returns to Inventors,” The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2012, 94 (4), 1173–1190.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Innova-
  tions,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 1990, 21 (1), 172–187.
Wilson, John D., “The Effect of Potential Emigration on the Optimal Linear Income Tax,”
 Journal of Public Economics, December 1980, 14 (3), 339–353.
  , “Optimal Linear Income Taxation in the Presence of Emigration,” Journal of Public Economics,
  August 1982, 18 (3), 363–379.
Young, Cristobal and Charles Varner, “Millionaire Migration and State Taxation of Top
 Incomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” National Tax Journal, 2011, 64 (2), 255–283.
Zucker, Lynne and Michael Darby, “Movement of Star Scientists and Engineers and High-Tech
 Firm Entry,” Annals of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 115/116.




                                              52
