                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHY ARE AMERICAN WORKERS GETTING POORER? CHINA, TRADE AND
                           OFFSHORING

                                        Avraham Ebenstein
                                          Ann Harrison
                                        Margaret McMillan

                                       Working Paper 21027
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21027


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




Special thanks to David Autor, Robert Feenstra, Wayne Gray, and Lawrence Edwards for providing
data critical to our analysis. Excellent research assistance was provided by Susan Schwartz. We also
thank seminar participants at the University of Paris in preparation for the book, “The Factory - Free
Economy”, edited by Lionel Fontagne and Ann Harrison, as well as seminar participants at the World
Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Avraham Ebenstein, Ann Harrison, and Margaret McMillan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why are American Workers getting Poorer? China, Trade and Offshoring
Avraham Ebenstein, Ann Harrison, and Margaret McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 21027
March 2015
JEL No. F16,F66

                                            ABSTRACT

We suggest that the impact of globalization on wages has been missed because its effects must be
captured by analyzing occupational exposure to globalization. In this paper, we extend our previous
work to include recent years (2003-2008), a period of increasing import penetration, China’s entry
into the WTO, and growing US multinational employment abroad. We find significant effects of
globalization, with offshoring to low wage countries and imports both associated with wage declines
for US workers. We present evidence that globalization has led to the reallocation of workers away
from high wage manufacturing jobs into other sectors and other occupations, with large declines in
wages among workers who switch, explaining the large differences between industry and occupational
analyses. While other research has focused primarily on China’s trade, we find that offshoring to China
has also contributed to wage declines among US workers. However, the role of trade is quantitatively
much more important. We also explore the impact of trade and offshoring on labor force participation
rates. While offshoring to China has a negative impact on US labor force participation, other factors
such as increasing computer use and substitution of capital for labor are significantly more important
determinants of US employment rates across occupations.


Avraham Ebenstein                                  Margaret McMillan
Department of Economics                            Tufts University
Hebrew University of Jerusalem                     Department of Economics
Mount Scopus Campus, #4208                         114a Braker Hall
Jerusalem, Israel 91905                            Medford, MA 02155
ebenstein@mscc.huji.ac.il                          and International Food Policy Research Institute
                                                   and also NBER
Ann Harrison                                       margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2016 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
annh@wharton.upenn.edu
I.       Introduction

         Between 1983 and 2008, the United States economy experienced a doubling of imports of

manufactured goods, and US multinational corporations tripled their employment in low income

countries. Over this same period, domestic American manufacturing employment declined from

22 million to 16 million (CPS). Since the “great recession” of 2008, US manufacturing has

declined precipitously, with nearly 2 million additional jobs lost. Today, the US employment

recovery remains anemic, and millions of Americans of working age are either unemployed or

out of the labor force entirely. Many blame these trends on globalization, and in particular on

China.

         Following China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, Chinese

imports to the US surged. Chinese imports currently represent over 8 percent of total imports and

nearly six hundred thousand Chinese workers were employed at US multinational affiliates by

2008. These parallel developments led some critics of globalization to conclude that “good”

manufacturing jobs had been shipped overseas, and America’s pre-eminence in the world

economy has been usurped by China. But defenders of globalization respond that the role of

trade and offshoring in these trends is exaggerated. They argue that empirical support for a direct

role of foreign competition in explaining the decline in US manufacturing is limited, in spite of

popular opinion blaming globalization and China in particular.

         One possible explanation for the lack of evidence regarding the impact of trade on

American workers is that most research has focused on analysis of workers in affected industries.

In the standard approach, the wage effects of import competition on wages are identified by

exploiting variation in the prices (or quantities) of imported goods across different manufacturing

industries and examine their impact within manufacturing. Examples include Feenstra and



                                                 1
Hanson (1999), Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), and others.

However, these papers generally ignore a key marker for exposure to overseas competition,

which is whether a worker’s occupation can be performed more cheaply and reliably in China.

Relying on analysis at the industry level may also fail to account for structural change that occurs

in response to trade. Insofar as globalization affects the US labor market by pushing workers out

of manufacturing and into services, a better measure of globalization’s impact is found by

focusing on occupational exposure to globalization. This is because workers can more easily

switch industries than occupations (Kambourov and Manovskii 2009a and 2009b), and so the

wage declines will be felt by workers who are forced to leave manufacturing or their occupation

entirely.

        In Ebenstein, Harrison, McMillan, and Phillips (2014), we present evidence that an

occupation-based analysis is more effective at uncovering the impact on worker wages of global

competition. We find significant wage declines for American workers exposed to globalization,

especially among workers performing tasks that are routine, and can presumably be performed

offshore. In this paper, we extend this work, and improve upon it in several ways. Due to data

limitations, Ebenstein et al. (2014) focused on the period between 1983 and 2002.1 In this paper,

we include the effects of globalization observed up to 2008, which allows us to include a period

characterized by rapid increases in offshoring, especially to China following its accession to the

WTO at the end of 2001.

        In this paper we also focus greater attention on the differences between offshoring and

imports. Most recent papers analyzing the impact of trade on labor outcomes (e.g. Autor, Dorn,

and Hanson 2013 or Pierce and Schott 2012) focus on trade in goods. However, trade in tasks, or

1
  The updated analysis was made possible by recently- released trade and offshoring data, as well as IPUMS-
Minnesota, which provided concordances necessary to generate industry and occupation codes consistent over time,
including the switch between 2002 and 2003 from SIC to NAICS.

                                                       2
offshoring, has the ability to affect a much wider class of workers. As we will demonstrate, while

imports are often found in low value added sectors (e.g. toys), offshore employment is most

common in high value added sectors, such as motor vehicles and electronics, where companies

would not want to share their intellectual property with a foreign firm. These industries have

historically had higher rates of unionization, and higher US wages. This new trend is potentially

much more threatening to American workers by reducing their bargaining leverage. Insofar as

the threat to move a factory overseas to China is credible, globalization can generate downward

pressure on wages, and affect even those workers whose jobs are not sent overseas. If the wages

prevailing in an occupation become sufficiently low relative to historical standards, many older

workers may begin to exit the labor force entirely.

         A second contribution of this paper is to disaggregate the impact of geographically

distinct sources of offshore employment changes on domestic US wages. In particular, we

measure the impact of offshore employment by US multinationals in China, Mexico, India, and

other low income locations. We also compare their impact on domestic US wages with offshore

employment growth in high income locations. We concentrate our analysis on China, and

compare the effects of import competition from China and offshore employment in China on US

worker wages.

         Consistent with our earlier work, we find that offshoring to low wage countries is

associated with wage declines for US workers, and the workers most affected are those

performing routine tasks. Our results indicate that a ten percentage point increase in occupational

exposure to import competition is associated with a 2.7 percent decline in real wages for workers

who perform routine tasks.2 We also find substantial wage effects of offshoring to low wage


2
 This finding is consistent with recent work highlighting the differential impact of offshoring by worker skill type.
Hummels, Jøgensen, Munch and Xiang (2011) use matched worker and firm data from Denmark and find that

                                                          3
countries: a ten percent increase in occupation-specific exposure to overseas employment in low

wage countries is associated with a 0.27 percent decline in real wages for workers performing

routine tasks for our entire sample, and nearly a 1 percent decline for 2000-2008. The wages of

workers without higher education and older workers are disproportionately affected by

offshoring activities, as the point estimates are larger for these groups of workers. If instead we

measure exposure to globalization at the industry level, we find no significant effects on US

worker wages.

        The downward pressure from trade and offshoring on US wages using occupational (but

not industry-level) measures of globalization explains the puzzling results reported in Autor,

Dorn, and Hanson (2013). They find a positive, but insignificant impact of import competition

on local wages, leading them to conclude that “manufacturing plants react to import competition

by accelerating technological and organizational innovations that increase productivity and may

raise wages”. Our research suggests that occupational exposure to globalization puts significant

downward pressure on wages because such a measure captures the movement of workers out of

manufacturing and into lower wage services.

        We explicitly test the importance of this mechanism to confirm the stark differences

between occupational versus industry measures of globalization. Using a subset of the CPS data

where we are able to follow the same worker over time, we measure what happens to worker

wages when they switch industries or occupations. Since our original exercise was motivated by

the possibility that globalization has affected US workers by forcing them out of manufacturing3,



offshoring raises skilled worker wages but lowers unskilled worker wages, while exporting raises the wages of all
types of workers.
3
  Our results corroborate results on employment declines within manufacturing by Harrison and McMillan (2011)
who use firm-level data on multinational manufacturing firms, but stand in contrast to Desai, Foley, and Hines
(2009). Desai, Foley, and Hines do not distinguish between high wage and low wage affiliate employment and find
that offshoring is unambiguously positive for US employment.

                                                        4
we directly examine the wage impact of switching within manufacturing, switching from

manufacturing, and finally, both switching out of manufacturing and switching occupations. We

find evidence that while the wage impacts of switches within manufacturing are mild, leaving

manufacturing for services is associated with an appreciable loss in wages, and larger losses still

for workers who are forced to switch occupation upon leaving manufacturing. This highlights the

importance of examining the impact of globalization by looking beyond workers only employed

directly in manufacturing.

       We then turn to a more in-depth analysis of competition from China, the US’s largest

trading partner and second most popular destination for offshoring (after Mexico) in 2008. We

present evidence that both imports from China and offshoring to China are associated with lower

US worker wages. Increasing occupational import penetration from China by a 10 percentage

point share of a market is associated with a 5.6 percent point wage decline, and increasing

occupational offshore exposure to China is associated with a further 1.6% decline in wages. The

results suggest that focusing on imports alone (as in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013)) may

understate the role of globalization in contributing to falling US wages.

       Lastly, we begin to examine the role played by trade and offshoring in explaining US

labor force participation. In the wake of the global financial crisis and the slow recovery, the US

has suffered persistently high rates of unemployment relative to historical averages, and

generational lows in labor force participation rates. While some of this is due to population

aging, the decline in labor force participation is thought to reflect the long-term weakness of the

labor market. Many unemployed Americans have discontinued their job searches, but the extent

to which this is related to globalization is unclear. We hypothesize that for workers who




                                                 5
participated in the “glory days” of American manufacturing, the offered wages available in the

market where they could secure employment do not justify working or continuing a job search.

       In our empirical analysis, we examine the relationship between trade, offshoring, and

labor force participation. We find a robust negative correlation between offshore exposure to

China and labor force participation, within age-year-occupation cells but interestingly, a positive

relationship between labor force participation and import competition from China. The evidence

suggests that factors associated with computer use and increasing capital intensity are much

more significantly associated with declining employment. Consistent with Harrison and

McMillan (2011), we find very small effects of globalization on labor force participation and

large effects of computer use and the price of investment goods. Falling investment goods prices

are associated with increasing use of capital. Greater use of computers and capital equipment is

associated with lower employment, higher unemployment, and lower labor force participation.

Taken together, our results indicate that while globalization as measured by trade and offshoring

is associated with downward pressure on US wages, globalization is not strongly associated with

the historically low rates of labor force participation. In fact, import competition appears to be

associated with higher rates of labor force participation, higher employment, and lower

unemployment.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes our data, documents broad trends

in trade and offshoring, and presents our empirical specification. Section III presents our main

empirical findings regarding the impact of globalization on domestic wages at the occupation

versus the industry level. Section IV examines the role of imports from and offshoring to China

and other destination countries in labor force participation in the United States. Section V

concludes.



                                                 6
II.     Data Description, Empirical Strategy, and Trends

A.      Data Description

        Our sample of US workers is taken from the Current Population Survey Merged

Outgoing Rotation Groups for 1983-2008, which provides data for over 4.3 million workers who

are assigned a consistent classification for their industry and occupation during the period.4

Offshore activity in each industry is measured by the total employment of foreign affiliates by

US multinationals, separated into high and low-income affiliate locations, as collected by the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).5 Our data on import penetration and export shares are

taken from Bernard at al. (2006), which we recalculated and updated through 2007. We control

for productivity changes that could also affect labor demand as well as wages using the NBER’s

calculations of total factor productivity provided by Wayne Gray, also updated through 2007.

The NBER data also provides measures of the prices of investment goods, capital to labor ratios,

and the real price of shipments by industry and year.6 These are included in our main

specifications to control for technological change that could also affect wage rates. We include

occupational exposure versions of these variables, which are generated in a manner similar to the

globalization variables. Lastly, we match our worker data with information on computer use


4
  We would like to express our gratitude to IPUMS-CPS, which generated a consistent coding scheme of industries
and occupations for the period. We use occ1990 in our analysis for coding occupation. We use a tweaked version of
ind1990 and create a concordance with the BEA industry scheme for coding industry. All programs and public data
are available from the authors upon request.
5
  The BEA sample of multi-national firms accounted for 80 percent of total output in manufacturing in 1980,
suggesting that the coverage is fairly extensive. However, using these data we are unable to distinguish between
imports from affiliates (arms-length trade between firms) and imports from non-affiliates.
6
  These data were aggregated from the 4-digit to 3-digit SIC level using the employment distribution in 1979. The 3-
digit SIC level was converted to our industry classification scheme using a concordance provided by David Autor
that was a census-based scheme that consistently defined industries for our sample period. A similar method was
used to match CPS workers to the trade data.

                                                         7
rates by industry and occupation from CPS computer supplements conducted during our sample

period (1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, 2000). Using the available surveys, we interpolate computer use

rates for intervening years. Since the CPS changed the nature of the computer question following

2000, we freeze computer use rates by occupation at the rates in 2002. Summary statistics for the

individual worker sample matched to our offshoring, trade, technology, and price data are

available in Table 1 for 1983 and 2007.

         We use Autor et al.’s (2003) distinction between routine and non-routine tasks to allow

us to separately identify the impact of different measures of globalization across different types

of workers. 7 To the extent that routine tasks are more easily offshored or replaced with imports,

we would expect globalization to have a larger impact on workers performing these types of

tasks. While Autor et al. (2003) use routine-ness to designate which jobs can be easily performed

by computers, we would argue that routine jobs are also more readily codified, communicated,

and consequently transferred overseas. Examples of these jobs include attaching hands to faces

of watches, sewing fasteners and decorative trimming to articles of clothing, and services tasks

that we think of as offshorable, such as answering telephones. This is described in greater detail

in Ebenstein et al. 2014.



B.       Empirical Strategy

         Our empirical strategy is to regress log wages of worker i in industry j in period t (Wijt) on

lagged measures of exposure to offshoring and international trade (Gijt-1) using annual data from




7
 These data were also provided by David Autor and are used in Autor et al. (1998). Autor et al. (2003) describe
routine jobs as “tasks that can be expressed using procedural or ‘rules-based’ logic, that is, codified in a fully
specified sequence of logical programming commands (“If-Then-Do” statements) that designate unambiguously
what actions the machine will perform and in what sequence at each contingency to achieve the desired result.”

                                                          8
1983 to 2008, first at the industry level and subsequently at the occupation level, which we

define below.

       We use lagged measures of exposure to offshoring and trade for two reasons. First, since

offshoring requires time to implement, and wage adjustment is not instantaneous, it is unlikely

that the causal effect of offshoring on wages will play out within a single calendar year. Second,

within a given year, offshoring, trade exposure, and wages are likely to be affected by

simultaneous shocks. In our basic specification in Tables 2 and 3, we use four measures of

exposure to offshoring and international trade: offshoring to low-income affiliate locations,

offshoring to high-income affiliate locations, export shares, and import penetration. Offshoring

is measured as the log of summed employment in sector j and year t by US multinationals in low

and high-income countries.

       There are three additional challenges to identifying the causal effect of globalization on

wages. First, the industries that are most likely to globalize may also be those with lower wages

or greater volatility. We address this concern by including industry fixed effects (Ij) in our

specification. Second, globalization and wages may be jointly affected by common time-varying

shocks, such as the business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations. We control for these by

including time fixed effects (dt). Third, we control for time-varying shocks at the industry level

that could be confounded with changes in globalization by adding a number of additional

controls. TFPjt-1 captures changes in productivity by industry and year that could affect demand

for labor. We also control for productivity changes including two (arguably) exogenous

measures, the price of investment goods and computer use rates. The price of investment goods

PINVjt-1 captures in part the role of falling computer prices and the potential impact of labor-

saving technology on labor market outcomes. We also control for industry factor intensity



                                                  9
(lagged capital to labor ratio KLRATIOjt-1) and computer use rates by industry and year (COMPjt)

to account for contemporaneous changes in an industry’s wage rate based on the ability to

substitute for labor with computers.8 Finally, we control for individual characteristics of the labor

force by including age, sex, race, experience, education, and location (Zijt). The estimating

equation at the industry level (for manufacturing only) is given by:

(1a )


Wijt   0 Z ijt   1G jt 1   2TFP jt 1   3 PINV jt 1   4 KLRATIO          jt 1     5COMP jt   6 d t   7 I j   ijt .




           To examine the relationship between wages and globalization at the occupation level, we

retain the same setup as in (1a) but expand the sample to include workers outside of

manufacturing. We also modify the G vector to create a measure of occupational exposure to

offshoring or trade. Each variable in the G vector was created from a merged dataset of BEA

offshore employment data, trade data, and CPS monthly outgoing rotation group individual-level

data, by industry and year. We calculate for each occupation its exposure to trade using as

weights the distribution of workers employed in this occupation across industries in 1983. For

                                                                      Lkj83
each occupation k and industry j, we have:  kj83                              where Lkj83 is the total number of
                                                                       Lk 83

workers in occupation k and industry j in 1983, and Lk 83 is the total number of workers across all

industries in occupation k. We then calculate occupation-specific import penetration in year t for

occupation k as:

                                                       J

                                                            kj83   IMP jt ,
                                                       j 1




8
    Our results are similar if we control for computer use rates in the previous year.

                                                               10
            where IMPjt is the measure of import penetration for goods in industry j in year t. We continue to

            control for technological changes by industry, and set these technological changes equal to unity

            for workers outside of manufacturing.9

                      This leads to a specification of the form:

(1b)


Wijkt   0 Z ijkt   1G kt1   2 TFP jt 1   3 PINV jt 1   4 KLRATIO   jt 1     5COMPkt   6 d t   7 I j   8Occupation k   ijkt


            where k indexes the worker’s occupation, and workers within the same k occupation may be in

            different j industries.10 For workers outside of manufacturing, the control variables for TFP,

            PIINV, and REALSHIP are produced at an occupation level using the same method as with trade

            and offshoring, where movement is based on the weighted average of change across industries,

            where the weights are taken from the occupation’s distribution across industries.

                      Our G vector and technology control variables are now an occupation-specific measure

            for each worker, and we have added occupation fixed effects to absorb variation specific to time

            invariant features of occupations. Note that we also control for variation in computer use rates by

            occupation and year, which is meant to account for wage changes driven by the ability of some

            occupations to benefit from computer technology (Autor et al. 1998). We will estimate this

            specification for routine and non-routine workers separately. 11



            9
               An alternative approach would be to create occupation-specific measures of each of our control variables. In the
            online appendix, we estimate models with occupational-specific measures of TFP, the price of investment goods,
            and the capital to labor ratio. The results are qualitatively similar to the results presented in the main text. These are
            presented in Table A9.
            10
               For workers outside of manufacturing, the control variables for TFP, PIINV, and REALSHIP are not available
            and are therefore assumed constant in our main specifications.
            11
                One important implicit assumption in our approach is that barriers to changing occupations are similar across
            routine and non-routine occupations. Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) show this to be the case. They also
            decompose occupation switching across routine and non-routine occupations and show that between 1968 and 1997
            workers were not able to escape routine occupations by switching into non-routine ones.


                                                                          11
C.       Trends in Offshoring, Trade, Employment, and Wages

         In this section we outline broad trends in the data for employment, wages, and the

relationship between wages and measures of globalization. In Figure 1, we compare the trends in

employment and wages in the manufacturing sector alongside the same trends in the service

sector between 1979 and 2012. We present these trends separately for workers performing

routine and non-routine tasks. Total manufacturing employment (using the CPS employment

numbers) fell from 22 to below 16 million from 1979 to 2008, with rapid declines at the

beginning of the early 1980s and in the late 1990s. Within manufacturing, the labor force has

become increasingly high-skilled with a large decline of about 8 million workers in routine

occupations. While there was a modest increase of 1.5 million between 1979 and 1999 in the

number of workers performing non-routine occupations, this increase evaporated in the ten years

that followed.

         In contrast, demand for both types of workers continued to grow in the service sector, and

many of the displaced routine manufacturing workers may have found employment in the service

sector. These trends have important implications for the US wage distribution. As shown in the

bottom of Figure 1, where we report the real hourly wage among CPS workers, manufacturing

workers enjoyed a large wage premium during the entire period among both routine and non-

routine workers. Insofar as manufacturing provided an opportunity to earn high relative wages –

even for low-skill workers – the fall in manufacturing employment might also have played a role

in increasing US income inequality during the period.12



12
   See Autor et al. (2008) for a review of these trends. It is worth noting that while the trends in Figure 1 are
informative, they do not control for other factors that affect income, such as sex, age, and experience. We redid the
trends in wages by educational attainment using wage residuals. These wage residuals were computed using
Lemieux’s (2006) approach for each educational category separately. We also added industry dummies to control
for inter-industry wage differentials. The wage residuals show similar trends, with falling wage premia for less

                                                          12
        The three panels displaying wage trends exhibit significant differences during the sample

period. Real wages grew in the 1980s, fell or stagnated in the 1990s, and then began to increase

around 1995-1996. Over the entire period, the gap between manufacturing and service wages

narrowed, particularly from the mid-1990s onwards. The persistently higher wage offered in

manufacturing relative to services during the entire sample period, and present in both routine

and non-routine occupations, is an important stylized fact that we emphasize in this paper. As

we will show in Section III, much of the impact of globalization has operated by shifting workers

from the higher paid manufacturing sectors to the lower paid service sectors in the US labor

market.

        In Figure 2, we turn to an examination of how offshoring and trade may be related to

these employment and wage trends within manufacturing and in the overall economy. As shown

in Figure 2, foreign affiliate employment in low-income countries by US multinationals nearly

tripled from a base of less than a million workers to almost 3 million workers, while affiliate

employment in high-income countries remained roughly constant. The increase in developing

country activity was accompanied by a reduction in the US workforce domestically from

approximately 22 to 16 million from the beginning of the sample period to 2008 when our data

on trade and offshoring end.

        In Figure 3, we report changes in the distribution across destination regions for offshoring

activity. The results show significant increases for Mexico, China, India and other low income

destinations. In Section III we focus on these three countries, which have received significant

attention and which represent important offshore destinations for US multinationals.                Means of

the different variables used in the analysis are reported in Appendix Table A1

educated workers and rising wage premia for more educated workers. Similar results are observed for wage premia
when workers are stratified by routine-ness of occupation. Results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                       13
III.    Offshoring, Trade, and the Impact on Domestic Workers

A.      Wage Impacts of Offshoring and Trade at the Industry versus Occupation Level

        In Table 1, we present our main results showing how the impact of offshoring and trade

differ when using industry versus occupation measures of exposure. In the first four columns, we

present our estimates for equation (1a) which defines exposure to trade or offshoring at the

industry level. In the last four columns, we redo the analysis using our occupation exposure

measure, as outlined in equation (1b). Note that the standard errors are clustered by industry and

five year period in columns (1) through (4) and by occupation and five year period in the last

four columns. Industry regressions include industry fixed effects and occupation regressions

include occupation as well as industry fixed effects.

        Columns (1) through (4) of Table 1 identify the impact on wages of workers in industries

which were more exposed to international trade or offshoring during the 1984 through 2008

period.13 In these four columns, only workers within the manufacturing sector are included in the

estimation. The results suggest a very limited role for offshoring or trade in explaining log

wages. There is no statistically significant relationship between low-income-affiliate

employment, lagged export share, or lagged import penetration and industry-level wages; indeed,

the point estimates are close to zero. We find a modest relationship between exports and wages,

suggesting that workers with intermediate routine tasks gain the most from export demand.

However, this evidence is from only a single significant coefficient, and in general, the table

indicates that trade has had an only mild effect on workers within manufacturing. In these first

four columns, which rely on differences in exposure to trade or offshoring across industries, the
13
  Note that we exclude 1983 for consistency with our occupation results, which can only be estimated from 1984-
2002, since occupation was only coded consistently from 1983 and on, and we are using lagged measures of our
independent variables.

                                                       14
evidence indicates that trade has no substantial negative effect on worker wages for either routine

or non-routine workers.

         In columns (5) through (8) of Table 1, we present results from specification (1b) where

we measure exposure to trade or offshoring at the occupation level. The effects of both

offshoring and trade are larger in sign and generally significant at the five percent level. In the

first row of column (5), the coefficient on low-income affiliate employment indicates that a ten

percent increase in employment offshored within an occupation is associated with a 0.27 percent

wage reduction for U.S. workers. For workers in the most routine occupations, we find that a ten

percent increase in low-income affiliate employment abroad is associated with a 0.68 percent

decline in domestic wages, whereas workers in less routine occupations were largely unaffected

by offshoring. Although the magnitude of the effect is small, the results are consistent with the

following interpretation: workers in low-income locations perform the same tasks that low-

skilled workers perform in the US and are therefore substitutes for workers in the US.

         We also find a positive effect of lagged high-income affiliate employment on wages, for

all but the least routine workers. Workers in high-income locations appear to perform tasks that

are complementary to workers in the US and so expansion of employment in high-income

countries can benefit domestic workers who engage in routine tasks. These results, which are

consistent with Harrison and McMillan (2011), are robust to a range of specification choices,

including whether we use prices of imported and exported goods instead of quantities, and our

chosen set of control variables, such as controlling for the real price of shipments by sector to

account for variation in product demand.14 The results are qualitatively similar to the results

presented here, and are available from the authors.


14
  The results indicate that workers with price decreases in their product market have suffered the largest wage
declines, with this pattern most pronounced in routine occupations. Similar to our core results, however, this effect is

                                                          15
         Our results indicate that a ten percentage point increase in occupational exposure to

import competition is associated with nearly a 3 percent decline in real wages for workers. For

intermediate routine workers, a 1 percentage point increase in import penetration translates into a

1.5 percentage point reduction in wages. While some occupations have experienced no increase

in import competition (such as teachers), import competition in other occupations (such as shoe

manufacturing) has increased by as much as 40 percentage points.15 For occupations with

significant export activity, wages are positively linked to export growth. For these workers, a ten

percentage point increase in export share at the occupation level is associated with a 6.1 percent

increase in wages over the sample period. The gains from growing exports are largest for routine

workers and actually negative for less routine workers, which is a puzzle.

         Krugman (2008) and Feenstra (2008) both hypothesize that the effects of international

trade and offshoring may have increased recently relative to earlier decades. In Table 2, we split

the sample into earlier and later time periods. In particular, we allow the impact of globalization

to vary for 1983-1990, 1991-1999, and 2000-2008. We also explore whether the impact of

globalization varied by gender, union status, education, and age.

         The results in Table 2 indicate that there is no significant association between log wages

and employment in offshore locations in the early years of our sample (1983-1990, 1991-1998).

However, in the later periods (2000-2008) worker wages are negatively and significantly

associated with increased offshore employment in low-income affiliate locations. In the years

2000-2008, the coefficient estimates in the third row of Table 2 indicate that a 10 percent



only observed using occupational exposure measures of import price changes. Special thanks to Lawrence Edwards
for generous use of his price series data on imports. Other specifications we have tested include removing measures
of TFP and controlling for price changes in the service sector using a CPI/PPI index, both of which provide results
similar to those presented in Table 2. Likewise, the results including the real price of shipments are similar to the
results in Table 2.
15
   See the online appendix for further information on import exposure by occupation.

                                                         16
increase in low-income affiliate employment is associated with a 0.4 percent decrease in

domestic wages. These negative coefficients contrast with the positive coefficients on high-

income affiliate employment: a 10 percent increase in high-income affiliate employment is

associated with a 0.3 percent increase in domestic wages.

       Table 2 also reports the coefficient on lagged imports and exports, measured at the

occupation level. The point estimates for occupation-specific import penetration are statistically

significant for some of the specifications, For example, among women, a 10 percentage point

increase in import penetration is associated with a 2.28% wage decline, significant at the 10%

level. The evidence also points to a positive and significant association between export share

and domestic wages.

        In Table 2, we also explore heterogeneity in our results across different demographic

groups. Anecdotes in the popular press and elsewhere suggest that women, union workers, less

educated workers and older workers may have been disproportionately affected by international

competition. If we restrict the sample to either women or union workers, there is no evidence that

their wages were more negatively affected than the rest of the sample. In fact, the wages of

unionized workers appear to have been relatively unaffected by either export activity or import

competition. Women seem to have significantly benefited from export activity.

       The wages of workers without higher education and older workers do appear to have

been disproportionately affected by offshoring activities, as the point estimates are larger for

these groups of workers. The estimates in Table 2 indicate that the largest negative and

significant effects of offshore employment were concentrated among older or less educated

workers. In contrast, the largest (negative) impacts of import competition and (positive) effects




                                                 17
of export activity on wages are concentrated among individuals under 35 years of age and

college educated workers.



B.     Mechanisms for Differences between Occupation and Industry Results

       In this section, we identify mechanisms for the differences between industry-level and

occupation-level exposure to offshoring and trade. Our evidence and previous research suggests

that switching occupations, but not sectors within manufacturing, significantly affects worker

wages. In this section, we directly link changes in occupations for the same individual with

changes in globalization and explore the impact on wages. We begin by examining the wage

consequences of switching industries, sectors, and occupations using a panel of CPS workers

who are followed for more than one period.

       To explore the impact of switching sectors or occupations, we construct a sample of

manufacturing workers observed in CPS samples in consecutive years between 1983 and 2008.

We regress the change in log wages between period t and t+1 for a given worker on an indicator

for switching industries, sectors, or occupations. We also include a rich set of controls for the

worker’s age, sex, education, race, union status in the first period, and industry in the first period.

If occupational exposure to globalization puts downward pressure on wages by inducing workers

to exit high wage jobs in manufacturing, then we would expect to see this in the data. In

particular, we would expect wages of manufacturing workers who retain their jobs to be

relatively unaffected by globalization, whereas those who shift sectors or occupations to be

negatively affected. In Table 3, we examine the impact on a worker’s wages of shifting across

manufacturing sectors, leaving manufacturing, and leaving an occupation within

manufacturing.The first panel (Panel A) of Table 3 examines the impact on wages for workers



                                                  18
who switch industries but remain within manufacturing during both periods. Consistent with the

results in Table 1, we see that switching sectors (from textiles to steel, for example) but

remaining in the same occupation within manufacturing is not associated with significant wage

changes. For all types of occupations, including the most routine occupations, switching

industries within manufacturing has no significant impact on worker wages. In Panel B of Table

3, we examine how wages of an individual are affected when that worker leaves manufacturing.

On average, a worker who leaves the manufacturing sector experiences a real wage decline of

three percent from one period to the next. The documented wage decline for an individual

worker in the CPS who leaves manufacturing is consistent with Figure 1 showing a wage

premium for workers in manufacturing. However, unlike Figure 1, the regression results in

Table 3 control for a wide range of individual worker characteristics.

       The last panel of Table 3 shows the highest real wage declines for workers who leave

manufacturing and switch occupations. On average, workers who leave manufacturing and

switch occupations experienced a real wage decline of 4 percent, with a range of 2.7 to 8.5

percent. To summarize, Table 3 shows that (1) remaining in the same occupation but switching

industries within manufacturing does not significantly affect a worker’s wages (2) leaving

manufacturing but remaining within the same occupation has a negative impact on an

individual’s real wage and (3) leaving manufacturing is particularly costly for workers who also

switch occupations.

       The evidence presented in Table 3 is consistent with the results presented earlier in this

paper but does not establish a direct link with trade or offshoring. In Ebenstein, Harrison,

McMillan and Phillips (2014), we explore direct linkages between switching sectors or

occupations and our different globalization measures. We decompose the results in the last four



                                                 19
columns of Table 2 into manufacturing only and services only. The impact of offshoring and

trade is significant using the occupational exposure measure for both manufacturing (only) and

services (only).16 What is particularly noteworthy is that the coefficients are the most negative

for services. Paul Krugman has argued that globalization could not possibly affect wage

outcomes in the United States because manufacturing is too small relative to the other sectors of

the economy, so the “tail can’t wag the dog”. However, our results indicate that, in fact, the

significant exposure at the occupational level to trade or offshoring does affect service sector

wages. This is likely to operate both through the falling wages of workers who have moved from

manufacturing to services (as documented in Figure 1 and Table 3) as well as by putting

downward pressure on the wages of workers in services as labor supply in services shifts out to

absorb workers formerly in manufacturing.

           Our results are consistent with work by Kambourov and Manovskii (2008, 2009a, 2009b)

who find large wage declines among workers who switch occupations; this evidence suggests an

important role for occupation-specific human capital in a worker’s wage profile. Kambourov and

Manovskii (2008, 2009a, 2009b) also argue that occupation-switching may be an important

cause of the increase in US wage inequality, as younger workers are missing out on the benefits

that accrue to occupational tenure enjoyed by workers in previous decades. Insofar as this is

partly driven by competition from overseas, this highlights another mechanism by which

offshoring may be responsible for declining US wages and increasing wage inequality.



IV.        Offshoring to Low Income Countries and Labor Force Participation

A.         Descriptive Statistics



16
     Those results are available in the Appendix to Ebenstein et al (2014).

                                                            20
       Some theories of foreign investment emphasize the horizontal nature of FDI and the fact

that it substitutes for international trade. Other theories emphasize the vertical nature of FDI and

focus on offshoring as an outcome of strategic and profit-maximizing location decisions to

increase the efficiency of global value chains. In this section, we begin our discussion of the

impact of offshoring on US wages by summarizing the patterns in trade and offshoring in 2007,

as reported in Table 4.

       Table 4 reports the sectors with the greatest activity in imports, exports, and offshoring.

Imports and exports are measured as a share of domestic production, while offshore activities are

measured using total foreign affiliate employment. All the data are calculated for 2007, the latest

year for which we have information on both trade and offshoring. Import penetration is highest

in lower value added industries, and sectors which are traditionally thought to be labor-intensive.

This includes toys, leather products, apparel and other textiles, and metal products.

       In contrast, offshoring occurs primarily in high value added industries, such as motor

vehicles and electronics. There are many possible reasons for this. Historically, the sectors

where offshore employment for US multinationals has been highest in Mexico, China, India and

other emerging markets are those where domestic tariffs in those destinations were the highest.

This means that in order to access those markets, US companies needed to establish offshore

operations there instead of exporting which was more challenging given the size of local tariffs

or other restrictions on entry. Foreign investment promotion efforts in many developing

countries have also targeted these types of activities, as countries like India and China have

sought to grow their own motor vehicle, electrical machinery, and other higher tech sectors. This

evidence, while preliminary, may indicate that offshoring could expose a larger and different

class of workers to international competition than trade alone.



                                                 21
B.     Occupational Exposure by Country of Destination

       In Tables 5 and 6, we redo our basic specification but replace the offshoring measure

with location-specific measures of offshore activity. In Table 5 we present estimates by time

period of the impact of offshore employment in China, India, and Mexico. While in Table 5 the

results are reported for each country in separate regressions, we also estimate the equation

including all country destinations concurrently. While the point estimates remain the same, the

significance falls due to multicollinearity. Consequently we only report the specifications in

Table 5.

       If we compare the coefficient estimates in Tables 1, 2, and 5, there is no evidence that

offshoring to China, India, or Mexico is more likely to put downward pressure on domestic US

wages than offshoring to other low income country destinations. In fact, the evidence is

consistent with offshoring to China being less costly or not significantly different than offshoring

to other low income country destinations. Similarly, offshoring activities in Mexico and India,

the other top destinations for offshoring by US multinationals as measured by the number of

employees at offshore affiliates, do not exert significantly larger downward pressure on US

wages than offering to other low income regions. The largest coefficient is for Mexico, which

remained the location with the highest number of affiliate employees for US multinationals

throughout the sample period (see Figure 3).

       In Table 6 we compare the impact of import competition from China with offshoring to

China by including both measures in the same regression. Other controls (see Tables 1 and 2),

are also included but not reported. The results show that the negative impact of import

competition from China did not become significant until the last decade (2000-2008), when

China joined the WTO and trade volumes significantly increased. The coefficient estimate, -



                                                22
0.562, is two to three times the magnitude of the import coefficients reported in Tables 1 and 2.

The coefficient indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in import competition from China is

associated with a 5.6 percentage point decline in wages of workers in occupations affected by

those imports.

       In contrast, the impact of offshoring to China is small in magnitude. In comparison to

offshoring activities in other low income regions, the impact is also smaller, if we compare the

point estimates in Table 6 with those in Tables 1 and 2. The coefficient, -0.0158, indicates that a

ten percent increase in offshore employment in China would be associated with a small wage

decline of .16 percent. The evidence in Table 6 indicates that the impact through 2008 of

Chinese competition on US wages was felt most significantly via imports and not through

offshoring activities of US companies to China. The point estimates on offshoring activities

through 2008 were significantly below those for other offshore destinations, including Mexico

and India.



C.     Results for Labor Force Participation

       Table 7 examines the determinants of labor force participation rates using the CPS data.

Labor force participation is defined as the share of the labor force either employed or actively

seeking employment. Labor force participation is calculated at the three digit occupation by year

by five year age group cell for ages 15 through 64. The measure is the labor-force participation

rate among workers in each of these cells weighted by their sample weight. We then regress

labor force participation on all of the variables included in Table 1. We report results for all

individuals as well as for individuals between the ages of 15 and 34, as there has been a

significant decline in labor force participation for this age group.



                                                 23
       The results, reported in the first two columns of Table 7, indicate that import competition

is positively and significantly associated with labor force participation, as measured by import

shares. The most significant determinant of labor force participation (apart from individual

characteristics such as sex, age, and experience which are included as controls) is the use of

computers in the occupation. Occupational exposure from offshore employment in China is also

significantly and negatively associated with US labor force participation, but the point estimates

indicate a very small effect.

       The last four columns of Table 7 decompose labor force participation into its two

components, individuals who are employed and those who are actively seeking employment (i.e.

the unemployed). We felt that it would be useful to decompose labor force participation into

these two components, since demand shocks are likely to have opposite effects on the percentage

of individuals who are currently employed versus those who are seeking employment. The

results in the last four columns of Table 7 show that the most important determinants of

employment are computer use rates (negative) and investment goods prices (positive). These

results are consistent with a viewpoint that technological change is leading to increasing use of

computers or capital equipment to replace labor. Offshoring, on the other hand, is not an

important determinant of employment or unemployment.

       The results for trade, as measured by imports and exports, are quite different for labor

force participation than they are for wages. While neither exports nor imports are significantly

associated with labor force participation, they are significantly associated with employment and

unemployment rates. The evidence indicates that higher import penetration is associated with

higher rates of labor force participation, and lower rates of unemployment. These results are

contrary to received wisdom. The evidence is equally surprising for exports: higher export



                                                24
shares in the previous period are associated with higher rates of unemployment, although the

relationship with labor force participation in the first two columns and employment rates in the

middle two columns is not statistically significant at conventional levels. We explored the

robustness of the trade results in Table 7 by adding a number of controls, including controls for

domestic production. The results remained unaffected.

       We further explore the robustness of these results using the subset of the CPS that

follows the same worker over time. In Tables 8 and 9 we are able to identify workers who

worked in the previous time period but stopped working in the current year. In particular, we

would like to see whether employment for the same individual over time is affected by our

measures of globalization. The results at the individual level are useful because they allow us to

control for individual fixed effects which may not be captured in Table 7.

       The results in Tables 8 and 9 are consistent with the earlier results presented in Table 6

on the determinants of employment. Individuals are more likely to stop working if they are in

occupations that are more exposed to offshoring in low income regions. Conversely, these

individuals are less likely to stop working if they are in occupations where high income affiliate

employment is growing. Consistent with the results in Table 7, the evidence indicates that

greater import shares are associated with a lower likelihood of leaving employment. When we

split the sample into the degree of routineness of the occupation, we see that the results on import

penetration are driven by the least routine workers. Increasing import penetration is associated

with a higher likelihood of employment for non-routine workers, implying complementarity

between non-routine activities and imports. The results are similar in Table 9, which replaces

low income offshore employment with offshore employment in China.




                                                25
V.     Conclusion

       This paper makes several contributions. First, it builds on the analysis in Ebenstein et al

(2014) by focusing on occupational exposure instead of industry-level exposure to identify the

wage effects of competition from international trade and offshoring activities through 2008. We

show that with China’s entry into the WTO in late 2001, our results remain significant and

robust. We also present results that indicate the mechanisms for differences in industry versus

occupational exposure. We present evidence that globalization has led to the reallocation of

workers away from high wage manufacturing jobs into other sectors and other occupations, with

large declines in wages among workers who switch, explaining the large differences between

industry and occupational analyses.

       Our data on offshoring from the BEA reveals differences in both the timing of offshoring,

and the industries that participate in offshoring, relative to conventional trade in goods.

Offshoring is a more recent phenomenon and has grown significantly faster than trade in recent

years, with implications for US wages and employment. Offshoring activities allow US

multinational corporations to separate the production process for any given good into high-skill

and low-skill tasks, and thereby take advantage of cheaper labor overseas, even for high value

added goods. This is particularly relevant for industries such as motor vehicles, which

historically had powerful unions and were able to demand high wages for their workers.

       The second contribution is that we are able to consider offshoring by destination country

separately from imports. We find that the most significant low income offshore destinations,

measured in terms of total employment offshore by US parents, are not associated with larger

downward pressure on US worker wages than offshoring to other low income regions.




                                                 26
       Third, we examine the role of China’s entry into the global economy in much greater

depth. Since China’s accession to the WTO in 2001, scholarship has largely focused on China’s

growing role in international trade and its potential impact. In this paper, we compare for the

first time the impact of both import competition from China and offshore activities by US

multinationals in China. Analyzing wages of individuals who are actively in the labor force

indicates that competition via international trade from China is economically much more

important as measured by downward pressure on US wages than offshoring activities in China.

The point estimates indicate that a one percentage point increase in import penetration from

China during the 2000 through 2008 period would have been associated with a .6 percentage

point decline in the wages of affected US workers. In contrast, a one percent increase in offshore

employment of US affiliates in China was associated with a .02 percent decline in wages.

       Finally, we explore the impact of trade and offshoring on labor force participation. We

demonstrate that neither offshoring nor international trade are associated with a significant

reduction in labor force participation. Our results indicate that the most important factors

associated with a reduction in US labor force participation during the sample period were

computer use rates or increasing capital intensity, and that offshore activities to China or

elsewhere played a very small role. Trade is positively associated with labor force participation

between 1983 and 2008. Our preliminary results indicate that the “discouraged worker effect” is

unlikely to be linked to increasing import competition, from either China or elsewhere.




                                                 27
References

Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. “Trade Shocks and Labor
Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 1008-1045.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 1169-1213.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 1279-
1334.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in US Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 300-23.

Autor, David H. David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review,
103(6): 2121-68.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure
to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing.” Journal of
International Economics, 68: 219-237.

Cosar, A. Kerem, “Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies,”
October 2010. University of Chicago Booth School of Business, unpublished manuscript.

Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines. 2009. " Domestic Effects of the Foreign
Activities of US Multinationals." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1): 181-203.

Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips, “Estimating the
Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers using the Current Population Surveys”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(4): 581-595, October 2014.

Feenstra, Robert C. 2008. “Offshoring in the Global Economy.” Presented at the Stockholm
School of Economics, September 17-18 as the Ohlin Lecture. Available for download at the
author’s website.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-
Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the US, 1972-1990.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3): 907-940.

Freeman, Richard. 1995. “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(3) 15-32.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
Offshoring.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1978-1997.

                                              28
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan. 2011. "Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and U.S.
Manufacturing Emploment." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3): 857–875.

Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2011. "The Wage
Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data." NBER Working
Paper No. 17496.

Jensen, J. Bradford and Lori G. Kletzer. 2005. "Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
and Impact of Services Offshoring." Working Paper Series Number WP 05-9.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “Rising Occupational and Industry Mobility
in the United States: 1968-97.” International Economic Review, 49(1): 41-79.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2009a. “Occupational Specificity of Human
Capital.” International Economic Review, 50(1): 63-115.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2009b. “Occupational Mobility and Wage
Inequality.” Review of Economic Studies, 76: 731-759.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and
Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 1989: 209-290.

Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry
Wage Structure.” Econometrica 56 (2): 259-293.

Krugman, Paul. 2008. “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Spring, 103-154.

Lemieux, T. 2006. “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data, or
Rising Demand for Skill?” The American Economic Review 96 (3): 461-498.

Menezes-Filho, Naércio and Marc-Andreas Muendler. 2011. "Labor Reallocation in Response to
Trade Reform." NBER Working Paper No. 17372.

Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott. 2012. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
Employment”. NBER Working Paper No. 18655.

Trefler, Daniel and Runjuan Liu. 2011. "A Sorted Tale of Globalization: White Collar Jobs and
the Rise of Service Offshoring." NBER Working Paper No. 17559.

United States Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. 1977.
“Dictionary of Occupational Titles: Fourth Edition.” Washington, DC: US Government Printing
Office.




                                              29
Table 1: OLS Estimates of Wage Determinants using Industry and Occupational Exposure to Offshoring and Trade, 1983-2008
Dependent Variable: Log Wage
                                         Offshoring and Trade Measured by                         Offshoring and Trade Measured by
                                  Industry-Specific Exposure, Manufacturing Only               Occupation-Specific Exposure, All Sectors

                                    All          Most       Intermediate     Least            All          Most       Intermediate     Least
Variable                        Occupations     Routine       Routine       Routine       Occupations     Routine       Routine       Routine

Lagged log of low income            0.000         -0.001        -0.001       0.003         -0.0271*** -0.0682***        0.0256*      0.0510***
affiliate employment               (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.003)          (0.009)    (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.015)

Lagged log of high income           0.001         -0.001        0.004        -0.003         0.0158**     0.0493***       -0.013      -0.0178**
affiliate employment               (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.005)          (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.014)       (0.007)

Lagged export share               0.0345*         -0.001      0.0921**       0.009          0.614***      0.750***     0.995***       -1.930**
                                  (0.020)        (0.025)       (0.038)      (0.050)          (0.170)       (0.231)      (0.319)        (0.967)

Lagged import penetration           -0.018        -0.010        -0.038       0.017          -0.277**        -0.041     -1.548***       0.333
                                   (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.027)      (0.031)          (0.125)       (0.100)      (0.340)       (0.877)

Number of observations             660,500       374,162       196,612       89,726        4,315,758     1,529,895     1,786,437      999,426
R-squared                            0.49          0.39          0.43         0.31            0.51          0.42          0.53          0.38
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : Current Population Surveys Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (1983-2008). See Table A1 for sources of the other variables.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. The workers are taken from CPS samples from 1983-
2008, with their lagged values of the independent variables taken from 1982-2007. The left side of the table is restricted to manufacturing
workers and the right-hand side variables shown are based on the exposure to trade within a worker's industry. The right side of the table
includes service workers as well, and all right-hand side variables shown are based on the exposure to trade within a worker's occupation. The
standard errors are clustered by occupation and 5 year period. The classification of occupations into routine categories is determined by the
proportion of tasks which are routine in each occupation, with low being occupations with more than 2/3rd, intermediate being between 1/3rd
and 2/3rd, and high being occupations with less than 1/3rd of tasks designated routine. We also control for the occupation-specific lagged log
price of investment, lagged total factor productivity, lagged real price of shipments, and lagged capital to labor ratio. Wage specifications
control for a worker's gender, age, race, experience, whether in a union, and include fixed effects for industry (3-digit), occupation (2-digit),
year, education and state. Controls for computer use rates are imputed by the worker's occupation using the CPS computer supplement and are
included in all specifications.
Table 2: OLS Estimates of Wage Determinants using Occupational Exposure to
Offshoring and Trade Among Subsamples of CPS workers, 1983-2008

Dependent Variable: Log Wage
              Lagged Log Lagged Log
                of Low     of High
                Income     Income               Lagged       Lagged
               Affiliate  Affiliate             Export        Import         Obser-       R-
Specification    Emp        Emp                  Share      Penetration      vations    Squared
1983-1990          -0.014          0.008           0.51        -0.151       1,385,716     0.55
                   (0.015)        (0.011)        (0.324)       (0.168)
1991-1999          -0.015         0.0044        0.600***        0.016       1,434,790     0.51
                   (0.014)        (0.012)        (0.221)       (0.213)
2000-2008         -0.0395**       0.0302*        0.496*        -0.170       1,495,252     0.47
                    (0.020)       (0.017)        (0.270)       (0.129)
Female            -0.0195**       0.0097        1.015***       -0.228*      2,101,141     0.49
                    (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.237)       (0.119)
Union             -0.0179*         0.007          -0.036        0.005        740,506      0.38
                   (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.189)       (0.130)
High School      -0.0466***     0.0366***       0.575***       -0.140       2,020,735     0.44
or Less            (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.204)       (0.121)
College or         -0.006         -0.0032       0.666***      -0.373**      2,295,023     0.45
More               (0.011)        (0.009)        (0.173)       (0.146)
Under 35         -0.0280***      0.0155**       0.958***     -0.422***      1,987,180     0.51
                   (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.181)       (0.142)
Over 40          -0.0337***      0.0209**        0.283*        -0.097       1,873,255     0.47
                   (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.169)       (0.120)
Over 50          -0.0387***     0.0249***          0.25        -0.079        851,052      0.47
                   (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.172)       (0.126)
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table A1.

Note : Each row represents a separate regression. The independent variables are listed in the
column headings, and the subsample of interest is listed in the row heading. Each regression is
estimated in the same manner as those reported in Table 1.
Table 3: Wage Changes Among Manufacturing Workers Observed 2 Periods Who
Switch Industry, 1983-2008
Dependent Variable: Log Wage Change Between Periods

                                    All            Most         Intermediate       Least
                                Occupations       Routine         Routine         Routine
Panel A: Sample of Workers who Stay in Manufacturing both Periods
      Switched Industry             -0.001          0.000             0.000      -0.0133**
      Classification (1=yes)       (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.005)      (0.006)
      Observations                177,759         111,833            42,600        23,326
Panel B: Sample of Workers who Switch Industry Classification between Periods
      Left Manufacturing        -0.0269***       -0.0267***         -0.0273***   -0.0220**
      (1=yes)                     (0.004)          (0.006)            (0.005)     (0.011)
      Observations                208,979         130,105            50,364        28,510
Panel C: Sample of Workers who Leave Manufacturing between Periods
      Switched Occupation       -0.0406***       -0.0276***         -0.0393***   -0.0852***
      (1=yes)                     (0.010)          (0.010)            (0.011)      (0.020)
      Observations                 32,212          18,696             7,947         5,569
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : Sample is composed of CPS MORG workers observed in two consecutive samples
and employed
Note           in manufacturing
     : Robust standard           in the in
                       errors reported  first period. below coefficient estimates. Standard
                                           parentheses
errors are clustered by occupation. All models include year, state and education level fixed
effects. Other demographic controls are age, sex, non-white, and union status in the first
period. Industries and occupations are defined by 3-digit census classifications.
Classification of routine is based on first period occupation. The classification of
occupations into routine categories is determined by the proportion of tasks which are
routine in each occupation, with low being occupations with more than 2/3rd, intermediate
being between 1/3rd and 2/3rd, and high being occupations with less than 1/3rd of tasks
designated routine.
Table 4: Summarizing Patterns in Trade and Offshoring: Five Largest Observations for Each Category

Panel A: Patterns in Exports and Import Penetration

                Export Share                                 Import Penetration                  Low Wage Country Import Penetration                    China Import Penetration
Toys, amusement, and sporting goods    0.42     Primary aluminum industries           0.93     Toys, amusement, and sporting goods   0.47     Toys, amusement, and sporting goods    0.46
Pottery and related products           0.39     Watches & clocks                      0.88     Leather and leather products          0.40     Leather and leather products           0.37
Construction machines                  0.32     Pottery and related products          0.68     Apparel and other textiles            0.37     Pottery and related products           0.33
Primary aluminum industries            0.32     Apparel and other textiles            0.63     Pottery and related products          0.36     Household appliances                   0.22
Engines and turbines                   0.25     Toys, amusement, and sporting goods   0.59     Household appliances                  0.22     Apparel and other textiles             0.20


Panel B: Patterns in Offshore Employment

                   Mexico                                           China                                           India                          All Other Low Income Countries
Motor vehicles and equipment          193,498   Electrical machinery and equipment 106,971     Motor vehicles and equipment          19,760   Motor vehicles and equipment          228,401
Sugar and confectionery products      100,674   Motor vehicles and equipment          55,890   Sugar and confectionery products      15,893   Sugar and confectionery products      139,338
Electrical machinery and equipment     63,464   Drugs                                 37,400   Electrical machinery and equipment    14,411   Machinery and Equipment (NEC)         119,144
Radio, TV, and related equipment       36,412   Other Machinery (NEC)                 33,223   Drugs                                 12,178   Apparel and textile products           82,880
Household appliances                   33,701   Radio, TV, and related equipment      32,460   Other Machinery (NEC)                 10,746   Tobacco manufactures                   78,860

Source : Export and Import figures taken from Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2007). Offshore Employment figures are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(2007).

Notes : NEC="Not Elsewhere Classified". Firms are reported as having offshore employment by the BEA when an overseas affiliate is at least 10% owned by a US-based
Parent corporation.
Table 5: Occupational Exposure to Offshoring by Destination
Dependent Variable: Log Wage

                          1983-1990         1991-1999          2000-2008
                             (1)               (2)                (3)
China                      -0.028             0.0008            -0.0197**
                           (0.017)            (0.003)             (0.009)
India                      -0.0018            0.0020            -0.0198**
                           (0.009)            (0.004)             (0.008)
Mexico                      0.000             -0.0114          -0.0290***
                           (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.010)
Other Low Income           -0.028             -0.020            -0.0486*
Countries                  (0.018)            (0.013)            (0.025)
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.

Source : See Table A1.
Note : Each cell represents the coefficient from a separate regression. The
regressions are estimated in the manner described in Table 3, but the
measure of offshore employment in low income countries is replaced by
employment in China, India, Mexico, and Other Low Income Countries (not
China, India, Mexica) in each row respectively, and estimated for the period
listed in the column heading.
Table 6: Comparing the Wage Impact of Imports from China versus Offshoring to China
Dependent Variable: Log Wage

                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)
Panel A: 1983-1990
   Lagged import                          -1.61                                     -1.26
   penetration from China                (1.93)                                    (1.66)

    Lagged log of Chinese                                  -0.0342***           -0.0194***
    affiliate employment                                     (0.013)              (0.007)
Panel B: 1991-1999
   Lagged import                         -0.318                                    -0.386
   penetration from China               (0.388)                                   (0.417)

    Lagged log of Chinese                                     0.002                0.003
    affiliate employment                                     (0.002)              (0.003)
Panel C: 2000-2008
   Lagged import                       -0.665***                                 -0.562**
   penetration from China               (0.226)                                   (0.228)

    Lagged log of Chinese                                  -0.0194***            -0.0158**
    affiliate employment                                     (0.007)              (0.007)
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table A1.
Note : The columns report the results of regressing wages on occupational exposure to (1) import
penetration from China, (2) offshoring to China, or (3) including both imports and offshoring
simultaneously. The regressions are specified in the manner described in Table 2, except without
including low-income offshoring or imports.
Table 7: Offshoring to China and Labor Force Participation, 1983-2008

Dependent Variable:                   Participating (1=yes)              Employed (1=yes)                Unemployed (1=yes)
                                        All        Ages 15-34            All         Ages 15-34            All        Ages 15-34
                                        (3)             (4)              (1)             (2)               (5)             (6)

 Occupational Exposure from        -0.00182***     -0.00313***        -0.00168*      -0.00356**         -0.0001          0.0004
 Employment in China                 (0.0007)        (0.0010)          (0.0009)        (0.0014)         (0.0006)        (0.0010)
 Imports                               0.057          0.082           0.173***        0.255***         -0.127***       -0.185***
                                      (0.038)        (0.053)           (0.049)         (0.076)           (0.037)         (0.061)
 Exports                               0.019         -0.005            -0.168*         -0.278*          0.156**         0.225**
                                      (0.070)        (0.099)           (0.094)         (0.142)          (0.070)         (0.111)
 Computer Use                       -0.0411***     -0.0338***        -0.0615***      -0.0549***        0.0211***       0.0223***
                                      (0.0059)       (0.0083)          (0.0075)        (0.0098)         (0.0042)        (0.0059)
 Price of Investment Goods           0.0256*          0.021           0.0837***      0.0956***         -0.0720***      -0.101***
                                     (0.016)         (0.024)            (0.020)        (0.029)           (0.015)         (0.021)
 Observations                         89,749         34,696             89,749         34,696            89,749          34,696
 R Squared                             0.32            0.31               0.32           0.33              0.17            0.17
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table A1.
Note : Each observation represents a 3-digit occupation X year X 5 year age group cell from ages 15-64. The dependent variable
is the listed CPS category (participating in the labor force, employed, or unemployed but participating in the labor force) rate
among workers in each cell (weighted by their sample weight), and the independent variable is the lagged log of occupational
exposure to Chinese offshore employment. The other controls are as described in Table 2, except that the real value of shipments
is used in place of the real price of shipments. The standard errors are clustered by 3-digit occupation and 5-year period, and are
robust.
Table 8: OLS Estimates of Employment Determinants using and Occupational
Exposure to Offshoring and Trade among Individuals Observed 2 Periods, 1983-2008
Dependent Variable: Stopped Working (1=yes)
                                                 Offshoring and Trade Measured by
                                              Occupation-Specific Exposure, All Sectors

                                             All          Most       Intermediate      Least
Variable                                 Occupations     Routine       Routine        Routine

Lagged log of low income                  0.00643*      0.0151***        -0.003      0.0100**
affiliate employment                       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.005)

Lagged log of high income                 -0.00566*     -0.0123***       -0.011     -0.00890**
affiliate employment                       (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.007)       (0.003)

Lagged export share                        -0.137**     -0.255***        0.103       1.164***
                                            (0.063)      (0.084)        (0.100)       (0.366)

Lagged import penetration                   -0.011         0.034        -0.120*      -0.775***
                                           (0.033)        (0.037)       (0.070)       (0.226)

Number of observations                     1,377,706      472,215        565,291       340,200
R-squared                                     0.03           0.03          0.04          0.02
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table A1.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
The workers are taken from CPS samples from 1983-2008, with their lagged values of the
independent variables taken from 1982-2007. The sample is composed of individuals
working in the first period and the dependent variable is whether they were working in the
second period. The standard errors are clustered by occupation and 5 year period. We also
control for the occupation-specific lagged log price of investment, lagged total factor
productivity, lagged real price of shipments, and lagged capital to labor ratio. Individual-
specific controls include a worker's gender, age, race, experience, whether in a union, and
fixed effects for industry (3-digit), occupation (2-digit), year, education and state. Controls
for computer use rates are imputed by the worker's occupation using the CPS computer
supplement and are included in all specifications.
Table 9: OLS Estimates of Employment Determinants using and Occupational
Exposure to Offshoring to China and Trade among Individuals Observed 2 Periods,
1983-2008
Dependent Variable: Stopped Working (1=yes)
                                                 Offshoring and Trade Measured by
                                              Occupation-Specific Exposure, All Sectors

                                             All          Most       Intermediate      Least
Variable                                 Occupations     Routine       Routine        Routine

Lagged log of Chinese                    0.00217*** 0.00296***           0.002         0.001
affiliate employment                       (0.001)    (0.001)           (0.001)       (0.002)

Lagged log of high income                   -0.001         0.000       -0.0133**       -0.001
affiliate employment                       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.005)       (0.002)

Lagged export share                       -0.161***     -0.295***        0.138       1.266***
                                           (0.061)       (0.086)        (0.094)       (0.384)

Lagged import penetration                   -0.016         0.042       -0.180***     -0.799***
                                           (0.032)        (0.039)       (0.069)       (0.234)

Number of observations                     1,377,706      472,215        565,291       340,200
R-squared                                     0.03           0.03          0.04          0.02
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table A1.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
The workers are taken from CPS samples from 1983-2008, with their lagged values of the
independent variables taken from 1982-2007. The sample is composed of individuals
working in the first period and the dependent variable is whether they were working in the
second period. The standard errors are clustered by occupation and 5 year period. We also
control for the occupation-specific lagged log price of investment, lagged total factor
productivity, lagged real price of shipments, and lagged capital to labor ratio. Individual-
specific controls include a worker's gender, age, race, experience, whether in a union, and
fixed effects for industry (3-digit), occupation (2-digit), year, education and state. Controls
for computer use rates are imputed by the worker's occupation using the CPS computer
supplement and are included in all specifications.
Figure 1
Trends in Employment and Wages in the Manufacturing and Service Sectors

                                                     All Workers                                                        Routine Occupations                        Non-Routine Occupations
   Manufacturing Employment (millions)




                                                                            120
                                                                                  Service Employment (millions)
                                         22




                                                                                                                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                  16




                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                                                      55
                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                  14
                                                                            100




                                                                                                                                                             6.5
                                                                                                                                                      50
                                         18




                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                  12
                                                                            80




                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                      45
                                         16




                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                      40



                                                                                                                                                             5.5
                                         14




                                                                            60




                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                  8

                                              1980    1990    2000   2010                                              1980   1990    2000     2010                1980   1990    2000     2010


                                                       All Workers                                                        Routine Occupations                       Non-Routine Occupations
                                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                                             35
                                         24
   Real Hourly Wage




                                                                                                                  18
                                         22




                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                  17
                                         20




                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                  16
                                         18




                                                                                                                  15
                                         16




                                              1980     1990      2000       2010                                       1980    1990     2000      2010       20    1980    1990     2000     2010


                                                                                                                  Manufacturing                            Services

Notes : Employment and wage calculations are based on the Current Population Survey
Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (MORG). Sample includes all part-time and full-time
workers. Wages are in 2012 dollars. Definition of routine workers is based on occupational
task content. Details are available in the data appendix.
Figure 2
Trends in Domestic and Affiliate Employment among Multinational Firms
                               24,000




                                                                                                                 3,000
                               22,000




                                                                                                                 2,500
  Domestic Employment (000s)




                                                                                                                         Affiliate Employment (000s)
                                                                                                                 2,000
                               20,000




                                                                                                                 1,500
                               18,000




                                                                                                                 1,000
                               16,000




                                        1983         1988      1993            1998     2003              2008


                                               US Employment   Low Income Employment   High Income Employment




Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis
Notes : Author's calculations based on the most comprehensive available data and is based
on firm-level surveys on US direct investment abroad, collected each year by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the US Department of Commerce. Using these data, we
compute number of employees hired abroad by country and year, and then aggregate
employment by Low (High) Income country according to World Bank income
classifications.
Figure 3
Trends in Manufacturing Affiliate Employment in Low Income Countries
                                 1500
   Affiliate Employment (000s)

                                 1000
                                 500
                                 0




                                        1983      1988   1993    1998    2003             2008
                                               Mexico    China   India    All Other Low Income




Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis
Notes : The "alll others" category includes all employment in low income countries other
than Mexico, China, and India.
Table A1: Sample Averages for Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing Rotation Group Workers, 1983-2008
                                                            Overall Sample                            1988                                   1993                                   1998                                  2003                                   2006                                  2008
                                                              Manufact-                            Manufact-                              Manufact-                              Manufact-                              Manufact-                             Manufact-                              Manufact-
                                                    All        uring         Services      All      uring        Services        All       uring       Services         All       uring       Services         All       uring       Services        All       uring       Services         All       uring       Services
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)         (7)         (8)          (9)           (9)        (10)         (11)          (12)        (13)        (14)          (15)         (16)        (17)          (18)        (19)        (20)          (18)         (19)        (20)

Panel 1: Demographic and Wage Information

    Number of Observations                       5,159,133     821,354    4,337,779     184,881      35,988      148,893       186,467      33,280      153,187       163,286      26,402     136,884       191,073      25,605      165,468       185,476      22,848     162,628       182,535      21,772      160,763

    Age                                            37.7          39.3         37.4        36.2        37.9         35.8          37.2        38.8        36.9           38.0        39.6        37.7          39.3        41.5         38.9          39.6        41.9        39.3          39.9         42.1        39.6

    Female                                         0.48          0.33         0.50         0.5         0.3         0.5           0.5          0.3         0.5           0.5         0.3          0.5           0.5         0.3         0.5           0.5          0.3         0.5           0.5         0.3         0.5

    Years of Education                             13.2          12.7         13.3        13.0        12.5         13.1          13.2        12.7        13.3           13.3        12.9        13.4          13.4        13.0         13.5          13.5        13.1        13.5          13.5         13.1        13.6

    Real Hourly Wage ($2006)                       16.9          18.3         16.6        15.6        17.2         15.2          15.8        17.0        15.6           17.2        18.7        16.9          18.0        19.5         17.7          21.7        23.4        21.5          20.4         22.0        20.2

    Sample Weight                                  2,560        2,619         2,549      2341.8      2417.8      2323.4         2410.6      2449.7      2402.1        2981.7       3131.7      2952.8        2720.5      2824.2      2704.4         2890.6      2990.1      2876.7        2951.8      3033.8       2940.6

    Routine                                        0.52          0.61         0.50        0.53        0.62         0.51          0.53        0.61        0.51           0.51        0.59        0.49          0.51        0.59         0.50          0.5          0.6         0.5          0.50         0.58        0.49

Panel 2: Offshoring and Trade Data

    Low Income Affiliate Emp                      6,943.7      43,615.2         .        5,079.1    26,092.7        .          5,749.2     32,212.5        .          8,600.4     53,190.2        .          8,842.9    65,988.8        .          9,849.6     79,957.6        .         10,699.5    88,810.6         .

    High Income Affiliate Emp                    11,925.8      74,909.3         .       12,973.2    66,647.1        .          12,181.8    68,254.1        .         12,861.4     79,542.5        .         12,372.0    92,323.9        .          11,303.7    91,761.6        .         12,025.2    99,814.8         .

    Low Income Affiliate Emp, Occupation          7,872.9      24,420.5      4,739.0     5,357.3    15,641.0     2,871.7       6,221.0     19,490.0     3,338.3       9,796.4     31,703.5     5,571.0       9,268.7    31,065.2     5,895.8       11,021.5    37,983.8     7,233.4      12,387.7    42,887.6     8,209.9

    High Income Affiliate Emp, Occupation        13,215.8      40,948.1      7,963.6    13,382.7    38,300.3     7,360.0       12,939.5    39,334.6     7,205.2      14,218.3     45,372.8    8,209.1       12,610.3    41,721.0     8,105.6       11,893.0    40,770.0     7,836.0      12,991.2    44,908.4     8,619.3

    China Affiliate Emp                            600.6       3,772.4          .         12.3        63.2          .            38.0       212.8          .           810.9      5,015.4         .          1,138.5     8,496.1        .          1,732.3     14,062.6        .          2,166.8    17,985.2         .

    China Affiliate Emp, Occupation                732.4       2,104.4        472.5       13.7        40.4         7.3           40.8       128.4        21.8          964.4      3,156.9      541.5         1,345.4     4,525.9      853.3        2,101.5     7,183.2      1,387.5       2,582.5     8,873.4     1,720.8

    India Affiliate Emp                            156.2        980.9           .         22.8        117.3         .            26.4       147.9          .           183.2      1,133.0         .           220.1      1,642.4        .           289.0      2,346.2         .           499.4      4,145.4         .

    India Affiliate Emp, Occupation                174.4        507.7         111.2       26.4        66.3         16.8          29.0        80.6        17.7          197.3       669.1       106.3          224.2       740.8       144.2         303.6      1,034.0      201.0          536.4      1,849.1      356.6

    Mexico Affiliate Emp                          2,481.6      15,587.7         .        1,847.1     9,489.0        .          2,539.5     14,228.6        .          3,416.4     21,129.2        .          3,284.5    24,510.2        .          2,942.8     23,888.9        .          2,982.7    24,757.6         .

    Mexico Affiliate Emp, Occupation              2,739.8      8,884.1       1,576.2     1,925.7     5,792.8      991.1        2,752.4      8,799.9     1,438.6       3,810.5     12,738.2     2,088.5       3,342.1    11,378.1     2,098.6       3,150.4     11,093.2     2,034.5       3,395.9    12,018.5     2,214.8

    Other Low Income Aff Emp                      3,705.3      23,274.1         .        3,196.8    16,423.1        .          3,145.3     17,623.2        .          4,189.8     25,912.5        .          4,199.8    31,340.1        .          4,885.5     39,660.0        .          5,050.6    41,922.4         .

    Other Low Income Aff Emp, Occupation          4,226.4      12,924.2      2,579.1     3,391.3     9,741.4     1,856.5       3,398.8     10,481.1     1,860.2       4,824.3     15,139.2     2,834.7       4,356.9    14,420.3     2,799.7       5,466.0     18,673.5     3,610.4       5,873.0    20,146.7     3,917.8

    Import Penetration                            0.0225        0.1416          .        0.0239      0.1228         .           0.0253      0.1420         .          0.0269       0.1663         .          0.0272      0.2028         .           0.0279      0.2264         .          0.0234      0.1941          .

    Export Share                                  0.0400        0.2510          .        0.0353      0.1812         .           0.0348      0.1948         .          0.0401       0.2478         .          0.0350      0.2609         .           0.0143      0.1158         .          0.0121      0.1002          .

    Import Penetration, Occupation                0.0261        0.0807       0.0158      0.0244      0.0701      0.0133         0.0271      0.0825      0.0151        0.0306       0.0968      0.0178        0.0343      0.1088      0.0228         0.0378      0.1235      0.0258        0.0290      0.0995       0.0193

    Export Share, Occupation                      0.0452        0.1285       0.0294      0.0374      0.1031      0.0215         0.0336      0.0997      0.0193        0.0423       0.1245      0.0265        0.0414      0.1330      0.0272         0.0187      0.0592      0.0130        0.0144      0.0477       0.0098

    Import Penetration, Low Income                0.0028        0.0175          .        0.0014      0.0070         .           0.0026      0.0145         .          0.0036       0.0223         .          0.0052      0.0388         .           0.0068      0.0552         .          0.0059      0.0491          .
    Import Penetration, Low Income,
    Occupation                                    0.0033        0.0103       0.0020      0.0013      0.0044      0.0006         0.0026      0.0087      0.0012        0.0039       0.0131      0.0022        0.0066      0.0215      0.0043         0.0101      0.0328      0.0069        0.0077      0.0275       0.0050

    Import Share, China                           0.0079        0.0497          .        0.0035      0.0178         .           0.0085      0.0477         .          0.0104       0.0642         .          0.0142      0.1062         .           0.0178      0.1443         .          0.0191      0.1585          .

    Import Share, China, Occupation               0.0089        0.0271       0.0054      0.0033      0.0108      0.0015         0.0083      0.0273      0.0042        0.0107       0.0343      0.0062        0.0162      0.0525      0.0106         0.0225      0.0748      0.0152        0.0256      0.0867       0.0172

    Import Penetration, China                     0.0018        0.0116          .        0.0006      0.0032         .           0.0016      0.0090         .          0.0023       0.0145         .          0.0038      0.0281         .           0.0052      0.0421         .          0.0043      0.0357          .

    Import Penetration, China, Occupation         0.0025        0.0074       0.0016      0.0006      0.0021      0.0003         0.0018      0.0059      0.0009        0.0029       0.0094      0.0016        0.0053      0.0169      0.0035         0.0085      0.0271      0.0059        0.0062      0.0219       0.0040

Panel 3: Technology Measures and Price Indices                                                                                                             .                                      .                                     .

    Real Price of Shipments                       6,689.1      42,016.0         .        3,679.0    18,900.1        .          3,762.4     21,080.8        .          6,052.3     37,431.0        .         10,207.1    76,168.4        .          12,028.6    97,645.7        .         13,885.9    115,259.5        .

    Real Price of Shipments, Occupation          10,917.0      25,153.2      8,220.8     3,665.5     9,821.6     2,177.6       3,881.9     11,040.2     2,326.8       7,739.9     21,769.6    5,033.8       16,223.5    42,575.0     12,145.7      24,273.9    62,453.4    18,909.9      30,974.3    76,599.3     24,724.6

    Price of Investment Goods                       0.2          1.1            .          0.2         1.0          .            0.2          1.1          .            0.2         1.1           .            0.1         1.1          .            0.1          1.1          .            0.1         1.2           .

    Price of Investment Goods, Occupation           0.2          0.6           0.1         0.2         0.6         0.1           0.2          0.6         0.1           0.2         0.6          0.1           0.2         0.5         0.1           0.2          0.5         0.1           0.2         0.6         0.1

    Total Factor Productivity                       0.2          1.3            .          0.2         1.0          .            0.2          1.0          .            0.2         1.2           .            0.2         1.6          .            0.2          1.9          .            0.3         2.1           .

    Total Factor Productivity, Occupation           0.3          0.7           0.2         0.2         0.5         0.1           0.2          0.5         0.1           0.2         0.7          0.1           0.3         0.8         0.2           0.4          1.1         0.3           0.5         1.3         0.4

    Capital to Labor Ratio                         25.1         157.4           .         23.7        121.7         .            25.9       145.2          .            24.2       149.8          .           29.3        218.6         .            28.6       232.3          .           26.7        221.3          .

    Capital to Labor Ratio, Occupation             32.1          84.6         22.2        25.0        63.7         15.6          28.9        77.4        18.4           29.8        82.9        19.5          41.6        117.2        29.9          44.7       128.4        32.9          41.7        120.7        30.9
    Computer Use Rates                             0.44          0.38         0.45        0.31        0.28         0.32          0.40        0.37        0.41           0.50        0.46        0.51          0.58        0.53         0.58          0.58        0.53        0.58          0.58         0.53        0.58

Source : Sample consists of Current Population Surveys Merged Outgoing Rotation Group Workers for 1983-2008. Affiliate (or offshore) Employment data are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis annual survey of US firms with multinational affiliates for the same period. Low income countries are defined according
to the World Bank income categories. Import penetration and export share are taken from Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006). Computer use rates are taken from October CPS supplements during the sample period and kept at 2002 rates for the subsequent years. Investment good prices, total factor productivity measures,
capital to labor ratios, and the real price of shipments are taken from the NBER productivity database. Services includes agricultural workers.
