                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  STUCK IN THE MIDDLE? STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
                             IN BOTSWANA

                                            Brian McCaig
                                        Margaret S. McMillan
                                        Iñigo Verduzco-Gallo
                                            Keith Jefferis

                                        Working Paper 21029
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21029


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




The authors thank the World Bank for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Brian McCaig, Margaret S. McMillan, Iñigo Verduzco-Gallo, and Keith Jefferis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stuck in the Middle? Structural Change and Productivity Growth in Botswana
Brian McCaig, Margaret S. McMillan, Iñigo Verduzco-Gallo, and Keith Jefferis
NBER Working Paper No. 21029
March 2015
JEL No. O5,O55

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper decomposes Botswana’s growth from the late 1960s through 2010 into a within-sector
and a between-sector (structural change) component. We find that during the 70s and 80s Botswana’s
rapid economic growth was characterized by significant structural change with the share of the labor
force employed in agriculture dropping from more than 80 percent to around 40 percent. Between
1990 and 2010 growth was also rapid, but structural change detracted from growth. We hypothesize
that this is one of the reasons for persistent poverty and very high income inequality in Botswana today.
This leaves us with the following puzzle: why is it that a country with such an impressive track record
marked by good governance and prudent macroeconomic and fiscal policy is having so much trouble
diversifying its economy?


Brian McCaig                                        Iñigo Verduzco-Gallo
Department of Economics,                            IFPRI
Wilfrid Laurier University                          I.VerduzcoGallo@cgiar.org
75 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, N2L 3C5 Canada                        Keith Jefferis
bmccaig@wlu.ca                                      Econsult Botswana
                                                    P O Box 45016
Margaret S. McMillan                                Riverwalk Gaborone Botswana
Tufts University                                    econsult.botswana@gmail.com
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
Introduction
        In 1966 when Botswana gained independence, it was one of the poorest countries in the
world. But by 1986, it had achieved middle-income status and in 2005, it was classified as an
upper-middle-income country by the World Bank. The only other country to enjoy such rapid
growth in real GDP per capita – an average of 7.3 percent between 1966 and 20101 – over such
a long period is China. Botswana has also maintained democracy throughout its recent history,
and this combination of economic and political success has earned it the reputation of an
“African success story” (Acemoglu et al. 2002).
        Botswana’s rapid economic growth has nonetheless left many individuals behind.
Unemployment is a major issue, particularly among the youth. Income inequality is extremely
high as is poverty. As such, it is important to understand the sources of Botswana’s economic
growth to better appreciate where it might come from in the future and what prospects it has
for being more inclusive.
        Historically, diamonds played a significant role in fueling this economic growth,
although this has changed in recent years. Between 1968 and 2010, the landscape of
Botswana’s economy changed dramatically (figure 1a) as economic activity shifted out of
agriculture first to mining and later to services. Between 1968 and 2010:
           Agriculture’s share of value added fell from 27.4 percent to 2.7 percent.
           Services’ share of value added increased from 40.4 percent to 64.4 percent.
           Manufacturing’s share of value added climbed from 3.6 percent to 7.7 percent.
           Mining and quarrying rose rapidly from 11.7 percent to 57.7 percent in 1984 before
            gradually declining to 17.7 percent.2
           Construction peaked at 24.5 percent in 1972 and then gradually declined to around 7
            percent by 2010.
        Although diamonds contributed significantly to value added, they never directly
accounted for more than 3.2 percent of total employment, given the highly capital intensive
nature of diamond extraction. Thus, although there were dramatic shifts in the occupational
structure of the Batswana (figure 1b), this did not involve movements in and out of mining.
Instead, between 1964 and 2010:
       Agriculture’s share of employment fell from 87.5 percent to 38.6 percent.


1
  Authors’ calculation based on estimates of real GDP at chained PPPs and population from Penn
World Tables 8.0 (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer 2013).
2
  Part of the sharp decline in the share of value added in mining in 2009 and 2010 is the global
recession.

2
       Services’ share of employment increased from 8.5 percent to 50.6 percent.
       Manufacturing’s share of employment rose from 1.4 percent to 6.6 percent. Mining and
        quarrying’s share of employment inched up from 1.1 percent to 1.5 percent.
       Construction’s share of employment rose from 1.2 to 12.9 percent in 1991, but then slowly
        fell back to 2.8 percent.
        Like many less developed countries today, Botswana’s economy was characterized by
large productivity gaps between different parts of the economy when it first gained independence.
Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) was one of the first to recognize that these large productivity gaps in less
developed countries could be an important engine of growth. The idea is that when labor and other
resources move from less productive to more productive activities, the economy grows even if
there is no productivity growth within sectors. More recently, McMillan and Rodrik (2011)
document significant gaps in labor productivity between sectors for a large set of developing
countries, and substantial differences in the contribution of structural change – that is, the
movement of workers among sectors, as opposed to changes in productivity “within” sectors – to
the overall economic performance of these economies between 1990 and 2005. Structural change
was growth enhancing in Asian economies, while it decreased growth in Latin American and
Africa. However, the story for Africa switches to a positive role for structural change when a large
sample of African countries is examined for a more recent time period – between 2000 and 2010
(McMillan, Rodrik and Verduzco-Gallo, 2014)3.
        How does Botswana fit into this African story? Here we should note that it was not
included in either of these studies because of data issues. This paper, using newly obtained
data, traces the extent to which structural change played a role in Botswana’s rise to middle-
income status as well as its role in Botswana’s more recent economic performance. Overall, we
find that structural change accounted for more than half of Botswana’s spectacular labor
productivity growth between 1970 and 1989, averaging 8.6 percent per annum. The reallocation of
employment away from agriculture toward service industries played the most important role.
However, between 1990 and 2010, overall labor productivity growth slowed to 1.9 percent per
annum, with “within” sector productivity growth much higher at 3.6 percent per annum and
structural change a drag on overall productivity growth. Indeed, there was almost no change in the
agricultural share of employment and a significant expansion in the share of employment in
wholesale and retail trade.

3
 Neither McMillan and Rodrik (2011) nor McMillan, Rodrik and Verduzo-Gallo (2014) include
Botswana. This is because a significant amount of work was required to make sense of the Botswana
data. We discuss these issues later on in this paper.

3
       What contributed to the early period of growth enhancing structural change and the
more recent experience in which structural change has been growth reducing? This is an
important question because structural change has played a significant role in Botswana’s
growth performance both positive and negative. To answer this question, we review
Botswana’s most salient trade and industrial policies over these two periods. One event that
stands out that has not received a lot of attention in the literature is Botswana’s exposure to
South Africa’s massive trade liberalization in 1994. As a member of the Southern African
Customs Union, its tariffs are set by the government of South Africa making them effectively
exogenous. Thus, Botswana presents an unusual case in which to study the impact of trade
liberalization on structural change.
       As for growth enhancing structural change, we believe it was fueled by the discovery
of diamonds and subsequent policies to expand the public service, attract the private sector,
and invest in education, health, and infrastructure. However, the triggers for growth-reducing
structural change remain a mystery, leaving a big question for researchers and policymakers as
Botswana continues to try to promote economic diversification and inclusion. One possible
trigger that we can rule out is trade liberalization. We found that despite the large size of the
tariff cuts, there was no strong link with changes in the workforce.


The Birth of a Nation
       The term Batswana originated from the country's major ethnic group – the "Tswana" in
South Africa – and refers to the people of Botswana. Botswana was originally inhabited by the
San from around 17,000 BC, but in the early 1880s during the Zulu war, the Batswana moved
into the area from South Africa, bringing with them the custom of holding “village meetings”
for consultation and consensus on public issues. Prior to European contact, the Batswana lived
mainly as herders focusing on cattle ranching because 84 percent of land is arid semi-desert
and only 4 percent is arable (Fibaek, 2010).
       The present day boundaries of Botswana reflect direct appeals by the Batswana to the
British to first establish political boundaries for protection and subsequently to remain separate
from what would become South Africa. In the late 19th century, antipathy between the
Batswana and Boer from the Transvaal emerged. In response to requests for assistance the
British Government put "Bechuanaland" under its protection in 1885. Then in 1895 the
southern portion was incorporated into the Cape Colony, while the northern portion remained
under direct administration as the Bechuanaland Protectorate. Residents of the Bechuanaland


4
Protectorate (current Botswana), Basutoland (current Lesotho), and Swaziland requested that
they not be included in the proposed Union of South Africa and the British agreed, thereby
keeping the Bechuanaland Protectorate outside of the Union of South Africa formation in 1910.
In 1964 Britain agreed to democratic self-government and independence was granted in 1966
(History of Botswana, n.d.).
        When Botswana achieved independence from Britain in 1966, it was one of the poorest
countries in Africa with a GDP per capita of about $450 (PPP in 2005 US$) (Feenstra, Inklaar,
and Timmer 2013). In the following years, and partly owing to the discovery of diamonds in
three sites – Jwaneng, Orapa, and Letlhakane – Botswana’s economy was radically
transformed. Between 1960 and 1990, the average real GDP per capita growth rate was around
9.4 percent4, the highest sustained real GDP growth rate in the world for that time. In 2005,
Botswana joined the ranks of the upper-middle-income countries.
        Today, economic diversification is a high priority (e.g., Government Implementation
Coordination Office 2009), given that export revenues continue to be dominated by diamonds,
a resource that may run out sometime in the not so distant future.5 Attempts at industrialization
have so far not worked, leaving employment dominated by agriculture and services, with the
public sector accounting for more than half of service sector employment. The heavy reliance
on mining – employing a tiny fraction of the labor force (3.5 percent) owing to its highly
capital-intensive nature – may partly contribute to Botswana’s inequality, poverty, and
unemployment problems.6 Income inequality is the third highest in the world (UNDP 2010),
and the poverty head count ratio was about 19 percent in 2009 (World Bank 2014).


A Strong Role for Structural Change… Initially
        Shortly after independence, Botswana was characterized by large differences in labor
productivity across sectors (figure 2a). In 1970, 82.5 percent of the workforce was involved in
agriculture – a very low productivity sector (24.4 percent of overall labor productivity) – but
only 1.5 percent of workers were in higher productivity manufacturing (labor productivity over
3 times higher than overall labor productivity) and only 1.7 percent of workers were in
construction (labor productivity more than 12 times overall labor productivity). Thus, the


4 Authors’ calculation based on estimates of real GDP at chained PPPs and population from Penn
World Tables 8.0 (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer 2013).
5
  NDP 10 is available at: http://www.finance.gov.bw/index.php?
6
  Additionally these jobs do not require any particular set of skills and they are typically reserved for
men.

5
reallocation of workers out of agriculture into higher productivity sectors could be a key factor
in boosting overall growth in labor productivity (Lewis 1954, McMillan and Rodrik 2011).
Indeed, in the following decades, as figure 2b shows, the structure of employment changed
greatly as the share of workers in agriculture fell dramatically. By 2010, fewer than 40 percent
of workers were still in agriculture, with the workforce shifting to higher productivity sectors.
          How much did the reallocation of workers across sectors contribute to growth in
overall labor productivity? Our methodology for measuring structural change follows
McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and decomposes aggregate changes in labor productivity into two
components: (i) “within,” which captures growth within sectors and (ii) “structural change,”
which captures growth owing to labor reallocation across sectors that differ in their labor
productivity, as follows:


                                ∆            ,   ∆   ,          ,   ∆   ,



where Pt and pt are aggregate and sectoral labor productivity levels at year t, and       ,   refers to
sector i's share of total employment. The first term is the “within” component and the second
term in the decomposition is the “structural change” term. We use value added and employment
data from the Groningen Growth and Development Center’s Africa Sector Database (ASD). Value
added is expressed in 2005 Pula. Labor productivity is measured as real output per worker in a
sector.
          Our results show that aggregate labor productivity grew on average 5.0 percent per annum
between 1970 and 2010, but with significantly higher growth between 1970 and 1990 than between
1990 and 2010 (figure 3). Labor productivity grew at 10.8 percent annually between 1970 and 1980
and then declined significantly in the subsequent three decades. Structural change accounted for
almost three quarters of the labor productivity growth in the 1970s but by the 1990s, it started to
become a drag on growth. In effect, our analysis paints a clear picture of two distinct periods in
Botswana’s growth since independence: 1970-1990 and 1990-2010. During the first period, a
significant portion of Botswana’s growth was driven by structural change. During the latter period,
structural change was growth reducing and all of the productivity growth was driven by within
sector productivity growth.
          At the sectoral level, productivity growth was quite uneven (table 1). Notably, agriculture
contributed very little to within sector productivity growth over a period of more than 40 years
owing to very modest productivity gains. The low contribution of agriculture to value-added


6
reflects, at least in part, the fact that most of Botswana’s land is not conducive to agricultural
production. In addition, most of the agricultural activities outside of cattle ranching are of a
subsistence nature – and because crops are rain fed, these activities are subject to frequent
disruption as a result of drought. Another notable trend is the changing driver of within sector
change. In the first decade, mining accounted for the majority of labor productivity growth owing
to within sector productivity improvements and growth in the share of the workforce in mining,
but in the following decades other sectors also contributed significantly to overall labor productivity
growth: construction and community, social, personal, and government services.
        Why do these two periods look so different? It is relatively easier to understand the patterns
in the first period. Botswana’s economy in 1966 was largely agrarian in nature and workers in
agriculture were the least productive. The gaps in productivity between agriculture and the rest of
the activities in the economy provided huge incentives for people to move out of agriculture. This
is exactly what happened from 1970-1990 (figure 4a and 4b). In each decade, the share of workers
in agriculture contracted by about 20 percentage points while it expanded in all other activities.
This process was facilitated by heavy state involvement via direct hires into the public service and
by programs targeted at increasing investments in education, health and infrastructure. Programs
were also created to facilitate investment by the private sector in all kinds of activities.
        A second possible explanation for the observed patterns in the earlier decades has to do
with the repatriation of men who had migrated to South Africa to find wage labor. It has been well
documented that the hut tax imposed by the colonial regime on the largely rural Batswana
encouraged young men to migrate to South Africa where they could usually find work in the mines.
Two things happened to precipitate the return of these men. The economy started to pick up in
Botswana with the discovery of diamonds and the subsequent public investment. Also, starting in
the 1980s, the mines in South Africa started to retrench leaving some men with few choices but to
return to Botswana. Having already been employed as wage laborers, it is likely that a
disproportionate share of these men went to Gaborone to seek work rather than returning to the
rural areas. This type of migration would partially explain the large increase in the employment
shares in services and construction, which accounts for much of the negative contribution of
structural change to aggregate productivity growth.
        Another possible explanation might be demographic changes, which could have
accelerated the decline in the relative share of agricultural employment by increasing the
employment share of younger cohorts that entered the workforce directly into high-productivity
sectors (such as manufacturing) and by ushering older cohorts out of the labor force directly from
agriculture. Shifts in the sectoral composition of the workforce owing to demographics are arguably

7
subject to smaller mobility costs than shifts across sectors among cohorts in the workforce. This is
likely to be part of the story in Botswana because it is so difficult to make a decent living in most
of agriculture, although we lack sufficient data for this period to test the relative importance of this
explanation.
        It is more difficult to understand why the share of employment in agriculture stopped
contracting around 1990 and subsequently stabilized around 40 percent, given that relative labor
productivity in agriculture is significantly lower in 2010 than in 1970. Although McMillan and
Rodrik (2011) have identified overvalued exchange rates and labor market rigidity as two possible
determinants of structural change, we can dismiss these in Botswana’s case. To begin with,
Botswana has maintained a competitive exchange rate since independence (figure 5a). In addition,
its labor markets seem to be quite flexible when compared to other countries at similar levels of
income (figure 5b).
        One explanation for why they have not moved has to do with the myriad of social assistance
programs offered by the Botswana government – that is, productivity differences may not reflect
effective differentials in income and consumption. Another might be the lack of opportunities for
low-skilled workers in urban areas. Each of Botswana’s national development plans has stressed
economic diversification as an important goal. In its efforts to diversify the economy, the
government has pursued various industrial incentive schemes aimed at promoting the growth
of other sectors, particularly manufacturing and tourism.
        For example, a number of programs have been targeted at encouraging local production,
particularly through preferential pricing and eligibility for government procurement. These
included the Local Preference Scheme (1976), the Local Procurement Program (1997), the
Economic Diversification Drive (EDD) (2010), and the Citizen Economic Empowerment
(CEE) Policy (2012). These generally aim to give a pricing preference margin to local
companies, regardless of ownership (domestic or foreign), although these policies also impose
restrictions on the ability of foreign owned firms to participate in government tenders (even if
locally incorporated). The government has also introduced complementary programs designed
to provide technical assistance to small scale entrepreneurs wishing to compete for government
projects. A comprehensive description of these incentive schemes is presented in Table 2.
        Beside these incentive schemes, the government has over the years tried to maintain an
investor-friendly policy environment, although the effectiveness of this is much debated. An
International Financial Services Centre, which aims to attract externally-focused financial and
business service investment, was established in the early 2000s. Also high on the policy agenda


8
are efforts to reduce unemployment (with little positive impact to date) and to mitigate the
effects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on productivity (much more successful).
       Another partial explanation has to do with measurement error. The GGDC ASD data
tell us that the share of workers in agriculture stopped falling. But when we verify this trend
with individual level data from the 1995/96 and 2005/06 Labour Force Surveys (LFSs), we
find that the share of employment in agriculture is likely overestimated in the GGDC – in fact,
it has more likely continued to fall during the 1990s and 2000s, although much more slowly
than in the 1970s and 1980s (see Appendix B). This slowdown might in part reflect the fact
that less educated and older workers are more likely to work in agriculture, and they may find
it more difficult to move into others sectors. Major policy changes took place in the 1990s and
2000s, including significant trade reforms, and this may have influenced the relative demand
for workers in various sectors, an issue that we turn to next.


A growing workforce and informality
       What was happening to the composition of the labor force as these changes in labor
productivity took place? Using labor force survey data covering the period of 1995/96 to
2005/06 we examine other margins of adjustment not covered in the GGDC’s ASD
employment estimates: labor force participation, unemployment, and informality. The
following patterns stand out.
       More individuals in the labor force. We begin by examining the reported activity of
working age individuals, those between the ages of 15 and 60 (table 3). We find that the number
of working age individuals increased by 24 percent, in line with population growth. But
surprisingly, the number of people in the labor force increased much faster, by 43.4 percent.
As a result the labor force participation rate increased from 55.9 percent to 64.5 percent – that
is, by 8.6 percentage points (or 15 percent). If we extend the conventional definition of the
labor force to include workers that are currently available to work, but not actively searching
for a job, then the labor force participation rate increased from 66.8 percent to 78.4 percent.
This figure does not include those who are sick, which is of interest given that HIV prevalence
is extremely high in Botswana at an estimated 17 percent (Levinsohn and McCrary, 2010).
That said, the share of the population reporting that they were not in the labor force because of
illness increased only marginally, from 3 percent in 1995/96 to 3.4 percent in 2005/06 –
possibly a testament to the government’s aggressive campaign to treat individuals who are HIV
positive.


9
        Unemployment remains high, especially for youths. Outside of agriculture,
unemployment remained high and relatively unchanged, 20.2 and 21.2 percent in 1995/96 and
2005/06 respectively (22.2 and 18.7 percent, respectively, if individuals in agriculture are
included). Unemployment is a major concern for youths. Youths, age 15 to 19 and 20 to 24,
are significantly more likely to be unemployed than older workers (table 4a). Individuals in the
latter age group participate in the labor force at the same rate as older workers, but the
unemployment rate is almost double the national average, at 38.7 percent in 2005/06. Although
labor force participation is much lower for individuals age 15 to 19, reflecting school
attendance, among these individuals 39.7 percent are unemployed.7
        Males the best off. We find that males are less likely to be unemployed and more likely
to be in the labor force than females in either year, although both genders achieved significantly
higher labor force participation rates between 1995/96 and 2005/06 (table 4a). As for schooling,
there is not much difference in either unemployment or labor force participation rates across
individuals with primary or secondary education by 2005/06 as the gap in labor force
participation in 1995/96 between individuals with primary and secondary education closed.
However, having some education, as compared to no formal education, is an important
determinant of labor force participation.
        Informality rose. As the workforce expanded and unemployment fell, the prevalence
of informal employment outside of agriculture rose by a significant 4.8 percentage points (or
36 percent) (table 4b).8 Importantly, the incidence of informality in manufacturing increased
by 4.3 percentage points, which is slightly below the overall increase, but may be partially
related to the SACU tariff cuts. Many sectors experienced an increase in the share of informal


7
  Unfortunately, it is difficult to consistently estimate unemployment for all working age individuals
using the labor force survey data due to seasonal employment in agriculture. The labor force surveys
were not conducted during similar months in rural areas leading to concerns about whether agricultural
workers were more likely to be surveyed during working periods in one survey relative to the other.
Thus, to obtain consistent estimates of unemployment we focus on individuals outside of agriculture
(table 4a). This means excluding individuals currently working in agriculture as well as individuals
currently unemployed but who most recently worked in agriculture.
8
  The Labor Force Surveys define informality according to a series of questions related to the
ownership sector (such as government, parastatal, NGO, or private), the number of workers in the
business, the location of the business, whether the business is registered, and whether the business
keeps a complete set of accounts. The enumerator evaluated whether the worker was formal or
informal based on these questions. The questions about location, business registration, and accounts
were only asked for workers in businesses with 10 or fewer workers in the private sector. Thus, we do
not have a direct indicator of formality for workers in larger workplaces in the private sector or
workers in other sectors. Consequently, for all workers that were not asked the detailed questions
related to formality, we classify them as formally employed if they either worked in large private
firms or in sectors more likely to be formal (such as government, parastatal, or NGOs).

10
workers. In fact, the only sector to experience a decrease was community, social, household,
and personal services.
        Major sectoral shifts. We also see some important changes in the distribution of non-
agricultural workers across sectors (table 5).9 The share of workers in manufacturing fell, but
only by 0.6 percentage points, and the share of workers in mining fell by 1.5 percentage points
(or 27 percent). Elsewhere, the share of workers in public administration and construction fell
appreciably, while the number of workers rose in both (i) wholesale and retail trade, hotels,
restaurants, etc.; and (ii) finance, insurance, real estate, and business services. The remaining
sectors experienced only marginal changes in their shares of the non-agricultural workforce.10


How Trade Reform Influenced Structural Change
        Why has it been so difficult to expand the production of traded goods in Botswana?
Many studies note that the country is landlocked with a small domestic market, reflecting a
population of less than 2 million. But Botswana also has distinct trade advantages. Since 1910,
it has enjoyed duty-free access to markets in South Africa as a member of the Southern Africa
Customs Union (SACU), which also enables it to share the revenues generated by tariffs on
imported goods coming from outside of SACU. The problem is that member countries have
typically not been involved in setting tariffs – a task done by South Africa.
        In Botswana, SACU matters are handled by the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning (MFDP) rather than the Ministry of Trade and Industry. The logic of this arrangement
is that for Botswana the key responsibility associated with the tariffs has been managing
resources received through the revenue sharing agreement. Historically, the Government of
Botswana has paid limited attention to trade negotiations, both because of the SACU
arrangement and because of the country’s historical concentration of trade in two commodities:
diamonds and beef. Diamonds were covered by agreements with De Beers (and were not
subject to tariffs in end markets), while beef exports enjoyed preferential access to Europe.
        Prior to the end of apartheid in 1994, South Africa pursued a vigorous policy of import
substitution (Edwards 2005), landing it with a wide range of prohibitive tariffs on imports. But
in 1994, the process of trade liberalization gained momentum as a result of South Africa’s
commitment to the GATT Uruguay Round. Export subsidies, which were incompatible with
the WTO, were phased out and finally terminated in 1997. Additionally, between 1994 and

9
  We restrict the analysis to non-agricultural workers due to difficulties in accurately measuring
agriculture employment across the two labour force surveys.
10
   These changes are broadly consistent with those in the GGDC ASD.

11
2004, import tariffs on all traded goods fell significantly. Because levels of initial tariffs varied
widely across products and because the goal was to ultimately harmonize tariffs, the percentage
point decline in tariffs varied widely across products, with some falling by more than 20
percentage points (Edwards 2005). In addition to multilateral liberalization, the government
has also engaged in a number of bilateral and regional trade agreements culminating in South
Africa’s implementation of the Southern African Development Community Free Trade
Protocol and the implementation of the South Africa-European Union Trade, Development and
Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) in 2000. More recently Botswana was granted preferential
access to markets in the European Union.
           For Botswana, the period of import substitution would have meant that prices of
imported intermediates were artificially high, making it more difficult for firms in Botswana
to be profitable. At the same time, the protection afforded to Botswana may have allowed some
firms to flourish that would have been unprofitable otherwise. Thus, South Africa’s trade
liberalization in the 1990s may have influenced the allocation of workers across sectors and
consequently played a role in structural change reducing labor productivity growth in the 1990s
and 2000s – a possibility that we explore to get a sense of not only past developments but also
the hurdles Botswana might face in its efforts to diversify the economy. To do this, we examine
the changes in trade flows and employment between 1995/96 and 2005/06 – years for which
detailed labor force surveys exist and the period that coincides with South Africa’s trade
liberalization and Botswana’s experience of growth-reducing structural change.
           From a theoretical standpoint, the tariff reductions are expected to have the following
effects:
                 Lower the cost of imports directly. This arises because imports from parties
                  outside of SACU are now taxed at a lower rate.
                 Lower the cost of imports indirectly. This arises because most of Botswana’s
                  imports come from or through South Africa. The imports from third parties will
                  be cheaper as long as some of the tariff reduction is passed on to consumers,
                  while the imports of products made in South Africa that rely on imported
                  intermediate inputs may also be cheaper if some of the lower production costs
                  are passed on to consumers.
                 Shrink the size of Botswana’s importables sector. This arises because of the
                  increase in imports.




12
              Either expand or shrink the exportables and non-traded goods sectors. The
               impact depends on the extent to which the sectors share resources in common
               with the importables sector and the extent to which those sectors rely on
               imported intermediate inputs.
              Possibly erode Botswana’s market share in South Africa, which might reduce
               the number or value of products that Botswana exports to South Africa. This
               might arise because South Africa has been, and still is, the primary destination
               for some of Botswana’s non-mineral exports.
The net effect of these competing forces will determine the impact of trade liberalization on
sectoral shifts in employment and labor productivity in Botswana.


Changes in trade flows and tariffs
       Let us start with trade flows. Between 1994 and 2009, import tariffs on all traded goods
fell significantly. Because levels of initial tariffs varied widely across products and because the
goal was to ultimately harmonize tariffs, the percentage point decline in tariffs varied widely
across products, with some falling by over 20 percent (Edwards 2005). In addition to
multilateral liberalization, the government also engaged in a number of bilateral and regional
trade agreements culminating in South Africa’s implementation of the Southern African
Development Community Free Trade Protocol and the South Africa-European Union Trade,
Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) in 2000.
       How much did tariffs fall and what was the impact on Botswana’s trade? If we take
the period between 1988 and 2009, we see that tariffs fell by 16.3 percentage points in
manufacturing, 10.3 percentage points in mining, and 4.6 percentage points in agriculture
(figure 6a). However, the large reductions in tariffs are not associated with an obvious
response in imports and exports (figure 6b). Imports as a percentage of GDP fluctuated
around 45 percent while exports as a percentage of GDP fluctuated around 50 percent.
However, at the product level there was strong growth in some import sectors that are likely
to include inputs for businesses in manufacturing (such as machinery and electrical
equipment) (table A1).
       Compared to exports, Botswana’s import profile is much less concentrated. Oil and
motor vehicles, including their parts, are a significant share of imports in both 1991 and 2005
(table A2). The one notable change is that medicine became the fourth most important import




13
in 2005 but was not among the top ten in 1991.11 On the export side, there has been some
limited diversification, with diamonds falling from 79.5 percent to 76.6 percent of total exports
from 1991 to 2005, but mining based exports still account for over 85 percent of total exports.
Products that gained in significance include copper and apparel, while meat and meat products’
share of exports declined.
         Furthermore, despite the tariff cuts on products originating outside of SACU, imports
from South Africa still constitute more than 80 percent of total imports, suggesting that, at an
aggregate level, the SACU tariff cuts did not lead to a significant change in Botswana’s trading
partners. Indeed, as table A3 shows, the share of imports from South Africa has even risen
slightly between 1991 and 2005. Export destinations have not changed significantly, except for
the shift from Switzerland to the United Kingdom, which is driven by changes in the diamond
trade.
         Thus, the SACU tariff liberalization seems to have had limited impacts on Botswana’s
economy. This is consistent with McCaig and McMillan (2014), which finds the relative size
of manufacturing industries did not change significantly in relation to industry tariff cuts. The
effects in agriculture are also likely to be small as Botswana continues to import a large fraction
of its food (Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, 2002, 2009) primarily from South
Africa and other SACU members from which it already had duty free access. In 2011, 93.6
percent of food, beverage and tobacco imports came from South Africa and 96.2 came from all
SACU members respectively (Statistics Botswana, 2014). This is relatively unchanged from
2004 when 95.4 percent came from South Africa and 96.4 percent from all SACU members
respectively (Central Statistics Office, 2009).


Looking to the Future
         South Africa’s trade liberalization had a modest impact on employment in Botswana
and very little impact on diversification. Employment shares in industries that were exposed to
tariff reductions – agriculture, manufacturing and mining – fell slightly. In addition, both
unemployment (broadly defined) and informality increased, although the magnitude of these
effects is not large. Somewhat ironically, Botswana’s lack of diversification appears to have
shielded its workforce from larger adjustment costs.
         Perhaps this outcome is not surprising. Botswana started with a tiny manufacturing
sector and so the main impact of the tariff reductions was an increase in the volume of trade.

11
  This reflects the impact of HIV/AIDS and the importation of antiretroviral medicines for the
national treatment program

14
The composition of tradables was largely unchanged by the tariff reductions. Imports remained
highly diversified and consumer oriented while exports continued to be dominated by natural
resources. The increase in the volume of imports likely provided petty traders with greater
opportunities for informal trade. Even though these informal jobs are not secure, they still
provide a much better living than most jobs in the agricultural sector.
       But for a country that has been hailed as an “African Success Story,” the results are
dissappointing and demand further explanation, with a large share of workers still in low
productivity agriculture and high rates of unemployment and discouraged workers. And time
is of the essence. Botswana’s diamond revenues are currently predicted to decline sharply from
the mid-2020s onwards. Even if this were not the case, the current structure of the diamond
industry is such that it does not and cannot provide enough jobs to make a dent in Botswana’s
levels of poverty and income inequality. This is not a secret and the Government of Botswana
has launched campaign after campaign targeted at diversification. The puzzle is: why have
these campaigns not been more successful? After all, Botswana has an impressive track record
marked by good governance and prudent macroeconomic and fiscal policy.
       We do not pretend to have the answer to this puzzle but only note that understanding
why things have stayed the same for so long is key to unlocking Botswana’s future potential.
One hypothesis is that a strong industrial sector stands to threaten both the political and
economic power of the longstanding ruling party, the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP)
(Robinson, 2013). The lack of diversification has allowed the elites in Botswana to maintain
their grip on Botswana for 50 years. Although unemployment and inequality would also
threaten the BDP, so far, the government has been able to manage these threats through a
myriad of social assistance programs.
       An alternative hypothesis has to do with Botswana’s current structure of production –
which is highly specialized in a handful of peripheral activities based on natural resource
exports, thereby making (export) diversification a major challenge (Klinger and Haussman,
2010). Moreover, although Botswana had been developing its garment sector, these activities
are disappearing with the erosion of trade preferences.
       A complementary explanation is Botswana’s structural problem of a high cost base –
such as high transport costs – which poses challenges in achieving competitiveness in the
production of goods for export. Diversification policies have failed to address the high costs of
production and to sufficiently raise productivity. High levels of public spending on education
and training have not succeeded in alleviating skills shortages or in producing school leavers
and tertiary education graduates with the attributes needed by the private sector. Combined

15
with a very large public sector and a restrictive immigration policy, this has led to high costs
for the available skilled labor. Furthermore, public sector investments in infrastructure have
not been well targeted at addressing economic constraints. For instance, there has been
extensive spending on rural roads and infrastructure that yield limited economic benefits, while
businesses remain constrained by electricity shortages and inadequate internet connectivity and
bandwidth. This prioritization in infrastructure spending may have political roots – the BDP
gains its strongest support in rural areas and hence rural infrastructure directly benefits its
electoral base, rather than the economy as a whole.
        Several much-needed reforms that would help to address competitiveness concerns are
politically sensitive and could impact on the BDP’s support base. For instance, the cattle/beef
sector has stagnated in recent years, but improving productivity and competitiveness requires
addressing cattle husbandry practices of small scale farmers on communal land. Addressing
the shortage of land for business requires introducing elements of land markets in place of
traditional, administrative land allocation processes, and allowing non-citizens better access to
land. And relaxing immigration restrictions to improve the supply of skilled labor and bringing
down production costs will reduce the rents earned by those with skills. Hence addressing the
constraints to diversification is as much a political economy consideration as a technical one.
        Finally, one obvious reason for persistent poverty is the large share of the population
working in an extremely unproductive agricultural sector. An important constraint on
agricultural productivity in Botswana is the limited availability of water. Many problems
surrounding water availability are in the hands of the government, such as international
agreements on the diversion and use of water sources that cross borders (such as the Zambezi
River). Public investment in scientific research for agriculture, largely in the domain of the
public sector, has also been limited (Klinger and Haussman 2010). It is curious that the 10th
National Development Plan devotes less than two pages to the agricultural sector.
        This lack of emphasis on agriculture might have something to do with just how
challenging the sector is in Botswana. As Arthur Lewis (1979) pointed out a long time ago, we
know how to raise agricultural output in tropical areas with adequate rainfall or access to
irrigation water, but arid lands have low yields, and in the absence of water do not respond to
fertilizers or to the potential of high yielding varieties. He also noted that this is where the real
poverty is and that to unlock this prison is the greatest challenge to development. For Botswana,
it probably means devoting many fewer resources to agriculture. Getting to this point will be a
slow process because so many of the poor and uneducated are still tied to agriculture.


16
       Despite these challenges, Botswana still has significant potential for diversification
based on services. It has recently built a new university of science and technology where
students from across Africa could come to train. Plus, Botswana has better governance, more
effective public services, relatively high educational attainment, and relatively little crime
compared to its neighbors. Thus, Botswana would be an ideal location as a business service
center for Southern Africa. Firms based in Botswana would have duty free access to all of the
members of SACU, including South Africa. But for this to happen, the government needs to
work harder to provide the necessary telecommunications and transportation infrastructure at
a reasonable cost.




17
                                       Appendix A: Data


       For our analysis, we rely on different sources of data: individual level employment data
from the 1995/96 and 2005/06 labor force surveys (LFS), value-added data from Statistics
Botswana, and trade and tariff data at the 4-digit HS level. Below, we provide details on each
of these data sources, including the time period covered and the level of aggregation.


Labor Force Survey Data
       The 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFSs are designed to be a source of nationally representative
information on the size, structure, and main characteristics of the labor force, and include
information on both formal and informal employment, unemployment and underemployment.
Data for these surveys was collected throughout the 12 months of the duration of the survey.12
Both the 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS asked virtually the same questions, with the 2005/06 LFS
adding some questions on child employment, so data from both surveys is comparable.13
       There are two main definitions of employment in the LFSs, each with its own
timeframe. The surveys ask about the main type of work the person has been doing in the past
12 months (“usual employment”) and the type of work the person did in the past 7 days
(“current employment”). Respondents were asked, for each month of the year, whether they
had worked part or all of the month, and whether they had been available or unavailable for
work. If the participant had done any work in any month, an additional question asked who the
individual was working for (e.g., self-employed, government, private sector, etc.).14 The LFSs
classify workers as “usually employed” if the person was economically active (if number of
months working and available to work were 6 or higher) in the past 12 months and the person
worked for most of the time for which she was economically active. Additionally, the LFSs
ask about work during the past 7 days. If the respondent did work during this period, they were
asked about whom they were working for, their employment status, occupation, and industry.




12
   Note that unless it was necessary to ensure data accuracy, each household was only visited once
during the duration of the survey.
13
   The 2005/06 LFS sample included persons 7 years old and above while the 1995/96 only included
persons 12 years old and above. Nevertheless, both surveys can be easily compared by controlling for
age.
14
   The 2005/06 LFS also asked questions related to occupation and industry for the usual employment,
but these questions were not included in the 1995/96 LFS.

18
15,16
        With the exception of agriculture, we rely on questions related to the current job (the past
7 days) as the surveys asked a broader set of questions for this job than for the usual job during
the past 12 months. Because of the seasonality of agriculture and because the surveys were not
conducted in rural areas during the same months across years, we classify agricultural workers
by their usual job.


Value Added Data
           We use data on value added by sector in constant values that cover the period 1995/96
to 2005/06. The data come from Statistics Botswana and are reported by 10 broad sectors at
the major division level of the Botswana Standard Industrial Classification (BSIC). The data is
reported for the fiscal year, which begins on July 1st of each year, and generally coincides with
the timing of the labor force surveys.


Trade data
           Bilateral trade data for 1990 to 2008 was provided by the Botswana Institute for
Development Policy Analysis (BIDPA). This dataset consists of yearly bilateral imports and
exports disaggregated at the 6-digit Harmonized System (HS) level and uses the 1988/92 HS
nomenclature. These data are consistent with the trade flows for Botswana reported in the UN
COMTRADE database. Since the maximum level of disaggregation in our tariff data was at
the 4-digit HS level, we aggregated exports and imports, respectively, to the 4-digit HS level
in order to have a correspondence between our tariff data and our trade flow data. The resulting
bilateral trade dataset has annual exports and imports (both in current US dollars and pula) at
the HS 4-digit level starting in 1990 and ending in 2008.
           We also gathered data on value, volume, and unit value indices on total exports and
total imports for the 1990-2008 period to help us understand whether Botswana’s changes in
exports and imports values were mostly driven by changes in volumes or prices. The data on
trade flow volumes comes from UNCTAD’s online database (UNCTADstat).




15
   Both LFSs report industry of work using Botswana Standard Industrial Classification (BSIC)
Revision 3 codes.
16
   Note that if a person reported not having worked in the past 7 days due to a temporary absence from
work (e.g., leave, sickness, etc.) but would resume work in the near future, that person was classified
as currently employed. People who reported not having worked in the past 7 days and not planning on
resuming work in the near future were counted as either unemployed or out of the labor force.

19
Tariff data
       As noted above, tariffs on trade with non-SACU members have been typically set by
South Africa, with little or no input from Botswana. Thus, we use South Africa’s tariff structure
– representing the SACU tariff structure - to determine the level of trade protection for
Botswana. We measure trade protection using tariffs (including ad valorem equivalents) plus
surcharges for South Africa. Our data on trade protection, provided by Lawrence Edwards,
spans the period 1990 to 2008 and is described in great detail in Edwards (2005). This dataset
comprises tariff rates (including ad valorem equivalents) and surcharges at the 8-digit HS level.
We aggregated these to the 4-digit HS level to match our trade flow data. To construct the 4-
digit HS tariffs we used a weighted average, where the weight for each 8-digit HS tariff is that
product’s share of imports within the 4-digit HS product imported by Botswana between 1990
and 1992. We used a similar procedure to construct industry level tariffs according to the
industry classification used in the LFSs.




20
 Appendix B: Is it possible that the share of agricultural workers has continued to fall?


       One hard to explain development in Botswana’s structural change story is that after two
decades of the share of agriculture contracting dramatically, it stabilized at 40 percent and has
remained there ever since. Many explanations are often proffered but how about the possibility
that the widely used measure is simply wrong?
       To check this, we begin by comparing employment estimates from the 2005/06 LFS
with those in the GGDC ASD. Seasonality in agriculture is a big concern when trying to
properly measure employment in Botswana. Usual employment (main activity during the past
12 months) in agriculture is much higher than current employment (last 7 days) (table B1). The
estimate of agricultural employment in the GGDC ASD is based on the worker’s usual activity
whereas employment estimates for all other sectors are based on the worker’s current activity.17
The difference between current and usual employment is greatest in agriculture, but using
current employment also leads to an underestimation of employment in other sectors and
consequently leads to an overestimation of the employment share of agriculture.
       So if we use usual (rather than current) employment, we estimate that for 2005/06,
agricultural employment is 34.3 percent, not 39.3 as estimated in the GGDC ASD. However,
owing to a lack of data, we cannot estimate the usual industry of employment from data sources
other than the 2005/06 LFS. Thus, we are unable to check the sensitivity of the estimates of the
share of workers in agriculture to differing definitions of work (like usual versus current) for
other years. Thus, the approach taken in the GGDC ASD likely leads to an overestimation of
the share of agricultural employment.
In sum, it is possible that the share of employment in agriculture has actually continued to
decrease slightly from the 1990s to the 2000s.




17
  The GGDC ASD agricultural employment estimates are in part based on previous work by some of
the authors (McCaig and McMillan, 2014).

21
References


Acemoglu, Daron, Simon H. Johnson and James A. Robinson. 2002. “An African Success
Story: Botswana,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3219.


Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis (BIDPA) and World Bank. 2006.
“Prospects for export diversification in Botswana,” Impression House: Gaborone, Botswana.


Central Statistics Office. 2008. “2005/06 Labour Force Report,” Department of Printing and
Publishing Services, Gaborone.


Central Statistics Office. 2009. “External trade statistics 2004,” Department of Printing and
Publishing Services, Gabarone.


de Vries, G.J., M.P. Timmer, and K. de Vries. 2013. “Structural Transformation in Africa:
Static gains, dynamic losses.” GGDC research memorandum 136.


Edwards, Lawrence. 2005. “Has South Africa Liberalised its Trade?” South African Journal of
Economics, Vol. 73, No. 4, pp. 754-775.


Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2013. “The next generation of the
Penn World Table.”


Fibaek, M. 2010. Botswana's Modern Economic History since 1966: Has Botswana reached
the last stage of Modern Growth Regime? Department of Economics, University of
Copenhagen, 4.


Government Implementation Coordination Office. 2009. “Botswana Excellence – The Strategy
for economic diversification and sustainable growth.”


Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten. 2011. Penn World Table Version 7.0, Center
for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
Pennsylvania.

22
History of Botswana. (n.d.). Retrieved from Embassy of Republic of Botswana:
http://www.botswanaembassy.org/history-of-botswana/


Klinger, Baily and Ricardo Hausmann. May 2010. “Achieving Export Diversification in
Botswana,” Center For International Development, Harvard University Working Paper.


Levinsohn, James and Justin McCrary, 2010. “The Prevalence of HIV in Botswana,” Yale
University Working Paper, January 6, 2010.


Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour.” The
Manchester School, 22: 139–191.


Lewis, W. A. 1979. “The Dual Economy Revisited.” The Manchester School, 47, no. 3: 211–
29.


McCaig, Brian and Margaret McMillan. 2014. “Trade liberalization, employment, productivity
and diversification: Evidence from an unusual experiment,” mimeo.


McMillan, Margaret and Dani Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change and
Productivity Growth,” NBER Working Paper 17143.


McMillan, Margaret, Dani Rodrik and Inigo Verduzco-Gallo. 2014. “Globalization, Structural
Change and Productivity Growth, with an Update on Africa,” World Development No. 63
(Special Issue on Economic Transformation in Africa), pp. 11-32.


Ministry of Finance and Development Planning. 2002. “The National Development Plan 9.”


Ministry of Finance and Development Planning. 2009. “The National Development Plan 10.”


Rodrik, Dani. 2008. “The Real exchange rate and economic growth,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Vol. 2, 365-412.




23
Robinson, James A. 2013. “Natural Resources and Industrialization: Implications for Africa,”
Mimeo.


Statistics Botswana. 2014. “Botswana International Merchandise Trade Statistics 2011,”
Gabarone.


United Nations Development Programme, 2010. “Human Development Report 2010. The Real
Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development.”


World    Bank    (n.d.).   Botswana   Overview.    Retrieved    from   The    World    Bank
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/botswana/overview#1


World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators.


Zizhou, Farai. 2009. “Linkages between trade and industrial policies in Botswana,” Industrial
Policy Thematic Working Group Paper. Trade & Industrial Policy Strategies (TIPS).
http://www.tips.org.za/files/botswana_paper.pdf




24
                                                              Figure 1a: Services now dominates in value added …



                                                  80
     Percentage of Constant Value Added (2005 pula)      Agriculture            Mining & Quarrying
                                                         Manufacturing          Construction
                                                         Services
              20          40  0       60




                                                       1970     1975     1980    1985    1990        1995   2000   2005     2010
                                                                                        year

                                                          Figure 1b: … and in terms of percentage of employment


                                                                                                            Agriculture
                              80




                                                                                                            Mining & Quarrying
                                                                                                            Manufacturing
     Percentage of Total Employment




                                                                                                            Construction
                                                                                                            Services
      20         40         600




                                                       1970     1975     1980    1985    1990        1995   2000   2005     2010
                                                                                        year


25
26
               Sectoral Productivity as % of Average Productivity                                                                                                  Sectoral Productivity as % of Average Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                           100%




                        100%
                                                                                                                                                                0




            0
                      agr, 7%




                                                                                                                                                                20




            20
                                                                                                                                                                          agr, 24%




                                                                                                                                                         40




     40
                               gs, 84%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Botswana 1970




                                                               Botswana 2010
                                                                                                                                                                     60




                 60
                                                                                                                                                         Employment (%)




     Employment (%)
                               wrt, 100%




                               man, 116%
                                                                                                                                                                80




            80
                                   tsc, 179%                                                                                                                              csps, 42%
                                     pu, 205%
                                                                                                                                                                                  tsc, 168%
                                      fire, 220%                                                                                                                                     gs, 233%

                                           con, 273%                                                                                                                                     man,
                                                                                                                                                                                           pu,313%
                                                                                                                                                                                               338%   fire, 666%
                                           csps, 274%                                                                                                                                                              wrt, 1164%
                                                                               Figure 2b: … but today, most workers are in higher-productivity sectors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       min, 1224%
                                                             min, 1207%                                                                                                                                                 con, 1241%
                                                                                                                                                                100




            100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 2a: After independence, most workers were in low-productivity agriculture …
                         Figure 3: From a big role for structural change to a drag on growth
                                              Labor productivity growth
              10
     Percentage Points
     0        -5  5




                         1970-1980            1980-1990            1990-2000            2000-2010
                                                          Period

                                           Within             Structural             Total


Source: Own calculations with data from GGDC’s ASD.
Notes: The graph shows the decomposition of labor productivity growth (value added in 2005 pula per worker)
where the calculations are based on changes over each decade. A similar calculation using annual labor
productivity growth and then summed over each decade shows the same overall pattern, but with a
somewhat smaller role for structural change.




27
                                                                        Figure 4a: Starting with a highly agrarian society …

                                                                                                   1970-1980
                                                             = 6.2280; t-stat = 1.14
     Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity                                                                                          min
                                                       2
                                                                                                                                      firewrt

                                                                                                                                      man
                                                       1



                                                                                                                                              con

                                                                                                                                     pu
                                                                                                                                   tsc
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                      gs
                                                       -1




                                                                                agr
                                                       -2




                                                                                                                                                     csps


                                                            -.3                       -.2               -.1                       0                         .1
                                                                                             Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                  (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                       Fitted values



                                                                             Figure 4b: … Botswana became less so …

                                                                                                   1980-1990
                                                             = 9.7617; t-stat = 3.37
     Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                                       3




                                                                                                                        min
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                  fire
                                                       1




                                                                                                                                             wrt
                                                                                                                                            man
                                                                                                                              putscgs
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                    con
                                                                                                                       csps
                                                       -1
                                                       -2




                                                                  agr

                                                            -.2                             -.1                          0                                  .1
                                                                                             Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                  (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                       Fitted values




28
                                                        Figure 4c: … then stabilizes at 40 percent of its agrarian share …

                                                                                               1990-2000
                                                         = 6.2849; t-stat = 0.57
      Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                                    4
                                                                                        min
                                        2




                                                                                          pu                  fire
                                                                                                   tsc
                                                                                                         man                 wrt
                           0




                                                          csps                                                                           gs
                                                                        con
                -2




                                                                                 agr
     -4




                                                              -.04            -.02             0                     .02           .04        .06
                                                                                       Change in Employment Share
                                                                                            (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                     Fitted values



                                                          Figure 4d: … even though productivity is still relatively low

                                                                                               2000-2010
                                                         = -6.6119; t-stat = -2.08
                                                                                                   min
      Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity
                                               2




                                                                          con              csps
                                                                                                         pu tsc       fire
                                                                                                          man                            wrt
                                  0




                                                                                          gs
                   -2




                                                                                                             agr
     -4




                                                        -.1                    -.05                      0                   .05               .1
                                                                                       Change in Employment Share
                                                                                            (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                     Fitted values




29
                                        Figure 5a: Botswana’s currency has remained competitive …

                                           Avg. Undervaluation of the Exchange Rate and GDP per capita

                    1
                                                    RWA     NGA TJK MDA            ECU                                     SLV

                                                             VNM           HTI                        GRD                  TON
                                                    VNM         KGZ                                               UKR
                                                                                          ECU               SLV         WSM                                                                 MHL
                                                                          ARM                   SLV                PER
                                                                                                                   WSM  GTM
                                    TKM                                                                        SYC   VUT
                                                                                                                      BLZ               GRD
                                                                                                                                        BGR                                                                 RUS
                                                              NGA                        TON             KIR JPN         KAZ    PERUKR     JAM                                                      HUN
                                                                         KGZKOR
                                                                        LAO                         GTM                       VUT
                                                                HTI                  CH2
                                                    KHMLAO LAO                           ALB
                                                                                          GTM               MEX   ECU JAM BLR
                                                                                                                          GTM
                                                                                                                           GTM
                                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                       ROM                        SYC
                                                                                                                                                                   LCA
                                                                                                                                                                     TON                           ESPBLR
                                            MLI         COM                 BTNVNMGEO                                                                                           LTU  POL                 LBN
                    .5

                                                       NPL          LKA
                                                                  CH2               IND     BOL                                                      JAM
                                                UGA NPL           IND         KIR               BOL       BTN SLV               ESP        IRN                       MHL            JAM
                                                                    KIR PAKPAKCHN
                                                                            MDA                                                         VUT            WSM ITA          CRI
                                                                                                                                                                         JAM AUT                  GRD
                                                   RWA
                                                  UGA                                  MNGIDNHND                           DOM                 TON           LVA
                                                  ERI         COM PAK  UZB                                    GEO                  BLZ                                                            MEX
                                                 ERI                               TWN                                            ECU
                                                                                                                            DJI ECUCH2AZE
                                                   NPL           KHM    LBR                           BOL         KOR             CHN  CRI                                           SUR         JPN
                                                                HTI     PRY                      PRT                 EGY     SLV     ATG
                                                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                                                                                     PRT    GTM      IRL
                                                                                                                                                   MKD                                      GRC
                                                     KHM
                                                    RWA BGD                     YEM
                                                                                LKA
                                                                               HND           THA
                                                                                             BOL LKA          IRQ   ARM          GRC   MNE   DOM                         ROM
                                                                                                                                                                         CRI      CUB      SUR     IRN
                                             ETH                     ZMB THA
                                                                        TUN MNG           HND                                     TWN                   GAB      THA    MEX                 KAZBGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL
                                               VNM AFG          COM             PNG
                                                                                MUS   PRY                                                                   BRA
     LnUnderval




                                                                       PHL HND
                                                                       IDN                   ALBJORIDN       VUT                                                                      DOM             SUR       CUBDNK
                                                       UGA
                                                         GMB   SDN
                                                                      KOR PHL                           PRY                     SGP                           MKD BLZ       POL SUR EST
                                          BDI TZA  RWA       PAK            ZMBGUYMUS BOL EGY                                            THA TUR                                   CRI         BLZ    PRT
                                                 IDN
                                                AFG  GMBIND
                                                   LSO
                                                    MDG                                               ZAF
                                                                                                       KIR                                                                             IRL                      LCA
                                              SOM
                                               GNB
                                             MLI
                                                    THA
                                                  BGD
                                                RWA  MDG
                                                     BGD   THA
                                                         BEN
                                                        GHA
                                                          TLS  TGO                   DOM           HND PRY
                                                                                                         DOM NIC                         ECU                           KOR                        JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                LSO
                                                NPL NER TGO
                                                       GNQ
                                                       CH2   CMR             JOR SWZ     MUS SWZ       COL          CRI                  BIH
                                                UGATCD
                                                  MDG
                                                      TZABEN
                                                       SOM
                                                            LKA
                                                                 UZB 1970s
                                                                  SDN PRY
                                                                         NICNIC       PHL
                                                                                    AGO FSM
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                 TUN DZA PRY
                                                                                                           JOR              KNA   HKG           MLT
                                                                                                                                                SLV        CUB
                                                                                                                                                                                    ROM           2000s
                                                                                                                                                                                                ATG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TWN
                                            LSOMLI
                                                TCDBGD
                                                     BFA
                                                      IND
                                                      BENCHN
                                                         TCDIDNMRT
                                                           BTN
                                                           BEN  EGY    SDN DJI
                                                                           BWA     DJI      BIH          DJISYR      COLZAF
                                                                                                                        TTO                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BWA
                                            AFG
                                             GNBCH2
                                               GHA  MDG
                                                    MWI   KENZMB NGA
                                                        CAF           VCT
                                                                    SLB       AGO       TUN     JOR1980s  MUS           PER    ALB COL          PER         COL                TTO SRB
                                    TKM            SLE
                                                  ZAR
                                                    BEN
                                                      MDG     ZMBTWN           AGO KNAFSM                 GUY                                    MNE
         0




                                               GNQ
                                             MWI   BEN
                                                 BFA                                                                                                                                                               ARG
                                          1960s
                                          ETH
                                           GNB  MWI
                                                  MLI
                                                  CH2
                                                  TGO
                                                   BGD
                                                    GIN TGO
                                                        KEN
                                                        SLE
                                                      TGO
                                                     MLI   KEN
                                                             SDN LBRGUY DOM
                                                               MRT
                                                                MDV         PHLGUY                         BWA      DZA JOR            ZAF
                                                                                                                                      TUN DZA
                                                                                                                                               URY                      FIN             FRAVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HKG
                                                NPL
                                               BFA
                                             NER
                                                    AFG
                                                  SLE
                                                    GHA
                                                  BWA
                                                 BGD   ZMB
                                                       SLE COMPHL CMRDMA   ZMB          COL        CYP
                                                                                                  NIC
                                                                                                   SWZ TUR MDV CYPDZA TUR
                                                                                                  IRN
                                                                                                                                    URY     ZAF1990s                      TUR                HRV ISR
                                                BFAIND
                                                  PAK
                                                      PAK
                                                    TCD
                                                     MRT
                                                        LSO
                                                         KEN
                                                            LSO
                                                           EGY
                                                              MRT
                                                                 SLB                            DMA         NAM
                                                                                                             TUN   JOR                               BWA CYP                      MYS MUS
                                              MWI
                                             NER
                                               BFAGMBGMB        SEN CMR
                                                                   CMR
                                                                     SLB PNG MAR   SYR
                                                                                 CMR                                                           MUS                                                      TUR
                                               MOZ
                                           LBRCAF   TCD
                                               INDSLELKACAF MRT YEM             EGY
                                                                                   MDV       NAM
                                                                                              NICSYR NAM                      MYS
                                                                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                         LBR BFAGHA
                                                CAFGMB                             VCT                        PAN            CHLDZA                                          ARG PAN
                                           BDI
                                            ETHNER
                                           ETH     LKA
                                                       COM
                                                      EGY        SLBNGA
                                                                       SWZFJIPNG               MYSFSM
                                                                                                                                         PAN               BRA                              OMNURY
                                                           SENSTP
                                                               SEN                                                                                     PAN                           ARGKNA
                                                           SEN
                                                          KEN
                                                            SEN CPV MYS              NIC     MAR FSM          FJI
                                                                                                                  CHL                                          IRN          CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                          VEN
                                              NER   CAF               MAR          MAR                             NAMCHL
                                                                                                                   PRIFJI                                                  PRI
                                            SOM
                                          ZAR  KHM KEN         CIV                                                               ROM  ZAF
                                                 GNQ
                                               TZA        NGA           SYR              PAN FJI
                                                                                             CPV   AGO
                                                                                                 FJI                                                                        URY
                                                                                                                                                                           VEN
                                          MOZTZA    BTN MAR    MYS                COL                                                    BRA
                                                                                                                                          ISR                                              VEN
                                          BDI             PHLYEMCIV                            BRA
                                                                                                 NAM                                    VCT
                                      ZARETH TZA  MDV PNG
                                                 SOM                                                      VCT             DMA URY                        VEN
                                                    GINCPV CIV     CIV                      TUR                                                  IRN
                    -.5




                                                        ZAR                                           CHL                                                                                           ISL
                                          MWI
                                          GNB
                                          GNB                 CPV CIV PAN
                                                                        CPVCOG               SYR                          URY     DMA                       ARG
                                          BDI                        PNG        COG
                                             CHN                                            BOL                                                    BGR                                     ARG
                                                        ZARNGA
                                                      COG                      COG                         BGR
                                        MWI           GHA
                                                       ZAR                                                                                                            IRQ
                                                                  COG
                                             UGAUGA                  GNQ
                                         CHN                STP                         ALB
                                        BDI        MARSTP
                                          CHN

                                                    GHA       STP
                                             MOZ
                    -1




                                                                                 MNG




                                    0           2000          4000          6000            8000           10000
                                        PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Chain Series), at 2005 constant prices

                                                                                                                           Botswana


                                           Figure 5b: … and its labor markets have remained flexible

                                                             Rigidity of Employment Index and GDP per capita
                    100




                                           NER
                                             BFA
                                                          COG
     Rigidity of Employment Index




                                              BFA
                              80




                                             SLE TCD
                                             TGO            COG               BOL
                                                                               BOL                                PAN             VEN VEN                                                                             PRT
                                          NERGNB                 AGO                                             BRA       BLR                    MEX
                                           CAF
                                             SLE
                                             TGO
                                              RWA                     AGOBOL                                            VEN           VEN
                                           MOZ
                                           CAF TCDMRT   CMR                 PRY                  PERUKR           BRA                                       MEX
                                          NER
                                           NER
                                         BDI        MRT COG
                                               TZACIV     COGCOG      MAR         IRQ       AGO     SLV                                     PAN
                                             SLETZA  STP MDA  MDA
                                              GNB
                                              MLI
                                               TZATCD                     BOL              AGO GTM                                  ARG     PAN         HRV LTU                                             GNQ
                                            MOZ
                                              BFA
                                             MDG
                                              MDG
                                              SLETZA
                                                 TZA SEN
                                                      STP
                                                       STPKGZ            MAR
                                                                          MAR AGO
                                                                            MARAZE    AGO             UKR              PAN PAN         CRI
                      60




                                         BDI
                                           CAF
                                            CAF
                                            MOZ
                                            MDG
                                              TZA
                                              BFABEN SEN COGNIC   IND                                      UKR
                                                                                                             PER
                                                                                                              THA                                     LVARUS                       SVK
                                         BDI
                                          NERRWA
                                              GIN
                                             MDG
                                              GIN
                                              RWA TCD
                                                   HTI
                                                     STP
                                                   MRTMRT
                                                       KHM     PHL MAR      PRY
                                                                             PRY
                                                                              PRY
                                                                               PRY
                                                                                PRY
                                                                                 IRQ
                                                                                   EGYJOR                COL                                  GAB
                                                                                                                                                GAB                          LVA        LVA
                                             TGO
                                             TGO
                                             TGO
                                             MDG        UZB
                                                          PAK            IDN
                                                                           IDN
                                                                            IDN ARM            TUN ECU          COL BRA                                                       HRV HRV          EST            EST EST
                                                        CMR
                                                        CMR
                                                       UZB VNM
                                                           SDNVNM      HND  GEO                  ECUPER
                                                                                                     DZA          PER KAZVEN TUR
                                                                                                                UKR                 PANTURTUR                        POL
                                            MOZ
                                             TGO
                                             MOZ
                                              MLI
                                              BFA   KHM
                                                    SEN
                                                  BEN
                                                   CIV LAO   MDA
                                                               MDA             CPVEGY
                                                                             HND          EGY TUN
                                                                                        EGY       TUN         MKD MKD                BLR                                                    HUN                   OMN
                                          MWI
                                          ETH SLENPL
                                                 NPL
                                               MLIBEN    TJK
                                                          TJK
                                                           NIC
                                                             INDVNMMAR                               SLV
                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                     DZA
                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                       ECU
                                                                                                        EMKD
                                                                                                          CUCOL  ZAF BGR
                                                                                                               ZAF          IRN           ARG GAB               MEX                                         EST
                                         BDI MDG
                                             MOZ BGD
                                               RWA KHM   LAO
                                                          LAO
                                                        KHM    MNG
                                                            PAKIND           BTN
                                                                               GEO BIH       BIH
                                                                                              ARMALB DZA
                                                                                                       TUN
                                                                                                        TUN      DOM MKD                         CHL
                                                                                                                                       IRN IRN TUR              LVA                  HRV HRVH RV
                                              GIN          NIC                                         DZA
                                                                                                        PER      PER                             ARG     MEX       MEX        LTU        LTU  LTU                         PRT
                                             AFG
                                              TLS
                                               COM
                                                TLS
                                                 TCD
                                                  BEN
                                                  TCD
                                                 NPLZMB
                                                  LSO
                                                   CIV  CMR
                                                      MRT
                                                      MRT DJI
                                                        KHMDJI
                                                         KHMDJI
                                                             PAK PHL           BTN CHN
                                                                               SYR                DZATUN
                                                                                                      DZA UKRBIHBIH  MKD
                                                                                                                  UKR BRA SRB           LBN BGR
                                          ETH GIN
                                                NPL
                                                NPL   NGA
                                                     NGACMR
                                                          SDN PAK LKACPV
                                                            YEM
                                                              PAK
                                                              PAK            CPV
                                                                             IDNIDN
                                                                              HNDNAM  GEO                                     DOM        BGR                       LVA         LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                 RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                  RUSLVA
                                                                                                                                                                                       RUS EST
               40




                                         BDI
                                           ETHUGA
                                                RWA
                                              GIN
                                              GIN NPL
                                                  LSO           PHL
                                                                MDA  IND                   ALB  BIH     BIH
                                                                                                        SLV     THAZAF ZAF
                                                                                                                     ZAFBRA          DOM       TUR     ARGARG          LTU
                                            AFG BEN
                                                 BEN                PHLLKABOL
                                                                            BOL
                                                                            LKASYR IDN
                                                                                   BTN            GTM
                                                                                                    GTM                 DOM
                                                                                                                         URY SRB  IRN            IRN
                                                                                                                                                 IRN                                              HUN
                                               MLI
                                                RWACIV
                                                   CIVNGA KGZ
                                                           KGZ
                                                            KGZ
                                                              KGZMDA                IRQ IRQAZE        ALBAZEMKD MNEMNEAZE SRB AZEVEN04 TUR CRI                    MEX                               SVK          SVK

                                        ZWEETH
                                            ETH
                                            ETHTLS
                                                  GHA
                                                  GHA
                                                GHA
                                                GHA
                                                GHALSO
                                                   BGD
                                                 GHA
                                                 KEN
                                                 TLSBGD ZMB
                                                         ZMB
                                                          UZB
                                                           UZB
                                                              LAO
                                                            SDN
                                                            SDNYEM
                                                               YEM
                                                             UZB
                                                                LAO
                                                                 VNM
                                                                 MNG
                                                               UZB PHL
                                                                 LAOPHL
                                                                  MNG MNG
                                                                       MNG
                                                                         MNG
                                                                               SYR
                                                                             HND SYR
                                                                           HND SYR
                                                                                        ARM
                                                                                       JOR
                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                      GTMALBALBMNE
                                                                                                                             MUS
                                                                                                                                  20 CRI
                                                                                                                                JAM BWA                     ARG
                                                                                                                                                                               POL          POL POL   HUN       CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SAUSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                               OMN   OMN SVK
                                        ZWE                    YEM
                                                               YEM                    NAM             VUT                             0 6DOM                             POL           POL              HUN
                                         LBR
                                         BDI       BGDTJK             INDHND SYR JOR
                                                                        IND               JORALBARM
                                                                                                  ARM
                                                                                                   ARM
                                                                                               CHNCHN
                                                                                                  VUT                             2U0RYBWA
                                                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                                                 MUS      URY      URYCRI
                                                                                                                                                     URY
                                                                                                                                                   BGR
                                                                                                                                                        CRI
                                                                                                                                                      BGR               RUS                      HUN     HUN
                                                 KEN
                                        ZWEERI LSOKEN
                                                 AFG
                                                   GMB
                                                    ZMB
                                                     GMB PNGNIC
                                                            NIC VNM           LKALKA
                                                                                  LKAJORNAM NAM
                                                                                            EGY
                                                                                             EGY       GTM
                                                                                                        GTM          SRB
                                                                                                                    COL
                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                     COL        KAZBGR    DOM
                                                                                                                                           LBN
                                                                                                                                           BLR        CRI
                                                                                                                                                      BLR     BLRBLR
                                                                                                                                                               RUS                                                      CZE
                                        ZWEMWI
                                           MWI KEN
                                                 BGD
                                                  BGD
                                                   LSO
                                                   HTI
                                                    HTI     NIC VNM                 GUY                  SLV
                                                                                                         VUT
                                                                                                          CHN
                                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                                           VUT
                                                                                                            SLVCHN  COL                        MYS LBN CHLCHLCHL
                                                                                                                                             LBN             LBN LBN
                                                                                                                                                            CHL
                                                AFG GMB ZMB                                                      SRB          09 05MUS 0
                                                                                                                                      MUS7 KAZ
                                                                                                                                            SUR   0
                                                                                                                                               SSUR
                                                                                                                                                 UR 8
                                                                                                                                                   KAZ    KAZ
     20




                                          MWI
                                           ERIBFA
                                            ERI   KEN
                                                   LSO
                                                    HTI
                                                    HTI
                                                      SLBNGA PNG                  GUY GUY
                                                                                        FJI
                                                                                         FJI
                                                                                           NAM
                                                                                             NAM                           20 2BWA   0 BWA 20 BWAKAZ GRD GRD
                                                                                                                                0 2BWA
                                                                                                                                                      CHL
                                                                                                                                                                    GRD
                                                  KEN SLB SLB
                                                            PNG            SWZ
                                                                             KIR
                                                                              KIRKIR KIR
                                                                                      FJI         DMA
                                                                                                   DMA DMA         THA
                                                                                                             VCT VCT  TTHA
                                                                                                                       THA
                                                                                                                        HA                                         KNA      KNA
                                                UGA                        SWZ         FJI                        VCT TONBLZ        BLZ                           LCA KNA                                               SAU
                                                     ZMB SLBPNG   P NG FSM
                                                                  PNG                                      WSM
                                                                                                            WSM
                                                                                                            WSMWSMMHL            JAM
                                                                                                                                   JAM
                                                                                                                                    BLZ               MYS
                                                                                                                                                       MYSMYS
                                                                                                                                                            MYS                      ATG SVK          ATG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ATG
                                               UGA
                                               UGA      NGA
                                                        NGA         FSM
                                                                    FSM    BTN
                                                                            MDV
                                                                             BTN
                                                                               GEOGEO
                                                                                 GEO                        TON
                                                                                                             TON
                                                                                                              TON                                          LCA
                                                                                                                                                           LCA
                                                UGA
                                                UGA                                                                     JAM
                                                                                                                          JAM
                                                                                                                           JAMAZE     MYS                               PLWPLW
                                                                                                                                                                           PLW
                    0




                                                                              MDV
                                                                               MDV
                                                                               MDV                    MHL
                                                                                                       MHL
                                                                                                        MHL                                                               PLW



                                    0               5000             10000              15000              20000
                                        PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Chain Series), at 2005 constant prices

                                                                                     Botswana                                               Fitted values




30
                             Figure 6a: Tariffs fell sharply, especially in manufacturing . . .

                                                      Average tariffs
                            30

                            25

                            20
               Percentage

                            15

                            10

                             5

                             0
                              1988         1993               1998            2003               2008

                                        Agriculture        Mining           Manufacturing

Note: The average tariff within each sector is a simple average of industry level tariffs where the industry level
tariffs are a weighted average of 4-digit HS tariffs using 2000 imports as weights.


                            Figure 6b: . . . but import and export volumes held steady
             80

             70

             60

             50

             40

             30

             20

             10
               1970              1975   1980      1985     1990      1995      2000       2005     2010

                                         Exports (% of GDP)          Imports (% of GDP)

Source: World Development Indicators.




31
Table 1: Mining initially drove sectoral productivity growth
                                                        Labor Productivity Compound Annual Growth
                                                                            Rate
                                                        1970 to 1970 to 1980 to 1990 to 2000 to
                                                         2010      1980     1990    2000     2010
Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing               1.8       4.9      1.6    -3.1       3.8
Mining and Quarrying                                      5.0       5.6     10.4     2.3       1.8
Manufacturing                                             2.4      13.6      -6.9    0.9       3.1
Public Utilities (Electricity, Gas, and Water)            3.7       1.3      2.3    10.1       1.4
Construction                                              1.1      -7.1      -5.5    1.3      17.5
Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels, and Restaurants       -1.3      5.4     -10.0   -0.5       0.6
Transport, Storage, and Communications                    5.2       7.7      4.4     6.1       2.6
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Business Services     2.1      10.4      -2.2    0.3       0.5
Community, Social, and Personal Services                 10.0      -3.6     22.3     8.1      15.1
Government Services                                       2.3      -0.4      6.7    -0.5       3.7
Economy-wide                                              5.0      10.8      5.7     1.1      2.7
                                                           Change in employment share (percentage
                                                                           points)
                                                        1970 to 1970 to 1980 to 1990 to 2000 to
                                                         2010      1980     1990    2000     2010
Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing              -43.9    -22.8     -19.6   -1.9       0.3
Mining and Quarrying                                      0.4       2.9      -0.7   -0.8      -1.0
Manufacturing                                             5.2       0.0      4.3     0.6       0.2
Public Utilities (Electricity, Gas, and Water)            0.4       0.6      0.4    -0.5      -0.1
Construction                                              1.1       3.5      6.8    -2.9      -6.4
Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels, and Restaurants      18.2       1.4      4.7     3.2       8.9
Transport, Storage, and Communications                    2.0      -0.1      1.2     0.2       0.8
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Business Services     5.8       0.4      2.0     1.1       2.3
Community, Social, and Personal Services                  -1.5      6.7      -1.4   -4.5      -2.3
Government Services                                      12.3       7.4      2.2     5.4      -2.6
Source: Authors' calculations using GGDC's ASD.
Table 2: Summary of Major Incentive Schemes
Incentive scheme        Objective                                   Status
Local Preference        To give local producers preference in       Revised and superseded by the Local
Scheme (1976)           the supply of goods for government          Procurement Program in 1997
                        contracts

Reserved sectors policy      To promote the participation of        Policy continues with some
(1982)                       Botswana and Botswana-owned firms      flexibility having been introduced,
                             in economic activity by limiting       especially that joint-ventures are now
                             certain activities to them only        allowed


Financial Assistance         Provided capital and labor grants      Terminated in 2000 following a
Policy (1982)                based on labor employed as well as     review report by BIDPA in 1999,
                             location                               which found a high failure rate as
                                                                    well as large-scale abuse, wastage
                                                                    and high costs per job created

Selebi-Phikwe Regional       To stimulate economic development      Phased out in 1996
Development Project          in the area around the copper mining
(1988)                       town

Citizen Entrepreneurial      To support the development of          Replaced the Financial Assistance
Development Agency           citizen-owned business through         Policy in 2001
(2001)                       subsidised funding, training and

Local Enterprise Agency      Providing business support services    In operation
(2007)                       for SMMEs

Economic                     Replaced Local Procurement Policy.     In operation
Diversification Drive        Provides preference margins for
(EDD) (2010)                 locally registered companies in
                             government procurement


Citizen Economic             Restricts participation in certain     In operation
Empowerment (CEE)            government procurement to citizen-
Policy (2012)                owned companies only
Source: Modified from BIDPA and World Bank (2006), pp. 22-23.
Table 3: Higher labor force participation
                                                                                                      Percentage of
                                                                                                       working age
                                                             Number of individuals                      individuals
Activity                                                 1995/96 2005/06 % change                   1995/96 2005/06
Total working age individuals                            743,403 923,055       24.2                  100.0      100.0
In labor force:                                          415,251 595,402       43.4                   55.9       64.5
      Working                                            323,034 483,818       49.8                   43.5       52.4
      Actively seeking work                               92,217 111,584       21.0                   12.4       12.1
Not in labor force:                                      328,152 327,653        -0.2                  44.1       35.5
      Not available to work                              247,073 199,610       -19.2                  33.2       21.6
           Attending school                              109,821 109,904         0.1                  14.8       11.9
           Engaged in household duties                   101,658 38,915        -61.7                  13.7        4.2
           Too old                                          876     1,798     105.3                    0.1        0.2
           Sick                                           22,570   31,523      39.7                    3.0        3.4
           Disabled                                        5,826    4,101      -29.6                   0.8        0.4
           Other                                           6,322   13,368     111.4                    0.9        1.4
      Available to work, but did not look for work
      during past 30 days                                 81,079     128,043       57.9               10.9        13.9
           Thought no work available                      41,409      61,101       47.6                5.6         6.6
           Awaiting reply for earlier enquiries            6,089       9,037       48.4                0.8         1.0
           Waiting to start arranged job, business
           or agriculture                                 2,598       3,142        21.0                0.3         0.3
           Occupied with household duties                 25,989      37,331        43.6               3.5         4.0
           Other                                          4,994       17,432       249.1               0.7         1.9
Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60. The numbers reported are population estimates using sample
weights. The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days.
Table 4a: High unemployment, particular for youth…
                        Unemployment                  Labor force
Excluding agriculture       rate (%)             participation rate (%)
                       1995/96 2005/06            1995/96      2005/06
All                      20.2      21.2             54.3         60.2
Males                    18.1      19.3             60.9         66.8
Females                  22.2      22.9             48.9         55.4
15-19 years old          37.1      39.7             12.7         14.6
20-24 years old          35.9      38.7             55.6         61.4
Urban                    20.7      20.1             64.3         64.9
Rural                    19.3      24.0             42.3         50.7
No formal education      21.4      20.0             51.2         51.9
Primary education        20.6      21.9             60.3         61.8
Secondary education      19.4      21.2             51.0         61.0
Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60 and excludes individuals
currently working or unemployed and previously working in agriculture. The numbers
reported are population estimates using sample weights. The estimates are based on the
individual's activity during the past 7 days. The unemployed include people who were
available to work (but did not work) in the past 7 days, which includes workers that did
not actively seek work. The labor force is defined as individuals that worked during the
past 7 days, sought work, or were temporarily absent. The labor force participation rate
differs from Table 3 due to the exclusion of agriculture.
Table 4b:…. and rising informality
                                                                        Percentage of informal workers
Industry Description (excluding agriculture)                            1995/96    2005/06      Change
Public administration                                                      0.1         0.7        0.5
Foreign missions and international organizations                           0.0         0.0        0.0
Mining and quarrying                                                       0.0         0.0        0.0
Manufacturing                                                             27.0        31.3        4.3
Electricity, gas, and water supply                                         0.0         0.0        0.0
Construction                                                              17.5        26.5        9.1
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.                     32.4        41.6        9.3
Transport, storage, and communication                                     27.0        36.0        9.0
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                     3.7         6.9        3.2
Community, social, household, and personal services                       12.7         9.2       -3.6
Total                                                                     13.2        17.9        4.8
Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFSs.
Notes: The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60 outside of agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing.
Informal workers are all those workers in the private sector, employed at firms with less than ten employees and
defined as informal in the survey by question 30 in the 1995/96 LFS and question 39 in the 2005/06 LFS. The
numbers reported are population estimates based on using sampling weights. The estimates are based on the
individual's activity during the past 7 days.
Table 5: A major move out of construction and public administration
                                                       Number of workers                        Percentage of workers
Industry Description                                   1995/96      2005/06                      1995/96     2005/06
Public administration                                   99,526      114,850                        35.6        31.6
Foreign missions and international organizations          224          895                          0.1         0.2
Mining and quarrying                                    15,028       14,289                         5.4        3.9
Manufacturing                                           27,899       34,077                        10.0        9.4
Electricity, gas, and water supply                       2,794        4,132                         1.0         1.1
Construction                                            38,759       26,474                        13.9        7.3
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.   51,973       85,416                        18.6        23.5
Transport, storage, and communication                    7,644       15,904                         2.7         4.4
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services  11,379       32,606                         4.1         9.0
Community, social, household, and personal services     24,572       34,486                         8.8         9.5
Total                                                  279,798      363,128                       100.0       100.0
Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60 outside of agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing. The numbers
reported are population estimates using sample weights.
Table A1: Trade Flows by Commodity Group, 1991-2005/06
                                                                             Imports not from South
                                            Total Imports                            Africa                  Total Exports        Exports not to South Africa
                                      Value    Share Growth                  Value   Share Growth      Value    Share Growth       Value    Share Growth
                                     (million                               (million                  (million                    (million
Commodity Group       Year            pula)      (%)      (%)                pula)     (%)     (%)     pula)      (%)      (%)     pula)     (%)       (%)
Animals and Animal    1991             91        2.33                          4       0.65             129       3.36              99       2.71
Products             2005/06           375       2.14     312                 25       1.03     525     465       1.81      260     269      1.13      172
Vegetable Products    1991             184       4.71                         62      10.03             12        0.31              10       0.27
                     2005/06           928       5.30     404                 37       1.52     -40     42        0.16      250     12       0.05        20
Foodstuffs            1991             274       7.01                         51       8.25             35        0.91              16       0.44
                     2005/06          1188       6.78     334                 99       4.07      94     172       0.67      391     38       0.16      138
Mineral Products      1991             349       8.93                         28       4.53              1        0.03               0       0.00
                     2005/06          3398      19.40     874                 121      4.97     332     287       1.12    28600     257      1.08
Chemicals and Allied  1991             196       5.02                         15       2.43             34        0.88              11       0.30
Industries           2005/06          1539       8.79     685                 165      6.78    1000     177       0.69      421     95       0.40      764
Plastics/Rubber       1991             165       4.22                         13       2.10              5        0.13               2       0.05
                     2005/06           688       3.93     317                 66       2.71     408     76        0.30     1420     11       0.05      450
Raw Hides, Skins,     1991             13        0.33                          4       0.65             24        0.62              17       0.47
Leather              2005/06           34        0.19     162                  4       0.16       0     32        0.12      33       6       0.03       -65
Wood and Wood         1991             213       5.45                         32       5.18              6        0.16               4       0.11
Products             2005/06           723       4.13     239                 102      4.19     219     55        0.21      817     17       0.07      325
Textiles              1991             254       6.50                         65      10.52             127       3.31              104      2.85
                     2005/06           688       3.93     171                 133      5.46     105    1072       4.17      744     730      3.06      602
Footwear              1991             72        1.84                          8       1.29              9        0.23               1       0.03
                     2005/06           200       1.14     178                 22       0.90     175     11        0.04      22       2       0.01      100
Stones and Glass      1991             119       3.05                         15       2.43            3031      78.89             3027     82.86
(includes diamonds)  2005/06           567       3.24     376                 258     10.60    1620    19349     75.24      538    19143    80.36      532
Metals                1991             449      11.49                         36       5.83             332       8.64              323      8.84
                     2005/06          1420       8.11     216                 143      5.87     297    3272      12.72      886    3060     12.85      847
Machinery/Electrical  1991             690      17.66                         139     22.49             47        1.22              17       0.47
                     2005/06          3011      17.19     336                 749     30.76     439     253       0.98      438     111      0.47      553
Transportation        1991             646      16.53                         123     19.90             43        1.12              20       0.55
                     2005/06          2021      11.54     213                 346     14.21     181     426       1.66      891     60       0.25      200
Miscellaneous         1991             192       4.91                         23       3.72              7        0.18               2       0.05
                     2005/06           732       4.18     281                 165      6.78     617     28        0.11      300     11       0.05      450
Total                 1991            3907     100.00                         618    100.00            3842     100.00             3653     100.00
                     2005/06          17512    100.00     348                2435    100.00     294    25717    100.00      569    23822    100.00     552
Source: Authors' calculations using UNCTAD & BIDPA data
Note: Data for 2005/06 was calculated using average levels between years.
Table A2: Botswana's top ten imports and exports, 1991 and 2005
                                            1991                                                               2005
                                                          Value                                                                     Value
                                                         (million                                                                  (million
  Rank                      Commodity                     USD)        %                         Commodity                           USD)      %
Panel A: Top Ten Imported Commodities (HS 4-digit level)
   1      Motor vehicles for the transport of goods.       125        8.0    Petroleum oils, etc, (excl. crude)                      372      13.7
                                                                             Motor cars and other motor vehicles principally
                                                                             designed for the transport of persons (other than
    2     Petroleum oils, etc, (excl. crude)                     96   6.1                                                            113      4.2
                                                                             those of heading 87.02), including station wagons
                                                                             and racing cars.
    3     Motor cars and other motor vehicles                    51   3.3    Motor vehicles for the transport of goods               112      4.1
                                                                             Medicaments consisting of mixed or unmixed
          Portland cement, aluminous cement, slag cement,
                                                                             products for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, put
          supersulphate cement and similar hydraulic
    4                                                            35   2.2    up in measured doses (including those in the form       74       2.7
          cements, whether or not coloured or in the form
                                                                             of transdermal administration systems) or in
          of clinkers.
                                                                             forms or packin
                                                                             Parts of railway or tramway locomotives or
    5     Parts and accessories of motor vehicles                31   2.0                                                            65       2.4
                                                                             rolling-stock.
          Other aircraft (for example, helicopters,
    6     aeroplanes); spacecraft (including satellites) and     29   1.8    Nickel ores and concentrates                            59       2.2
          suborbital and spacecraft launch vehicles.
          Structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of                   Transmission apparatus for radio-telephony, radio-
          heading 94.06) and parts of structures (for                        telegraphy, radio-broadcasting or television,
          example, bridges and bridge-sections, lock-gates,                  whether or not incorporating reception apparatus
    7                                                            28   1.8                                                            54       2.0
          towers, lattice masts, roofs, roofing frame-works,                 or sound recording or reproducing apparatus;
          doors and windows and their frames and                             television cameras; still image video cameras and
          thresholds for doors,                                              other video cam
    8     Other furniture and parts thereof                      27   1.7    Parts and accessories of motor vehicles                 46       1.7
                                                                             Portland cement, aluminous cement, slag cement,
                                                                             supersulphate cement and similar hydraulic
    9     Insulated wire,cable,other insulated electric cables   26   1.7                                                            43       1.6
                                                                             cements, whether or not coloured or in the form
                                                                             of clinkers.
                                                                             Self-propelled bulldozers, angledozers, graders,
                                                                             levellers, scrapers, mechanical shovels,
   10     New pneumatic tyres, of rubber                         22   1.4                                                            36       1.3
                                                                             excavators, shovel loaders, tamping machines and
                                                                             road rollers.
Panel B: Top Ten Exported Commodities (HS 4-digit level)
          Diamonds, whether or not worked, but not                           Diamonds, whether or not worked, but not
   1                                                     1459         79.5                                                          3322      76.6
          mounted or set.                                                    mounted or set.
          Nickel mattes, nickle oxide sinters, and other                     Copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated
   2                                                      154         6.9                                                            456      10.5
          intermediate products                                              copper).

    3     Meat of bovine animals, fresh or chilled               32   5.1    Tractors (other than tractors of heading 87.09).        78       1.8

                                                                             Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waist-coats and
    4     Woven fabrics of cotton, with >=85% cotton             21   4.9                                                            76       1.8
                                                                             similar articles, knitted or crocheted.
    5     Meat of bovine animals, frozen                         20   1.4    Meat of bovine animals, fresh or chilled                41       0.9
          Pile fabrics, including long pile fabrics and terry
    6                                                            16   0.6    Meat of bovine animals, frozen                          32       0.7
          fabrics, knitted or crocheted.
          Carbonates; peroxocarbonates (percarbonates);
                                                                             Women's or girls' blouses, shirts and shirt-
    7     commercial ammonium carbonate containing               11   0.3                                                            30       0.7
                                                                             blouses.
          ammonium carbamate.
          Motor cars and other motor vehicles principally                    Women's or girls' suits, ensembles, jackets,
          designed for the transport of persons (other than                  blazers, dresses, skirts, divided skirts, trousers,
    8                                                            7    0.3                                                            26       0.6
          those of heading 87.02), including station wagons                  bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts (other
          and racing cars.                                                   than swimwear), knitted or crocheted.
                                                                             Gold (including gold plated with platinum)
    9     Motor vehicles for the transport of goods              7    0.3    unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in          25       0.6
                                                                             powder form.
                                                                             Men's or boys' suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers,
          Yarn (other than sewing thread) of artificial staple               trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and
   10                                                            6    0.2                                                            23       0.5
          fibres, not put up for retail sale.                                shorts (other than swimwear), knitted or
                                                                             crocheted.
Source: Authors' calculations using UNCTAD & BIDPA data
Table A3: Top ten source countries for imports and destination countries for exports, 1991
and 2005
                           1991                                     2005
                              Value                                     Value
                             (million                                  (million
  Rank          Country       USD)        %             Country         USD)         %
Panel A: Top Ten Source Countries (Imports)
    1     South Africa        1586       84.7      South Africa          2632       86.8
    2     Zimbabwe             101        5.4      Zimbabwe                47        1.5
    3     United States         69        3.7      United Kingdom          38        1.3
    4     Turks and Caicos Is 20         1.1       United States           37        1.2
    5     Germany               15        0.8      China                   34        1.1
    6     Switzerland           12        0.6      Sweden                  28        0.9
    7     Sweden                11       0.6       Germany                 28       0.9
    8     Italy                  9        0.5      India                   22        0.7
    9     Japan                  6       0.3       Japan                   20       0.7
   10     France                 5        0.3      Namibia                 15        0.5
Panel B: Top Ten Destination Countries (Exports)
    1     Switzerland         1458       79.5      United Kingdom        3350       76.1
    2     Zimbabwe             127        6.9      South Africa           382        8.7
    3     Norway                94       5.1       Norway                 262       6.0
    4     South Africa          90        4.9      Zimbabwe               183        4.2
    5     United States         26        1.4      United States           97        2.2
    6     Germany               11        0.6      Germany                 28        0.6
    7     Zambia                 6        0.3      Faeroe Islands          20        0.5
    8     Malawi                 5        0.3      Zambia                  12        0.3
    9     Netherlands            5        0.3      Namibia                 11        0.2
   10     Italy                  4        0.2      Israel                  10        0.2
Source: Authors' calculations using UNCTAD & BIDPA data
Table B1: A possible case of measurement error
Comparison of employment estimates
                             Africa      LFS
                             Sector    (current LFS (main
                            Database   activity)  activity)
Agriculture                   236,107     161,712   236,270
Mining                         14,173      14,289     14,854
Manufacturing                  35,973      35,973     43,415
Utilities                        4,163      4,163      5,055
Construction                   27,587      27,587     38,312
Trade services                 92,068      92,177   118,243
Transport services             16,050      16,094     19,109
Business services              33,679      33,724     38,184
Government services           117,404     117,498   127,847
Personal services              24,291      36,684     47,829
Total                         601,495     539,901   689,118
Sources: The Africa Sector Database employment estimates are from the
Groningen Growth and Development Centre (de Vries, Timmer, and de
Vries 2013). The LFS estimates are the authors own calculations using the
2005/06 LFS.
Notes: Current activity refers to the past 7 days and main activity refers to
the past 12 months.
