NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACCOUNTING FOR THE RISE IN C-SECTIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM POPULATION LEVEL DATA
Sara Allin
Michael Baker
Maripier Isabelle
Mark Stabile
Working Paper 21022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21022

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015, Revised June 2019

Previously circulated as "Physician Incentives and the Rise in C-sections: Evidence from
Canada." Lauren Jones, Genevieve Jeffrey and Carla Sorbara provided excellent research
assistance. Baker gratefully acknowledges the research support of SSHRC (#410-2011-0724) and
a Canada Research Chair at the University of Toronto. We thank Phil DeCicca, Marit Rehavi,
Sisira Sarma and seminar participants at NYU, the 2015 Canadian Health Economics Study
Group and Canadian Economics Association meetings for helpful comments. Parts of this paper
are based on data and information provided by the Canadian Institute for Health Information.
However, the analyses, conclusions, opinions and statements expressed herein are those of the
authors, and not necessarily those of the Canadian Institute for Health Information. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sara Allin, Michael Baker, Maripier Isabelle, and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Accounting for the Rise in C-sections: Evidence from Population Level Data
Sara Allin, Michael Baker, Maripier Isabelle, and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 21022
March 2015, Revised June 2019
JEL No. I1,I11
ABSTRACT
Drawing on administrative records of nearly 4 million births in Canada as well as macro data
from the US and Australia, we provide a comprehensive account of rising C-section rates. We
explicitly consider the contributions of the changing characteristics of mothers, births, and
physicians as well as changing financial incentives for C-section deliveries. These factors account
for at most one-half of the increase in C-section rates. The majority of the remaining increase in
C-sections over the period 1994-2011 occurred in the early 2000s. We overview the relative
contributions that the Hannah Breech Trial and technological change may have played in this
development.
Sara Allin
University of Toronto
14 Queens Park Cres W
Toronto, ON
M5S 3K9
Canada
sara.allin@utoronto.ca

Maripier Isabelle
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON
Canada
maripier.isabelle@mail.utoronto.ca

Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca

Mark Stabile
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
Europe
mark.stabile@insead.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
Why are Caesarian section (C-section) births increasingly viewed as a public health care
problem? First, C-section rates have been rising steadily over past decades in many developed
countries. In Figure 1 we graph the rates of Caesarean births for selected countries of North
America and Europe, and in Australia between 1995 and 2012. Across these countries, C-section
rates have increased between 17 and 48 percent since 2000. Second, the World Health
Organization (1985) has identified 15 percent as the highest C-section rate justifiable on medical
grounds,1 yet Gibbons et al. (2010) report that half of a sample of countries representing over 95
percent of global births had C–section rates exceeding this level. Note that the C-section rates in
all six countries represented in Figure 1 are above 15 percent throughout the entire period. Third,
over time, C-section deliveries have consumed a rising proportion of hospitals’ surgical resources.
For example, in both Canada and the US, C-sections have become the most common inpatient
surgery (CIHI 2016a, Pfuntner et al. 2013).2 Fourth, C-section rates have been found to vary across
countries, within countries and across hospitals, suggesting that something more than the health of
the mother and the child is at play defining the trends. Finally, C-sections are increasingly
recognized as major surgery, posing significant, and perhaps in certain cases avoidable, risks for
both mother and child (Card et al 2018, SOGC 2004).

1

The guideline emitted by the WHO in 1985 stated: "Countries with some of the lowest perinatal mortality rates in
the world have caesarean section rates of less than 10%. There is no justification for any region to have a rate higher
than 10-15%." (WHO 1985) This guideline has been re-examined in 2015 and concluded that no optimal C-section
rate could be identified, and that more evidence is needed to understand the health risks to mothers and babies of
C-section rates over 30 percent (WHO 2015).
2
C-sections totaled 100 963 surgeries in Canada in 2014-15. Knee replacements came second, with 60 607
occurrences. Over that same period, birth deliveries were responsible for nearly 370 000 inpatient stays, lasting on
average 2.3 days. The second most important factor for inpatient hospitalization during that period were respiratory
diseases, with nearly 88 000 occurrences (CIHI 2016a).

2

Among the reasons offered for the rise in C-sections rates, the trend to delay childbirth—
the risk of complication during labor increases with maternal age—and the higher incidence of
multiple births due to fertility treatments are leading medical based accounts. In addition, defensive
medicine and risk avoidance—the risk of poor or catastrophic health outcomes for the mother and
child and/or the risk of lawsuits in the rare event of failed vaginal delivery—on the part of health
practitioners is also thought to contribute, fanned by new technologies such as continuous
electronic fetal monitoring. Economic research on rising C-section rates has mostly focused on
doctors’ monetary incentives to perform the procedure. Finally, the convenience of C-sections is
believed to appeal to both health professionals and mothers. It precludes long periods of labor and
offers more predictability to doctors’ and mothers’ schedules.
Much of the previous research on the rise of C-sections focuses on a subset of these
explanations and/or a selected sample of births. While this approach may be justified on the
grounds of identification or data limitations, it lacks the context required to understand the relative
roles that competing causes may play, or to assess how much of this overall rise can actually be
explained by the factors proposed in the literature.
In this paper, we use Canadian population level data to investigate the salience of these
competing explanations to rising C-section rates in Canada. Our administrative data provides
detailed information on the characteristics of mothers and the delivery, which span many of the
non-economic explanations enumerated above. Also, Canada provides an attractive forum for
identifying any role of economic explanations—i.e., physician incentives. Obstetric care in this
country is remunerated through fee-for-service agreements, and fees for Caesarean and vaginal

3

deliveries vary substantially across provinces and over time.3 The health system in Canada is
public (single payer) and universal, and our administrative records allow us to consider the full
population of hospital births within the country. We can therefore explore the roles of a variety of
explanations of increasing Caesarean rates while obtaining findings that are not limited in scope
or in nature by selection issues (either based on the patient or delivering physician types) present
in some other systems. Finally, as documented in Figure 1, the rise in C-sections in Canada mirrors
the rise in other developed countries, so our findings should have external validity for other
developed countries facing.
Our investigation offers three main results. First, we find that variables capturing these
various explanations of rising C-section rates are related to the choice of a birth delivery method
in the expected ways. For example, C-section rates rise expectantly with maternal age and are
higher in instances of, for example, fetal distress, multiple gestation, breech presentation and
previous C-section.
Second, changes in the characteristics of mothers and deliveries together with changes in
physician incentives account for at most half of the secular increase in C-section rates in Canada
between 1994 and 2011. This is primarily the work of changes in characteristics, rather than
changing incentives.
Third much of the remaining increase in C-section rates, net of changes in observables,
occurs in the first half of the 2000s. This part of the increase can be roughly seen in Figure 2 for
Canada, as well as in Figure 1 for the other countries, save Germany.

3

In 2011-2012, more than 85 percent of Canadian physicians reported being mainly compensated by fee-for-service
agreements (National Physician Survey 2013). The Canadian Institute for Health Information estimated the proportion
of physician payments made in the form of fee-for-service compensation to be around 72 percent (CIHI 2016b).

4

In the final part of the paper we consider two leading accounts of a strong increase in
C-section rates in the early 2000s. One is technological change, which has been widely cited as a
possible cause of the increased practice of defensive medicine. A second is the publication of the
results of the Hannah Term Breech Trial in late 2000. We do not find any evidence of a
technological innovation in the early 2000s that might lie behind the sudden acceleration of
C-section rates in this period. However, in Australia, the U.S. and Canada we find that the jump
in the C-section rates for vertex births in the early 2000s echoes a jump in the C-section rate for
breech births, which is widely attributed to the publication of the “Term Breech Trial” results
(Hannah et al. 2000). While we lack the data to explicitly test ties between these two developments,
the coincidence of the jumps in the rates for these different types of births points to possible
spillover effects of the Trial. Given growing concerns over rising C-sections rates, this finding
presents an important question for future research.

2 PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Several studies have investigated the contribution of mother/birth characteristics to the
rising number of C-section deliveries (c.f Lauer et al. 2010, Taffel et al. 1987, Anderson and
Lomas 1984). Others have investigated the relationship between a variety of financial/physician
incentives and C-section rates (c.f Gruber and Owings 1996, Gruber et al. 1999, Alexander 2017).
Another explanation of rising C-section rates is changing patient preferences. Some media
reports have claimed that an increasing proportion of mothers requests a C-section for aesthetic
reasons, for fear of experiencing prolonged labor or for scheduling convenience. Testing this
hypothesis is challenging; in Canada, for example, data on maternal requests for C-sections has
not been collected consistently across provinces or over time. The few existing studies argue that
5

explore mothers' preferences suggest that they could only play a marginal role in explaining the
high rates of primary C-sections across the country (e.g. Canadian Health Services Research
Foundation 2012, Hanley et al. 2010, Declercq et al. 2007, Gamble 2007).
In parallel, the medical and legal literatures have described how tort laws, initially adopted
to deter negligence, have intensified the recourse to unnecessary medical acts and contributed to a
culture of defensive medicine (c.f. Carrier et al. 2010, Currie and MacLeod 2008, Baicker et al.
2007, Kim 2007, Keeler and Brodie 1993, Lawthers et al. 1992). However, these investigations
tend to focus on the U.S. tort laws, and cannot explain why C-sections have been rising in contexts
with different legal environments.
Still another explanation for high C-section rates is technological change in health
professionals’ practice (Currie and MacLeod 2017, Clemens and Gottlieb 2014). Finally, there is
very little evidence-based support in the literature for the hypothesis that physicians opt for
C-section deliveries for reasons of scheduling convenience or demand for leisure (e.g. Fabbri et
al. 2016, Lefevre 2014, Brown 1996).

3 THE CANADIAN HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
Canadian health care is a universal, single payer system that operates at the provincial level and is
financed both by general provincial taxes and by fiscal transfers from the federal government. In
the period we study, most physician services were remunerated according to fee-for-service
agreements, in which physicians are responsible for billing the provincial health insurance plan for
each procedure they perform at a fee administratively fixed by provincial authorities for a
predetermined period (typically corresponding to a fiscal year). Even in those cases where doctors
were paid by alternate arrangements such as capitation agreements, births were generally
6

reimbursed by fee-for-service. Fees did not evolve in response to the relative movements of the
demand and supply for different medical services. Physicians are, moreover, precluded by
provincial legislation aligned with the Canada Health Act from billing their patients in addition to
the fees they receive from the public insurer. Finally, over our study period, the Canadian health
care system did not provide an opportunity for physicians to choose between privately and publicly
insured patients, or to self-select into remuneration agreements for obstetric care.4
Another important feature of the Canadian health care system relevant to this study is that
physicians are effectively insulated from any impact of tort liability (Flood and Thomas 2012).
This is significant, because as explained in the previous section, an explanation of “defensive
medicine” has been used to account for some of the increase in the use of C-section in other
countries. Because Canadian physicians are substantially reimbursed by provincial governments
for malpractice insurance premiums, and are defended by the (historically very successful)
Canadian Medical Protective Association in the event of a court proceeding, the risks of
financial—as opposed to the reputational—costs of malpractice are unlikely to play a significant
role in Canadian C-section trends.
Finally, most (but not all) births in Canada are delivered in hospitals, and they can be
handled by different types of healthcare providers. General practitioners and family physicians are
trained to provide obstetric care, including intrapartum care, although these represent only one
(often marginal) component of their varied practice. They also have the option to refer their

4

Changes in the fees in each province are typically induced by external scientific assessments of changes in the relative
level of effort or skills required to perform different medical acts, caused for example by technological change,
modifications in medical protocols or in the training for certain areas of practices. Changes in fees may also reflect
political considerations as the formal negotiation process involves the provincial government and the provincial
medical association (or its designated tariff committee). However, the objective of these negotiations is mostly to
determine the amount of the global envelope attributed to physician remuneration, rather than to determine the relative
movements in specific fees.

7

patients to an OB/GYN, for example for higher risk pregnancies or if they decide to opt out of
obstetric practice completely.

4 DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Our main source of data on birth deliveries is the Discharge Abstract Database (DAD),
administered by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), which covers the universe
of administrative discharge abstracts from acute inpatient facilities in all Canadian provinces but
Quebec. Our sample covers the administrative records for all hospital births between April 1994
and March 2011 in the remaining nine provinces.5
The data provides some demographic characteristics for each mother, such as her age at
delivery and her province of residence. It also contains detailed clinical information including the
date of her admission and discharge, the day of the week and time of the birth.
Most importantly, the data lists, for each mother during our study period, diagnoses made
and interventions performed by physicians in acute care facilities prior to, during and after the
delivery using the International Classification of Diseases codes, adapted for Canada (ICD-9-CM
and ICD-10-CA)6, the Canadian Classification of Health Interventions (CCI) and the Canadian
Classification of Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Surgical Procedures (CCP). With this information
on the medical records, we can identify the factors that are medically known to be associated with
higher risks of Caesarean deliveries, such as multiple pregnancy, non-vertex presentation, etc. (e.g.

5

Deliveries not happening in a hospital represent a marginal fraction of all births in Canada. For 2002-03, CIHI reports
that 99 percent of births were delivered in acute care facilities (CIHI 2006), with a slight decline to 98.5 percent by
2010. Unlike other provinces, facilities in Quebec do not directly provide CIHI with all discharge abstracts, which can
only be accessed following a different protocol. Canadian territories are also excluded from our analysis. Our birth
records also exclude the years 1994 for Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia, and the years 1994-1997 for
Prince Edward Island for data availability reasons.
6
ICD-9-CM codes were gradually replaced by ICD-10-CA codes by some provinces starting from 2001. From 2004
onwards, all provinces reported the diagnostics to CIHI using ICD-10-CA. Manitoba is the latest province to have
completely transitioned.

8

NICE 2012, PHAC 2008, SOGC 1986). From the hospital records, we can also extract details on
the health conditions of the infant at birth (weight, gestational age, etc.), as well as the mode of
delivery for the birth (vaginal or C-section).
Finally, the administrative records provide the necessary information to identify the
specialty of the physician most involved in the mother’s inpatient stay for the birth delivery.7 We
assign a type of healthcare provider to each birth based on the most responsible provider identified
on the mother’s record: GP (either family physician or general practitioner), OB/GYN (either
obstetrician/gynaecologist or gyne-reproductive specialist) or midwife.8 In the small number of
cases where the most responsible provider is not identified as being one of these types (0.69 percent
of cases), we turn to the specialty of the other providers identified as responsible for the mother’s
care without being the most responsible.9
We exclude from our main estimating sample all deliveries that are assigned to a midwife
(2.5 percent of all births), since these providers have different remuneration agreements and
compensation parameters. Including these births does not alter our results in an important way

7

We note that the most responsible physician identified on a mother’s chart is not necessarily the physician who
proceeded to deliver the baby; it rather corresponds to the physician responsible for most of the care during the
mother’s inpatient stay at delivery (or associated with the care justifying the longest portion of the stay). While there
is not a one-to-one mapping between the physician delivering the birth and the most responsible physician, it is
reasonable to assume that the latter in most cases is involved in the choice of a delivery method. Furthermore,
information on the most responsible physician is available for almost all observations in our data (one notable
exception is Manitoba between 1994 and 2000, and for approximately one third of births in that province between
2001 and 2003, since hospitals in that province used an older reporting system for those early years).
8
Laws recognizing the status of midwives have been adopted during the 1990s and 2000s by different provinces (for
example, regulation was introduced in 1994 in Ontario, in 1998 in British Columbia and Alberta, 2008 in
Saskatchewan, etc. Newfoundland and Labrador still had not adopted regulation at the end of our sample period in
2010). The increase in the share of births delivered by midwives between 1994 and 2010 represents both an increase
within provinces as the profession and services offered by midwives gained popularity and an increase in the number
of provinces recognizing midwifery as a profession within the health care system of midwifery. Like GPs and
OB/GYNs, midwives are often responsible for the pre- and post-partum care of the mother and baby.
9
In the cases where this procedure is not successful (0.4 percent of all births), we assign GP as a physician type for
cases where the most responsible physician is listed as either a public health physician or a practitioner in family
medicine, and we assign OB/GYN where the most responsible provider is from another relevant specialty (for a few
cases, our OB/GYN category therefore more loosely means “physician specialist”).

9

(results are available upon request). We also discard all records for mothers younger than 14 years
old or older than 65 years old. Our final sample consists of 4,084,755 maternal birth delivery
records.
We obtain information on the fees paid in each fiscal year to physicians for vaginal
deliveries and C-sections from provincial ministries of health and medical associations. Those
amounts correspond to the information listed on the fee schedules published for physician billing
purposes in the fee-for-service remuneration system. As previously mentioned, those schedules
are administered at the province-level, and physician compensation for different procedures vary
not only through time, but also across provinces. We obtain annual information on fees for the
period 1994 to 2010 for most provinces with a few exceptions: Alberta for the periods 1994-96
and 1998-2000, and Prince-Edward Island for the period 1995-1997. 10
The average C-section rate for all births in our main estimating sample is 24.74 percent,
but varies through time and across provinces (see Table 1 and Table A1). Excluding all Caesarean
deliveries for cases of previous C-section, fetus breech presentation and multiple pregnancies, the
rate falls to 14.03 percent. Table 2 provides the average maternal and pregnancy characteristics in
the sample and compares the mean of each variable across delivery outcomes. Mothers are on
average 29 years of age at delivery, and mothers delivering by C-section are generally older than
mothers delivering vaginally (aged 30.28 versus 28.62). Underlying this difference is that women
older than 40 are overrepresented in the C-section group (4.3 percent versus 2.2 percent). This is

10

For each combination of a province and a fiscal year, we use the payment associated with the fee codes describing
standard vaginal deliveries and C-sections. To ensure comparability, those payments are stripped of the fees associated
with ancillary procedures. Certain provinces list slightly different fees for GPs and OB/GYNs; we therefore allocate
to each birth the appropriate fee measures given the physician type associated with the birth using the procedure
described above. The estimated parameter on the fee variable is very similar to the reported results when we average
the GP and OB/GYN fees for each procedure, or when we use only the fees listed for OB/GYNs or only the fees listed
for GPs.

10

likely due, in part, to the fact that pregnancy later in life is associated with specific risks and
complications during labor (Joseph et al. 2005).
The proportion of deliveries performed on weekends is significantly lower for C-sections
than for vaginal deliveries, which might simply be due to hospitals’ constraints on the availability
of operating rooms for planned surgical procedures, or might attest to the scheduling convenience
of C-sections from a physician’s perspective. Finally, C-section deliveries are associated with
longer inpatient stays (4.09 against 2.26 days) and with a (five times) higher probability of
exceptional postpartum complications leading to long-term hospitalization (one month or more).
Table 3 presents the C-section rates for riskier births (corresponding to either cases of
previous C-section, fetus breech presentation or multiple pregnancy), and for lower-risk births
(vertex singleton births for which the mother had no previous C-section). The C-section rate for
lower-risk births rose by 58 percent (or nearly 6 percentage points) over the period, while the rate
for riskier births rose by 25.2 percent (or a little more than 16 percentage points). Because vertex
singletons represent 83 percent of all births throughout the period covered by our analysis, they
make the greater contribution to the overall increase in the C-section rate. Figure 2 maps the
evolution of the C-section rates between 1994 and 2010. It identifies the years between 2000 and
2005 as a period of significant growth in the C-section rates, in aggregate and for higher- and
lower-risk births alike.
In Figure 3 we graph the evolution of some of the variables capturing leading accounts of
upward march of the C-section rate: the rate of pregnant women with a previous history of
C-section, the proportion of multiple births, average maternal age and the ratio of the fee paid for
a C-section relative to the fee paid for a vaginal delivery. The increase in the rate of pregnant
women with a previous history of C-section over time is a mechanical consequence of the rise in
11

the caesarean section rate. The rate of repeat C-section is 77.88 percent at the national level in our
data, which can partly be explained by the fact that a previous C-section increases the risks of
uterine rupture and placenta previa in subsequent pregnancies (NICE 2014, ACOG 2013, Shearer
1993).11 The trends in the proportion of multiple births over the population of births are relatively
flat, suggesting that they are not a significant contributor to the increase in the C-section rate.
Maternal age increased steadily in our sample from 28.4 in 1994-95 to 29.5 in 2010-11. This
pattern is observed in all provinces, and occurred in tandem with the increase in the C-section rate.
Leon et al. (2011) report that in 2008, nearly a third of first-time mothers were older than 34.
Finally, across provinces between 1994-95 and 2010-11, the fee billed by a physician for a
C-section delivery was approximately 21 percent higher on average than the fee billed for a vaginal
delivery. However, the period was marked by significant heterogeneity in the fee ratio both across
provinces and over time.
Of all births delivered by a physician recorded in our sample, 69.37 percent had an
OB/GYN as the most responsible provider of care for the mother during the delivery. Figure 4
shows that this proportion was relatively constant at around 62 percent into the mid 1990s, started
to increase around 1997, and then plateaued beginning in 2000 to land at more than seventy-three
percent in 2010. Of all OB/GYN assigned births, 31 percent were delivered by C-section; for GP
assigned births, that proportion falls to 10 percent. As shown in Figure 5, although more
pronounced for OB/GYNs, the increase in C-section rate is common to both types of providers.
The differences in trends across provider types is somewhat in line with the observation that

11

However, we note that various policy statements of the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada
(SOGC) during the period covered by our study rejected the idea that pregnancies following a Caesarean section
should automatically lead to subsequent surgical deliveries. The relative risks associated with vaginal birth after a
Caesarean remain debated; Young et al. (2018) find evidence that, despite adverse events being rare in both cases,
elective C-sections following a previous Caesarean are associated with lower risks of maternal and neonatal mortality
and morbidity than attempted vaginal deliveries.

12

OB/GYNs were generally more likely to deliver riskier births by the end of the study period (see
appendix Table A2). Given these patterns, we examine how our observable characteristics affect
the probability of C-section for OB/GYNs and GPs separately below.

5 EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
Our main estimating equation is:
CSectionipth = a + Z’pt b+ X’ipth f + g Trendp + dt + µh + eipth

(1)

where Csection is a binary variable indicating if a birth i in province p, fiscal year t and hospital h
was delivered by C-section. Z is a vector of time varying characteristics at the provincial level, X
is a vector of time varying characteristics at the birth delivery level, and d and µ are fiscal year
and province or hospital fixed effects respectively.12 Standard errors are clustered at the hospital
level.
Included in Z is the ratio of C-section to vaginal delivery fees for the physician in charge.
We also include a measure of provincial GDP and changes in population size, a control indicating
the status of midwives in the province, as well as measures of provincial total health care
expenditure per capita and provincial total expenditure on capital in health care per capita.
X captures an extensive set of maternal health conditions and characteristics related to the
pregnancy. These include indicators for pre-term delivery, multiple birth, breech presentation of
the fetus, previous C-section, a set of dummy variables for maternal age and for the day of the
week and the month on which the mother was admitted to the hospital, as well as variables
indicating if the newborn was large or small for gestational age at delivery, and for any
disproportion (of the mother or the fetus) or problems of the placenta (including placenta previa)

12

In specifications where hospital fixed effects are not included, we include a vector of province fixed effects.

13

likely to complicate the delivery process. We also control for health conditions of the mother
associated with risks during the pregnancy and delivery process, such as hypertension (preexisting or pregnancy-related), pre-eclampsia or eclampsia, antepartum hemorrhage, diabetes (preexisting or pregnancy-related), and obesity. As discussed in section 4, some of these
characteristics, in addition to having an impact on the choice of a birth delivery method, have
followed specific trends throughout the period considered. Finally, we also control for problems
arising during the labor and delivery (including issues related to the umbilical cord), such as fetal
stress or distress, maternal stress or distress and obstructed labor13

14

, and include an indicator

variable specifying if the provider most responsible for the mother’s care during the inpatient stay
for the delivery was an OB/GYN.
We observe anonymized physician identifiers on most discharges for the period 2001
through 2010. These might be important if we suspect changes in the population of physicians,
who may have been trained differently, to play a role in the evolution of delivery outcomes. They
can also help understand if changes in the fee incentive variable leads to dynamic sorting of
physicians practicing obstetrics, and provide some additional context in which to interpret
physician responses to financial incentives. For example, physicians more sensitive to fee
incentives may be responsible for a higher proportion of births when C-section fees are relatively
high. We, therefore, also present estimates of equation (1) adding physician fixed effects for this
restricted period.

13

While these are often noted as indicators of a potential C-section delivery, we note that they may ex post be added
to patients’ charts by physicians to justify a C-section that may have been performed for other reasons, for example
convenience or the presence of other incentives (the coding creep phenomenon describes in, for example, Gruber and
Owings 1996, Carter, Newhouse, and Relles 1990). Given their potential contribution to the rise in C-section, we
include these controls in our preferred specification, but note that our results are robust to excluding them (results
available upon request).
14
Our results are also robust to including a control for the use of forceps or ventouse suction cup (vacuum extraction)
during the delivery and/or a control for labor induction.

14

6 RESULTS
6.1 Base Results
Estimates of equation (1) for our main sample of births are presented in the first three columns of
Table 4. In the first column are the results for the characteristics of the birth and the fee variable,
conditioning on fixed effects for province, (fiscal) year of birth and single year of maternal age.
The remaining province level controls are added in the second column of the table, while in the
third column we add hospital fixed effects. Most birth-level characteristics have the expected
impact. The estimates for three factors known to be important predictors of Caesarean births,
multiple gestation, previous C-section and fetus breech presentation, are large, positive and
strongly statistically significant. In particular, fetus breech presentation and a previous Caesarean
increase by, respectively, slightly more than 57 percentage points each the probability of a
C-section delivery, all else equal. Other important contributors are disproportion, which increases
by nearly 65 percentage points the probability of a Caesarean delivery, and disorders related to the
placenta (such as placenta previa), which increase it by more than 20 percentage points. The
estimates for hypertension or (pre)eclampsia, obesity, diabetes, antepartum hemorrhage, fetal
distress and obstructed labor are also positive and statistically significant, as are the indicators for
small or large size for gestational age. The impacts associated with each of these variables are
remarkably stable across the specifications.
The coefficient estimates associated with the full set of maternal age dummies, presented
in Figure 6 indicate an increasing probability of C-section with age primarily starting in the mid
30s.15 This is firstly the mechanical implication of maternal age on potential complications in

15

Figure 6 presents the estimates corresponding to column 3 of Table 4. However, the estimates present the same
pattern when province-level controls and hospital fixed effects are excluded from the empirical specification.

15

antepartum and intrapartum care, for example in the form of dystocia (Leon et al. 2011). Since a
subset of intrapartum complications cannot be precisely accounted for as individual control
variables, the age dummies could be picking up some of this impact.
For the most part, province-level characteristics are not significant predictors of a C-section
birth. One exception is per capita capital expenditures in the healthcare sector, which is positively
associated with the probability of a C-section. This relationship may reflect the introduction of
new technologies that have been offered as an explanation of rising C-section rates; for example
the availability of electronic monitors for fetal surveillance during labor or other regional
differences that change over time. While not statistically significant, the overall expenditure per
capita on health care is negatively correlated with the event of a C-section birth. This last
relationship could for example be coherent with the probability of C-section being reduced when
more resources are invested to improve the ratio of non-physician personnel in hospitals (for
example to improve the ratio of nurses per patient which could help monitoring labor), or when
more resources are invested in preventive or pre-natal care. We note that our results on both health
expenditures and capital expenditures in the healthcare sector are in line with the cross-country
estimates presented by the World Health Organization (Lauer et al. 2010).
The estimate for the fee incentive variable indicates that the birth delivery method does not
strongly respond to changes in the relative compensation for a C-section compared to a vaginal
delivery. The coefficients presented in columns (2) and (3) imply that raising physicians’
remuneration for a C-section by 100 percent relative to the baseline fee of a vaginal delivery might
increase the probability that a physician opts for Caesarean by 0.6 to 1.1 percentage points, but
those estimates are not statistically different from zero. This result contrasts with some of the
findings in previous literature, mostly focused on the U.S. system. It is important to note that we
16

do obtain significant estimates of fee variables (with similar magnitudes) if we exclude birth level
controls and hospital fixed effects. However, such restrictions undermine the value of our
population-level, comprehensive approach, which differs most from previous literature looking at
the effects of prices on physician decisions. 16 17
In addition to clustering standard errors at the hospital level, we allow for the potential
serial correlation of the error terms within each province in our baseline specification. When
clustered at the province-level, the statistical significance of most controls which vary at the
province-year level is reduced, but the inference does not change in a material way. Doing so, our
number of clusters however decreases to 9, such that we might still over-reject the null hypothesis
on individual coefficients, even if a province is the right unit to cluster over. To correct for this,
we obtain p-values using a wild cluster bootstrap procedure (Cameron et al. 2008), which suggest
a further reduction in the significance of most province-year varying controls (results available
from the authors on request).
In column 4 we present the estimates adding physician fixed effects for the restricted
sample for which physician IDs are available. This modification has a negligible impact on the
estimates of most of our variables of interest, with the exception of provincial capital expenditures,
which is attenuated, and the fee variable, which is now negative (suggesting that composition

16

The estimates for the fee variable are modestly larger but still statistically insignificant conditioning on province
specific trends rather than the provincial level controls—see appendix Table A3. We have also estimated a version of
equation (1) using the difference in fees for C-section and vaginal deliveries rather than their ratio, and obtained very
similar results. These results are available from the authors on request.
17
Evidence from the U.S. suggests that the gap in C-section rates between Medicaid and non-Medicaid patients is
(rather largely) influenced by financial incentives (Gruber et al. 1999), and that such incentives also drive a difference
in the C-section rates of Medicaid salaried versus fee-for-service physicians (Alexander 2017). With a single
population of physician all remunerated similarly and the full population of births (rather than a Medicaid subsample),
our account of physician responses to financial incentives for Caesareans in the Canadian context does not lead to
similar conclusions, with much weaker and not statistically significant responses (more in the line of those obtained
by Grant (2009) in the U.S. when accounting for state-specific trends).

17

effects within the population of physicians as remuneration parameters change might matter), but
statistically insignificant.
Given that the share of complicated births delivered by OB/GYNs has increased over our
sample period, we next estimate equation (1) for the GP and OB/GYN samples separately. The
results are presented in columns 5 and 6, and reveal that the estimates on birth-level characteristics
remain relatively stable, with the OB/GYN coefficients mostly larger that GP ones. This could
because specialists are more comfortable with both types of birth deliveries, and are more likely
to adapt their choice of procedure to various characteristics of the mother or of the pregnancy.
Finally, we also estimate a specification in which we take a more agnostic approach to
important provincial level factors and replace the province level variables with province-specific
time trends. The resulting estimates for the other control variables, reported in appendix Table A3,
are very similar to those in Table 4.

6.2 The Overall Contribution of Observable Characteristics on Rising C-section Rates
The signs of the parameter estimates for most of the variables representing the various
accounts of the rise in the C-section rate are consistent with their hypothesized effect and so could
play a role in the rising C-section rate over the sample period. To evaluate their contribution, we
report in Table 5 the estimates of the year effects from specifications in columns 1 through 3 and
5-6 in Table 4. We also add a column “0”, which presents the estimates of the year fixed effects
from a model with no other added control variables. In column 0 the overall increase in the
C-section rate is 12 percentage points, comparable to the overall increase reported in Table 3.
Comparing this result to the estimates in columns 1-3 indicates that our controls for birth and
province level factors can account for 39 to 49 percent of the overall increase in the C-section rate.
18

Therefore, somewhat more than half of the increase in the C-section rate over the period remains
unaccounted for.
Another message of the estimates in columns 1-3 is that the vast majority of this residual
increase in the C-section rate over the period occurs between 2000 and 2005, echoing the patterns
observed for most countries reported in Figure 1. In column 1 it is roughly 4 of the almost 7
percentage point residual increase, while in column 3 it is effectively the entire increase. In this
latter specification, all the year effects prior to 2000 are statistically insignificant, and we cannot
reject the hypotheses that most of the estimates either pre- 2000 are jointly equal nor that the
estimates from 2005 on are equal. The coefficients associated with each of the years between 2000
and 2005, which are characterized by an increasing pattern, are however generally statistically
different from each other. We note that these results hold when replacing the province-level
controls with province-specific time trends (Table A3), and when including both our set of
province-level controls and such trends.18
The abrupt increase in C-section rates in the early 2000s suggests some event is at play. In
general, like changes in the birth, mother, province and physician characteristics included in our
model, changes in some omitted variable are more likely to be gradual, inconsistent with the “trend
break” evident in Table 5. For example, while it is plausible that successive cohorts of physicians
have become less comfortable with assisted vaginal birth, or have developed different preferences
over the two methods of delivery, it is unlikely that the effect of such changes would manifest as
a discrete break in the C-section rate. A more promising story would be a corresponding break in

18

We also note that the year effects estimated from a sample composed exclusively of more complicated births
(multiple gestation, breech presentation of previous C-sections) suggest that nearly two thirds of the total increase in
C-section for those categories is captured by the year effects from 2000 to 2005 (results available upon requests).

19

the fee schedule, but our results do not support this conclusion. We therefore look for some event
in the early 2000s that may lie behind the pattern we find in the year effects.

7 WHAT ELSE MIGHT EXPLAIN THE JUMP IN C-SECTIONS FROM 2000 ONWARDS
What caused the C-section rate to jump upwards starting around 2000 and level off after
2005? We see two main alternative explanations: 1) the publication of results from the Term
Breech Trial (Hanna et al. 2000), and 2) a technological change in intrapartum care.

7.1 The Impact of the Term Breech Trial
The high-profile "Term Breech Trial" (Hannah et al. 2000), based on a cross-country
randomized trial, concluded that planned C-section was safer for mothers and infants than vaginal
deliveries in cases of breech presentation at term. The original results from the trial were published
in October 2000 and the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologitss of Canada (SOGC) published
new recommendations for breech births founded on this research in March 2001.
While the Trial and subsequent announcements of national health professional associations
in various countries specifically targeted breech births in their recommendations for C-section,
there is evidence from a number of nations suggesting possible spillover effects of this discovery
on a wider set of births. In Figure 7 we report the growth rate of C-section deliveries in Australia
between 1995 and 2005, separately for singleton term breech and vertex births. The underlying
data are population records of term singleton births taken from Table 1 in Sullivan et al. (2009).
In 2001, there is a very clear impact of the Term Breech Trial on the growth of C-section deliveries
for breech births, but there is also a very clear corresponding spike in the growth rate of C-section
deliveries for vertex births. The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and
20

Gynaecologists issued a statement in February of 2001 stating the higher risk in planned vaginal
breech deliveries than in planned C-section deliveries for breech births as per the Trial results
(Sullivan et al. 2009, p. 458).
In Figure 8 we examine the rates of growth of C-section deliveries in the US. To construct
this figure, we use data on term births from the public-use U.S. microdata natality files, constructed
by the National Center for Health Statistics using information abstracted from all birth certificates
registered in the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia between 1995 and 2005. Here we see
a (albeit smaller) spike in the growth of C-sections for singleton term breech births in 2001 and a
corresponding spike in the growth of C-sections for singleton term vertex births between 2000 and
2003.19
Finally, in Figure 9 we present C-section growth rates for Canada in comparable form to
the graphs for Australia and the U.S. Very similar patterns are observed. Between 1999—the year
before the Trial was published—and 2002, the unadjusted C-section rate for singleton term breech
deliveries rises from 78.8 percent to 94.5 percent. Importantly, we observe the corresponding
spikes in the growth rate of C-section beyond breech births.

19

An interesting feature of the US data is the significant deceleration in the growth rate of C-sections for breech births
starting in 2005, which also coincides with the tapering of the increasing pattern observed for Canada in the year
effects presented in Table 5. A proximate cause of a decline in the growth rate for breech births is the publication of
follow up results and commentary on the Term Breech Trial research in this period. A follow up study published in
2004 (Whyte et al. 2004) found no difference in the mortality or neurodevelopment of children born by vaginal or
C-section delivery at selected Trial sites. A few months later, an observational study of births in France and Belgium
found little difference in neonatal outcomes between breech births delivered by C-section and planned vaginal delivery
(Goffinet et al. 2006). Finally, a series of articles (e.g., Glezerman 2006, Kotaska 2004, Hauth et al. 2002) questioned
the methodological soundness of the Trial and the external validity of the results. In June 2006, the ACOG officially
modified its recommendation for the delivery of breech presentations (ACOG 2006), the new recommendation
deferred to the clinician’s specific experience. The deceleration of the growth in C-sections for singleton term breech
births in Figure 8 is such that the level of these deliveries in fact falls in the data by over 10 percentage points between
2004 and 2007. Note also, we observe a deceleration in the growth of C-section delivery for vertex births starting in
this same year. Extending the data set until 2010, the growth rate in C-sections for breech presentations is negative
until 2007. Over this same interval, the growth rate in the C-section rate for vertex births falls from 5.5 percent in
2004 to 1.5 percent in 2008.

21

Relative to the patterns for the other two countries these responses are slightly more “spread
out” through time. We note that the Term Breech Trial was led by a team of Canadian researchers,
and that at least some local facilities may have had early notice of the results, thus also contributing
to the gradual increase observed in Figure 9. Another factor contributing to the gradual response
to the trial in Canada, is that the effects of the Term Breech Trial played out differently across
provinces. While there are national associations of various medical specialties in Canada, health
services are organized and funded at the provincial level and doctors are governed by provincial
level practice associations. In their study investigating the impact of the Term Breech Trial across
Canadian health care facilities, Daviss et al. (2010) note some significant heterogeneity in the
responses of the maternity centers surveyed. For example, 11 of 20 centers amongst the largest in
the country, reported it did not become required protocol to perform C-sections for breech
presentations after the publication of the study. In three of the eight centers where it did become
protocol, qualification criteria applied. Similarly, reactions to follow up criticism of the Trial’s
results and external validity was mixed (e.g. Whyte et al. 2004). By the Fall of 2004, 35 percent
of the hospitals in the sample changed their internal practices (or had the intention to do so) in
response to the publication of studies reassessing the safety of vaginal breech birth, while 55
percent had no intention to make any changes. In contrast, 65 percent of hospitals mentioned
having seen a marked increase in the rate of C-section for breech presentations in the aftermath of
the publication of the Trial in 2000, 30 percent having seen some increase and 5 percent having
seen no increase during the same period.
The mechanisms that might have facilitated a fall out effect of the Trial on vertex births
could include that an official recommendation of C-section, albeit targeted at cases of term breech
presentation, went some way to alleviate any concerns about the safety of the procedure.
22

Alternatively, the recommendation of C-section delivery for breech births could have necessitated
the provision of staff and physical infrastructure that could not be rationalized based on the
incidence of breech presentations alone (which roughly represent 4 percent of hospital physician
assisted births in our sample). Therefore, these resources became ready and available to facilitate
the advancement of C-sections for other births.

7.2 Technological Changes
The second possible explanation for the trend break around 2000 is some breakthrough in
the technology associated with birth delivery, which could have increased the incidence of
C-sections. Perhaps the technology most commonly cited in discussions of “excess” C-sections is
electronic fetal heart rate monitoring (EFM), primarily used to detect risks of fetal compromise
(e.g. fetal hypoxia leading to acidosis) during labor. As the interpretation of the additional insights
produced by EFM is not always conclusive, the rate of false positives when predicting bad
outcomes with this technology is known to be high (ACOG 2005, Thacker et al. 2001). For these
reasons, it is possible that recourse to electronic fetal monitoring may have led to increased,
unnecessary interventions during deliveries, especially by risk averse doctors.
There however appears to be little evidence that the availability of EFM changed discretely
in the early 2000s, and that it would drive the pattern we observe in Table 5. First introduced to
obstetric practice in 1968 and increasingly used in the 1970s and 1980s, electronic fetal heart rate
monitoring equipment was available in almost three quarters of Canadian hospitals by the early
1990s, and almost all women were monitored with this technology at some point during labor
before 2000 (SOGC 1995). In the US, the prevalence of EFM also rose more quickly between

23

1980 and 1998 (from 45 percent to 64 percent) than between 1992 and 2002 (from 74 percent in
to 85 percent) (ACOG 2009).
In Appendix B we document in more detail the changes in guidelines influencing the use
of fetal monitoring. We also survey the introduction of complementary and substitute technologies
such as ST waveform analysis, near infrared spectroscopy and fetal pulse oximetry.

Our

conclusion is that changes in guidelines associated with EFM, and the availability of and
recommendations targeting related or complementary technologies are also unlikely to explain the
patterns observed in Table 5. Indeed, these other technological innovations and the development
of new software or models might plausibly be expected to reduce (rather than increase) the
incidence of C-sections, and are not susceptible to have caused a discrete increase in Caesareans
in the early 2000s. Furthermore, to the extent that these technologies would likely have increased
the recourse to Caesareans by facilitating the identification of fetal distress, the estimated year
effects should be net of this effect in columns 1 to 5 of Table 5, since we directly control for fetal
distress in the regressions.

7.3 Other Guidelines and Directives From Medical Societies
A final factor to consider in trying to explain the break in the trend presented in Table 5 is
any change to directives concerning alternatives to C-sections. The May 2000 policy statement of
the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada on attendance at labor and delivery
seems most relevant (SOGC 2000). Updating a statement originally published in August 1995 and
published again in an amended version in September 1996 (SOGC 1996), it suggested, among
other things, that all hospitals have a responsibility to maintain the adequate equipment and staff
to perform C-sections, especially in case of emergency, and recommended that C-sections be
24

performed without delay when the clinical progress of labor justifies it. It also highlighted that
physicians bear responsibility when choosing to delay the recourse to C-sections, and should report
the reasons for such a decision on the patient’s chart. According to this last recommendation, we
would expect the inclusion of risk factors in our empirical model to at capture the impact of this
directive on the choice of a birth delivery method.
Ultimately we do not have the data to directly test the Breech Trial and technological
change alternatives. What is clear is that there was a discrete break in the trend of C-sections for
both vertex and non-vertex births at the beginning of the 2000s. Our overview of the alternatives
does not identify a discrete technological event in the early 2000s, perhaps making some spillover
from the Breech Trial a more likely cause. Given widespread concern over the high proportion of
births by C-section, the exact reasons for this development are an important topic for future
research.

8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we use unique features of the Canadian health care system— universal,
single-payer, fee-for-service remuneration—to better understand the competing causes of the
dramatic rise in C-sections over the 1990s and 2000s. Our empirical approach rests on an
institutional context that allows us to use detailed data on the entire population of births, and to
evaluate the contributions of birth, physician and environmental characteristics.
Changes in characteristics of the mothers and births, the move towards more deliveries by
OB/GYNs and the changing relative prices of C-section and vaginal deliveries account for roughly
half of the increase in C-sections (and their effects are remarkably stable across various

25

specifications). The residual increase in C-section deliveries, representing over half the overall
increase during the period, primarily occurred in the early 2000s.
We investigate two possible explanations of this latter development. We can find no
evidence of a technological innovation that might account for the observed trend break in the
C-section rate. We do find that the accelerated growth rate for all C-sections coincides with the
publication of the Hannah Breech Trial, which focused on term breech births. We document a
coincident increase in the growth rates of C-sections for both breech and vertex births in data from
Australia, the US and Canada. We lack the data to explicitly connect these two developments and
so a resolution awaits future study, but our investigation does suggest that spillovers from the Term
Breech Trial may have had an influence on the changes in the number of C-sections.
C-sections represent, by far, the main cause of surgery in many countries. Our findings
constitute an insightful basis for policy initiatives that would seek to improve the efficiency in the
allocation of resources within the health care system and the broader impacts of dissemination of
new best-practices.

26

References
ACOG. Practice Bulletin 70: Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
106(6), 1453-1460, 2005.
ACOG. Committee Opinion. 340: Mode of term singleton breech delivery. Obstetrics and Gynecology;
108(1); 235-239, 2006.
ACOG. ACOG refines fetal heart rate monitoring guidelines, Communications office, American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Washington, DC, United States, June 22, 2009.
ACOG. Committee Opinion 559: Caesarean Delivery on Maternal Request., Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 121(4); 904-907, 2013.
Alexander, D. Does Physician Compensation Impact Procedure Choice and Patient Health? Evidence
from Medicaid C-section Use. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Working paper 2017-17, 2017.
Anderson, G. M and J. Lomas. Determinants of the increasing Caesarean birth rate – Ontario data 197982, New England Journal of Medicine, 311; 887-892, 1984.
Baicker, K., E. S. Fischer and A. Chandra. Malpractice Liability Costs and the Practice of Medicine in
the Medicare Program. Heath Affairs, 26(3); 841-852, 2007.
Brown, H. Shelton. Physician Demand for Leisure: Implications for Caesarean Section Rates. Journal
of Health Economics, 15(2); 233-242, 1996.
Canadian Health Services Research Foundation. Myth: C-sections Are on the Rise because More
Mothers Are Asking for Them. Journal of Health Services Research and Policy, 17(l):63-64,
2012.
Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach and D.L. Miller. Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with
Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 141-427, 2008.
Card, D., A. Fenizia, D, Silver, “The Health Effects of Caesarean Delivery for Low-Risk First Births”,
NBER Working Paper No. 24493, April 2018.
Carrier, E. R., J. D. Reschovsky, M. M. Mello, R. C Mayrell, and D. Katz. Physicians' Fears of
Malpractice Lawsuits Are Not Assuaged by Tort Reforms. Health Affairs, 29(9); 1585-1592,
2010.
Carter, G., J. Newhouse, and D. Relles, How much change in the case mix index is DRG creep?, Journal
of Health Economic, 9 (4): 411-428, 1990.
CIHI. Giving Birth in Canada: The Costs. Canadian Institute for Health Information, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, 2006.
CIHI. Inpatient Hospitalizations, Surgeries and Newborn Indicators, 2014-2015. Data tables, Canadian
Institute for Health Information, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2016a.
CIHI. Physicians in Canada, 2015. National Physician Database 2014-2015: Data Release, Canadian
Institute for Health Information, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2016b.
Clemens, J. and J. D. Gottlieb. Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect Medical Treatment and
Patient Health. American Economic Review, 104(4); 1320-49, 2014.

27

Currie, J. and W. B. MacLeod. First Do No Harm? Tort Reform and Birth Outcomes. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 123(2); 795-830, 2008.
Currie, J. and W. B. MacLeod. Diagnosis Expertise: Human Capital, Decision Making, and Performance
Among Physicians. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1); 1-43, 2017.
Daviss, B.A., K. C. Johnson and A. Lalonde. Evolving Evidence Since the Term Breech Trial: Canadian
Response, European Dissent, and Potential Solutions. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Canada, 32(3); 217-224, 2010.
Declercq, E. R., C. Sakala, M. P. Corry and S. Applebaum, Listening to Mothers II: Report of the
Second National U.S. Survey of Women’s Childbearing Experiences, Journal of Perinatal
Education, 16(4); 9-14, 2007.
Fabbri, D., C. Monfardini, I. Castaldini and A. Protonotari. Caesarean section and the manipulation of
exact delivery time. Health Policy, 120(7), 2016.
Flood, C. M. and B. Thomas. Canadian Medical Malpractice Law in 2011: Missing the Mark on Patient
Safety. Chicago-Kent Law Review, 86(3); 1053-1092, 2012.
Gamble, J. A., C. Creedy, D. K. McCourt, J. Weaver, and S. Beake. A Critique of the Literature on
Women's Request for Caesarean Section. Birth, 34(4); 331-340, 2007.
Gibbons, L, Belizan, J.M., Lauer, J.A., Betran, A., Merialdi, M. and F. Althabe. The Global Numbers
and Costs of Additionally Needed and Unnecessary Caesarean Sections Performed Per Year:
Overuse as a Barrier to Universal Coverage. World Health Organization. World Health Report,
Background Paper 30, Geneva, 2010.
Glezerman, M. Five Years to the Term Breech Trial: The Rise and Fall of a Randomized Control Trial.
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 194(1); 20-25, 2006.
Goffinet F., M. Carayol, J.-M Foidart, S. Alexander., S. Uzan, D. Subtil, and G. Breart. Is planned
vaginal delivery for breech presentation at term still an option? Results of an observational
prospective survey in France and Belgium. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
194(4); 1002–1011, 2006.
Grant, D. Physician Financial Incentives and Caesarean Delivery: New Conclusions from the
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project. Journal of Health Economics, 28(1); 244-250, 2009.
Gruber, J. and M. Owings. Physician Financial Incentives and Caesarean Section Delivery. The RAND
Journal of Economics, 27(1); 99-123, 1996.
Gruber, J., J. Kim, and D. Mayzlin. Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity: The Case of Caesarean
Delivery. Journal of Health Economics, 18(4); 473-490, 1999.
Hanley, G. E. P. A. Janssen, and D. Greyson. Regional Variation in the Caesarean Delivery and Assisted
Vaginal Delivery Rates. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 115(6); 1201-1208, 2010.
Hannah, M. E., W. J. Hannah, S. A. Hewson, E. D. Hodnett, S. Saroj, and A. R. Willan. Planned
Caesarean Section versus Planned Vaginal Birth for Breech Presentation at Term: A
Randomized Multicentre Trial. Lancet, 356(9239); 1375-1383, 2000.
Hauth, J. C. and F. G. Cunningham. Vaginal Breech Delivery Is Still Justified. Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 99(6); 1115-1116, 2002.
28

Joseph, K. S., A. C. Allen, L. Dodds, LA. Turner, H. Scott, and R. Liston. The Perinatal Effects of
Delayed Childbearing. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 105(6); 1410-1418, 2005.
Keeler, E. B. and M. Brodie. Economic Incentives in the Choice between Vaginal Delivery and
Caesarean Section. The Milbank Quarterly, 71(3); 365-404, 1993.
Kim, B. The Impact of Malpractice Risk on the Use of Obstetrics Procedures. The Journal of Legal
Studies, 36(S2); S79-S119, 2007.
Kotaska, A. Inappropriate Use of Randomized Trials to Evaluate Complex Phenomena: Case Study of
Vaginal Breech Delivery. British Medical Journal, 329(7479); 1039-1042, 2004.
Lauer, J. A., A. P. Betran, M. Merialdi and D. Wojdyla. Determinants of caesarean section rates in
developed countries: supply, demand and opportunities for control. World Health Report,
Background paper, 29, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2010.
Lawthers, A. G., A. R. Localio, N. M. Laird, S. Lipsitz, L. Hebert, and T. A. Brcnnan. Physicians'
Perceptions of the Risk of Being Sued. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 17(3); 463482, 1992.
Lefevre, Melanie. Physician Induced Demand for C-sections: Does Convenience Incentive Matter?
Health, Econometrics and Data Group (HEDG), Working paper 14/08, University of York,
2014.
Leon, J. A., M. Kramer, R. S. Sauve, and M. Walker. In Due Time: Why Maternal Age Matter. Analysis
in brief. Canadian Institute for Health Information, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2011.
National Physician Survey, 2013 Canadian Survey Results, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2013.
NICE. Caesarean Section. Clinical Guideline 132, National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, London, United Kingdom, 2012.
NICE. Advice on Offering Caesarean Section in Specific Situations. Pathway, National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence, London, United Kingdom, 2014.
Pfuntner A., L. M. Wier and C. Stocks. Most Frequent Procedures Performed in US Hospitals, 2011.
HCUP Statistical Brief #165. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD,
United States, 2013
PHAC. Canadian Perinatal Health Report, 2008 edition, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, 2008.
Shearer, E. L. Caesarean Section: Medical Benefits and Costs. Social Science and Medicine, 37(10);
1223-1231, 1993.
SOGC. Indications for Caesarean Section: Final Statement of the Panel of the National Consensus
Conference on Aspects of Caesarean Birth. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 134(12);
1348-1352,1986.
SOGC. Policy Statement: Fetal Health Surveillance in Labor, Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Canada, 17(9); 859-901, 1995.
SOGC. Policy Statement: Attendance at Labor and Delivery Guidelines for Physicians, Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada, 18(9); 928-929, 1996.

29

SOGC. Policy Statement 89: Attendance at Labor and Delivery Guidelines for Physicians, Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada, 22(5); 928-929, 2000.
SOGC. Caesarean Section on Demand - SOGC's Position. Press release, Society of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists of Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2004.
Sullivan, E. A., K. Moran and M. Chapman. Term Breech Singletons and Caesarean Section: A
Population Study, Australia 1991-2005. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, 49(5); 456-460, 2009.
Taffel, S.M., P.J. Placek and T. Liss. Trends in the United States cesarean section rate and reasons for
the 1980-85 rise. American Journal of Public Health, 77(8); 955-959, 1987.
Thacker S. B., D. Stroup and M. Chang. Continuous Electronic Heart Rate Monitoring for Fetal
Assessment During Labor, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, 2001.
Whyte, H., M. E. Hannah, S. Saigal, W. J. Hannah, S. Hewson, K. Amankwah, M. Cheng, A. Gafni, P.
Guselle, M. Helewa, E. D. Hodnett, E. Hutton, R. Kung, D. McKay, S. Ross, A. Willan,
Outcomes of Children at 2 Years After Planned Caesarean Birth Versus Planned Vaginal Birth
for Breech Presentation at Term: The International Randomized Term Breech Trial, American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 191(3), 864-871, 2004.
WHO. Appropriate Technology for Birth. Lancet, 326(8452); 436-437, 1985.
WHO. World Health Organization Statement on Caesarean Section Rates. Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.
Young, C. B., S. Liu, G. M. Muraca, Y. Sabr, T. Pressey, R. M. Liston and K.S. Joseph. Mode of
Delivery After a Previous Caesarean Birth, and Associated Maternal and Neonatal Morbidity,
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 190(18); 556-564, 2018.

30

Table 1: Total observations for fiscal years 1994 to 2010, by province
All births

Births

C-sections
20,839

Births not corresponding to cases of
breech, multiple births or previous
C-sections
Births
Vaginal
C-sections
deliveries
64,612
54,128
10,484

Newfoundland
and Labrador

76,544

Vaginal
deliveries
55,705

Prince Edward
Island

17,954

12,854

5,100

14,794

12,326

2,468

Nova Scotia

145,170

109,793

35,377

121,687

104,280

17,407

New Brunswick

128,174

95,274

32,900

107,936

91,698

16,238

2,264,754

1,715,091

549,663

1,882,295

1,627,003

255,292

Manitoba

130,421

103,548

26,873

109,374

97,262

12,112

Saskatchewan

164,725

131,511

33,214

139,300

123,957

15,343

Alberta

469,997

349,299

120,698

386,724

330,502

56,222

British
Columbia

687,018

500,970

186,047

565,177

474,962

90,215

Canada

4,084,757

3,074,046

1,010,711

3,391,899

2,916,118

475,781

Ontario

Notes: The sample restricted to births recorded in the hmdb/dad files between fiscal years 1994 to 2010, from
mothers between 14 and 65 years of age, whose birth was assisted by a physician (general practitioner or
specialist), for whom price data on birth delivery method is available and for which information on the specialty
of the most responsible physician is available. Data for Alberta includes fiscal years 1997, and 2001 to 2010. Data
from Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia includes fiscal years 1995 to 2010. Data from Saskatchewan
and Prince Edward Island includes fiscal years from 1998 to 2010. Data from Manitoba includes fiscal years 2001
to 2010 (with partial population of births between 2001 and 2002 due to some hospital not providing information
on physician types). No data from Quebec is included.

31

Table 2: Means of main variables in the sample of births by physicians
All

Vaginal
Delivery

C-section

C-section birth

24.74

0

100

Maternal age

29.03

28.62

30.28

Maternal age > 40 years

0.027

0.022

0.043

Maternal age > 35 years

0.170

0.150

0.231

Multiple gestation

0.016

0.009

0.037

Previous C-section

0.121

0.036

0.380

Breech presentation

0.045

0.010

0.150

Pre-term delivery

0.105

0.051

0.084

Prolonged gestation

0.103

0.105

0.099

Disproportion

0.035

0.004

0.130

Obstructed labor

0.088

0.058

0.178

Fetal distress and umbilical cord problems

0.265

0.260

0.283

Antepartum hemorrhage

0.004

0.004

0.006

Disorders of the placenta

0.026

0.018

0.051

Maternal obesity

0.006

0.004

0.013

Maternal diabetes

0.045

0.037

0.070

Hypertension and (pre) eclampsia

0.060

0.049

0.094

Induced labor

0.220

0.234

0.178

Small for gestational age

0.017

0.034

0.023

Large for gestational age

0.022

0.017

0.035

Week-end delivery

0.228

0.249

0.164

OB/GYN

0.694

0.635

0.872

GDP per capita ($2002, k)

38.63

38.47

39.11

Gov expenditure on health care capital per capita
($2002)
Gov expenditure on health care per capita ($2002,
k)
Length of stay (days)

118.50

116.16

125.65

2.524

2.502

2.593

2.710

2.257

4.089

Stay > 1 month (/10,000)

0.002

0.001

0.005

4,084,755

3,074,046

1,010,711

Observations

Notes: The sample restricted to births recorded in the hmdb/dad files between fiscal years 1994 to 2010,
from mothers between 14 and 65 years of age, whose birth was assisted by a physician (general
practitioner or specialist), for whom price data on birth delivery method is available and for which
information on the specialty of the most responsible physician is available.

32

Table 3: Contribution of different types of births to the rise in C-section, 1994 to 2010
Panel A: OB/GYNs and GPs only
1994

2010

Vertex singletons without a previous
C-section

10.23

16.21

Multiple births, breech and previous
C-sections

66.19

82.84

All births
Panel B: Share of all births (%)
Multiple births, breech presentations
and previous C-sections

18.37

29.31

14.55

19.65

1994

2010

Vertex singletons without a previous
C-section

10.19

15.52

Multiple births, breech presentations
and previous C-sections

66.10

81.94

All births
Panel B: Share of all births (%)

18.30

28.12

Multiple births, breech presentations
and previous C-sections

14.51

18.97

Panel A: C-section rate by birth type (%)

Panel B: OB/GYNs, GPs and Midwives

Panel A: C-section rate by birth type (%)

33

Table 4: Probability of C-section birth: Impact of birth- and province-level characteristics – with
full set of birth-level characteristics and province characteristics
Baseline Specification
(1)
Most responsible provider is OB/GYN 0.109***
(0.008)
Breech presentation (care or obstruction) 0.580***
(0.009)
Multiple gestation 0.109***
(0.009)
Previous C-section 0.582***
(0.007)
Preterm birth 0.003
(0.004)
Hypertension or (pre)eclampsia 0.113***
(0.003)
Diabetes mellitus 0.043***
(0.003)
Obesity 0.104***
(0.017)
Antepartum hemorrhage 0.040***
(0.008)
Placenta disorders (previa, etc.) 0.209***
(0.011)
Large fetus for gestational age 0.091***
(0.014)
Small fetus for gestational age 0.077***
(0.005)
Disproportion 0.648***
(0.009)
Obstructed labor (any) 0.172***
(0.009)
Maternal distress/stress in labor/delivery -0.018
(0.023)
Fetal distress/stress incl. umbilical cord problem 0.057***
(0.005)
Recognition of midwifery
Change in population
GPD per capita
Provincial exp on capital in health care per capita
Provincial expenditure on health care per capita
Financial incentive (CS/VD) 0.040
(0.025)
Hospital fixed effects
Physician fixed effects
Observations 4,084,757

(2)
0.109***
(0.008)
0.580***
(0.009)
0.109***
(0.009)
0.582***
(0.007)
0.003
(0.004)
0.113***
(0.003)
0.042***
(0.003)
0.105***
(0.017)
0.040***
(0.008)
0.209***
(0.011)
0.090***
(0.014)
0.077***
(0.005)
0.648***
(0.009)
0.172***
(0.009)
-0.020
(0.023)
0.057***
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.117***
(0.030)
-0.014
(0.009)
0.011
(0.027)

(3)
0.156***
(0.011)
0.576***
(0.009)
0.105***
(0.008)
0.572***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)
0.110***
(0.003)
0.045***
(0.002)
0.117***
(0.014)
0.038***
(0.007)
0.209***
(0.010)
0.102***
(0.012)
0.079***
(0.004)
0.644***
(0.010)
0.169***
(0.009)
-0.014
(0.015)
0.065***
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.107***
(0.030)
-0.012
(0.010)
0.006
(0.032)
ü

4,084,755

4,084,755

Physician
IDs
(4)
0.002
(0.009)
0.595***
(0.009)
0.108***
(0.010)
0.599***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.111***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.002)
0.119***
(0.011)
0.031***
(0.009)
0.206***
(0.013)
0.123***
(0.014)
0.074***
(0.004)
0.662***
(0.011)
0.159***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.015)
0.069***
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.060*
(0.033)
-0.009
(0.008)
-0.032
(0.022)
ü
2,601,061

Physician type
OB/GYN
GP
(5)
(6)

0.565***
(0.009)
0.104***
(0.009)
0.593***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)
0.118***
(0.003)
0.048***
(0.003)
0.118***
(0.012)
0.035***
(0.008)
0.227***
(0.011)
0.127***
(0.013)
0.089***
(0.004)
0.644***
(0.011)
0.170***
(0.011)
-0.019
(0.018)
0.073***
(0.006)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.000
(0.001)
0.149***
(0.041)
-0.014
(0.014)
0.009
(0.028)
ü

0.610***
(0.015)
0.090***
(0.018)
0.394***
(0.019)
0.001
(0.005)
0.074***
(0.005)
0.028***
(0.003)
0.090***
(0.021)
0.053***
(0.010)
0.130***
(0.019)
0.042***
(0.011)
0.041***
(0.005)
0.625***
(0.016)
0.163***
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.013)
0.050***
(0.006)
0.003
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.045
(0.032)
-0.025**
(0.011)
0.014
(0.013)
ü

2,833,505

1,251,250

Notes: All specifications include a full set of maternal age fixed effects, day of the week fixed effect for the day of admissions, month of admission fixed effects, province
fixed effects and year fixed effects. All amounts are in 2002 dollars (k) using the all-item consumer price index published by Statistics Canada (CANSIM Table 3060020). Provincial health expenditure (total and on capital) are for each fiscal year and from the National Health Expenditure Database published by the Canadian Institute
for Health Information (Series F-nhex2017). Population counts are taken on July 1st of each year per province, as published by Statistics Canada (CANSIM Table 0510001). Expenditure-based GDP is from Statistics Canada (CANSIM Table 384-0002). Results in column 4 are obtained on a sample of observations between years 2001
to 2010 for which physician identifiers are available. Standard errors, in parenthesis, are clustered at the province-year level for columns 1-2, at the hospital level for
columns 3-5. The coefficient on the fee variable for a specification corresponding to column (3) but on a sample corresponding to that used in column 4 is 0.001 (0.046).
Significance levels: *** = 1%; ** = 5% and * = 10%.

34

Table 5: Probability of C-section birth: Estimates of year effects from main specification –
with full set of birth-level characteristics and province characteristics

Year FE: 1995
Year FE: 1996
Year FE: 1997
Year FE: 1998
Year FE: 1999
Year FE: 2000
Year FE: 2001
Year FE: 2002
Year FE: 2003
Year FE: 2004
Year FE: 2005
Year FE: 2006
Year FE: 2007
Year FE: 2008
Year FE: 2009
Year FE: 2010

No
controls
(0)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.014***
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.003)
0.030***
(0.003)
0.047***
(0.003)
0.064***
(0.004)
0.076***
(0.003)
0.090***
(0.002)
0.099***
(0.002)
0.108***
(0.002)
0.109***
(0.002)
0.115***
(0.002)
0.119***
(0.003)
0.119***
(0.003)
0.122***
(0.003)

Baseline specification
(1)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.007*
(0.004)
0.013***
(0.004)
0.023***
(0.004)
0.033***
(0.004)
0.044***
(0.004)
0.053***
(0.004)
0.062***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
0.068***
(0.005)
0.069***
(0.005)
0.069***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
ü

Fee incentive and birth
controls
Province characteristics
Hospital fixed effects
Observations 4,084,755 4,084,755

(2)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
0.008*
(0.004)
0.013*
(0.007)
0.024***
(0.005)
0.034***
(0.005)
0.045***
(0.006)
0.055***
(0.006)
0.065***
(0.007)
0.072***
(0.008)
0.074***
(0.008)
0.076***
(0.009)
0.076***
(0.010)
0.073***
(0.010)
0.075***
(0.012)
ü

(3)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.017***
(0.005)
0.027***
(0.005)
0.037***
(0.006)
0.046***
(0.006)
0.055***
(0.007)
0.061***
(0.008)
0.063***
(0.008)
0.064***
(0.009)
0.063***
(0.010)
0.061***
(0.011)
0.062***
(0.012)
ü

Physician type
OB/GYN
GP
(5)
(6)
-0.002
-0.004*
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.002
-0.003
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.003
-0.002
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.006
-0.002
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.011**
0.003
(0.005)
(0.005)
0.025*** 0.011**
(0.005)
(0.005)
0.036*** 0.022***
(0.005)
(0.006)
0.048*** 0.028***
(0.007)
(0.007)
0.058*** 0.036***
(0.008)
(0.007)
0.068*** 0.041***
(0.009)
(0.008)
0.077*** 0.042***
(0.011)
(0.010)
0.079*** 0.044***
(0.012)
(0.010)
0.078*** 0.047***
(0.013)
(0.011)
0.078*** 0.046***
(0.015)
(0.013)
0.076*** 0.047***
(0.016)
(0.013)
0.076*** 0.048***
(0.018)
(0.014)
ü
ü

ü

ü
ü
4,084,755

ü
ü
2,833,505

4,084,755

ü
ü
1,251,250

Notes: Includes a full set of province fixed effects and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for OB/GYN (except columns
4 and 5). Birth and province controls correspond to those in Table A3 (part 1). Standard errors, in parenthesis, are clustered at the
province-year level for columns 0 to 2, and at the hospital level for columns 3 to 5.
Significance levels: *** = 1%; ** = 5% and * = 10%.
F-statistics from column (3): Test that the year effects for 1995 to 1999 jointly equal has a p-value 0.22 (F stat of 01.45), and
decreases to 0.00 (F= 6.78) when testing the equality of the year effects for 1995 to 2000. Tests that each pair of years between
2000 and 2005 are jointly equal has a p-value of 0.00 (F=22.10) and testing the equality of the coefficients for each pair of these
years yields p-values of at most 0.002 (for 2004-2005); Year effects for 2005-2010 are jointly equal has a p-value of 0.66 (F=0.65).

35

Figure 1: Evolution of C-section Rates for Selected Countries, 1995-2012

Figure 2: Evolution of C-Section Rates by Presentation, 1994-2010

36

Figure 3: Evolution of Selected C-section Risk Factors, 1994-2010

Figure 4: Evolution of the Share of Births by Type of Most Responsible Provider

37

Figure 5: Evolution of C-section Rates by Type of Most Responsible Provider

38

Figure 6 : Effects of Maternal Age at Birth on Probability of C-section

39

Figure 7: Growth in C-section Rate Between 1995-2005 in Australia, by Presentation Type

40

Figure 8: Growth in C-section Rate Between 1995-2005 in the US, by Presentation Type

41

Figure 9: Growth in C-section Rate Between 1995-2005 in Canada, by Presentation Type

42

APPENDIX
Appendix A: Supplementary Tables
Table A1: Description of variations in annual C-section rates for fiscal years 1994 to 2010,
by Canadian province
C-section rate (%)
All births

C-section rate (%)
Births not corresponding to cases of breech
presentations, multiple births or previous
C-sections

Average
27.495

Annual Min
20.895

Annual Max
32.485

Average
16.457

Annual Min
11.439

Annual Max
20.216

Prince Edward
Island

28.502

21.921

33.309

16.781

12.345

21.629

Nova Scotia

24.609

18.796

27.962

14.475

10.658

16.816

New Brunswick

25.893

20.433

29.229

15.223

11.104

17.354

Ontario

24.386

17.4495

30.124

13.688

9.636

16.447

Manitoba

20.482

18.550

21.995

11.058

10.178

11.910

Saskatchewan

20.086

16.417

23.013

10.976

8.567

13.267

Alberta

25.371

16.631

28.259

14.414

9.421

16.076

British Columbia

27.353

20.611

34.054

16.207

11.844

20.686

Canada

24.743

18.373

29.306

14.027

10.232

16.259

Newfoundland and
Labrador

43

Table A2: Birth-level characteristics by physician type
GP

Midwives

OB/GYN

C-section birth

Sample
average
10.34

Change
1994-2010
3.74

Sample
average
6.07

Change
1994-2010
2.48

Sample
average
31.11

Change
1994-2010
11.03

Maternal age at delivery

28.176

0.525

29.935

-0.76

29.402

1.185

Maternal age > 40 years

1.693

0.985

2.432

-0.501

3.122

2.139

Maternal age > 35 years

13.014

3.888

18.357

-3.096

18.768

7.632

Multiple birth

0.298

-0.096

0.231

-0.081

0.223

0.718

Previous C-section

5.421

1.096

4.929

1.48

15.027

4.865

Breech presentation

1.536

-0.479

0.907

-0.586

5.755

-0.132

Pre-term delivery

3.187

0.458

2.599

0.723

7.168

2.317

Prolonged pregnancy

11.183

6.358

10.763

5.19

9.977

4.109

Disproportion

2.216

-0.788

1.592

-0.335

4.123

-3.163

Fetal distress and umbilical
cord problems
Hemorrhage

24.140

12.487

12.890

11.179

27.588

9.188

0.376

-0.251

0.165

-0.263

0.460

-0.084

Placental disorders

1.616

0.057

1.081

-0.213

3.059

0.065

Maternal obesity

0.407

0.346

0.233

0.205

0.734

1.203

Maternal diabetes

3.181

1.387

1.147

1.332

5.145

3.834

Hypertension and (pre)
eclampsia
Induction of labor

4.440

0.66

2.309

0.502

6.710

1.235

19.518

7.661

11.462

3.183

23.173

4.115

Small for gestational age

1.493

0.231

0.745

-0.04

2.621

0.349

Large for gestational age

2.145

0.275

1.565

-2.726

2.160

0.144

Week-end delivery

24.223

-0.313

26.478

-1.802

22.144

0.05

Length of stay (days)

2.433

-0.675

1.524

-0.022

2.833

-0.729

Stay > 1 month (/10,000)

0.055

0.027

0.006

0

0.213

-0.078

Observations

1,251,252

105,400

2,833,505

44

Table A3: Probability of C-section birth: Impact of birth- and province-level characteristics – with full set
of birth-level characteristics and province specific time-trends
Baseline Specification

Most responsible provider is OB/GYN
Breech presentation (care or obstruction)
Multiple gestation
Previous C-section
Preterm birth
Hypertension or (pre)eclampsia
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
Antepartum hemorrhage
Placenta disorders (previa, etc.)
Large fetus for gestational age
Small fetus for gestational age
Disproportion
Obstructed labor (any)
Maternal distress/stress in labor/delivery
Fetal distress/stress incl. umbilical cord problem
Financial incentive (CS/VD)

(1)
0.109***
(0.008)
0.580***
(0.009)
0.109***
(0.009)
0.582***
(0.007)
0.003
(0.004)
0.113***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.003)
0.104***
(0.017)
0.040***
(0.008)
0.209***
(0.011)
0.091***
(0.014)
0.077***
(0.005)
0.648***
(0.009)
0.172***
(0.009)
-0.018
(0.023)
0.057***
(0.005)
0.040

(0.025)
Hospital fixed effects
Physician fixed effects
Province specific time trends
Observations 4,084,755

Physician
IDs

(2)
0.109***
(0.008)
0.580***
(0.009)
0.109***
(0.009)
0.582***
(0.007)
0.003
(0.004)
0.113***
(0.003)
0.042***
(0.003)
0.105***
(0.017)
0.039***
(0.008)
0.209***
(0.011)
0.090***
(0.014)
0.077***
(0.005)
0.648***
(0.009)
0.172***
(0.009)
-0.020
(0.023)
0.057***
(0.005)
0.023

(3)
0.156***
(0.011)
0.576***
(0.009)
0.105***
(0.008)
0.572***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)
0.110***
(0.003)
0.045***
(0.002)
0.117***
(0.014)
0.037***
(0.007)
0.209***
(0.010)
0.102***
(0.012)
0.079***
(0.004)
0.644***
(0.010)
0.169***
(0.009)
-0.014
(0.016)
0.065***
(0.005)
0.018

(4)
0.002
(0.009)
0.595***
(0.009)
0.108***
(0.010)
0.598***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.111***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.002)
0.120***
(0.011)
0.031***
(0.010)
0.206***
(0.013)
0.123***
(0.013)
0.074***
(0.004)
0.662***
(0.011)
0.159***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.015)
0.069***
(0.006)
0.020

(0.027)

(0.033)
ü

(0.022)

ü
4,084,755

ü
4,084,755

Physician type
OB/GYN
(5)

(6)

0.565***
(0.009)
0.104***
(0.009)
0.593***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)
0.118***
(0.003)
0.048***
(0.003)
0.119***
(0.012)
0.034***
(0.008)
0.227***
(0.011)
0.127***
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.004)
0.644***
(0.011)
0.170***
(0.011)
-0.018
(0.018)
0.073***
(0.006)
-0.026

0.610***
(0.015)
0.090***
(0.018)
0.394***
(0.019)
0.001
(0.005)
0.074***
(0.005)
0.028***
(0.003)
0.090***
(0.020)
0.052***
(0.010)
0.130***
(0.019)
0.042***
(0.011)
0.041***
(0.005)
0.625***
(0.016)
0.163***
(0.012)
0.000
(0.013)
0.050***
(0.006)
0.009

(0.021)
ü

(0.013)
ü

ü
ü
ü
2,601,061 2,833,505

GP

ü
1,251,250

Notes: All specifications include a full set of maternal age fixed effects, day of the week fixed effect for the day of admissions, month of admission fixed effects, province
fixed effects and year fixed effects. All amounts are in 2002 dollars (k) using the all-item consumer price index published by Statistics Canada (CANSIM Table 3060020). Results in column 4 are obtained on a sample of observations between years 2001 to 2010 for which physician identifiers are available. Standard errors, in
parenthesis, are clustered at the province-year level for columns 1-2, at the hospital level for columns 3-6.
The coefficient on the fee variable for a specification corresponding to column (3) but on a sample corresponding to that used in column 4 is 0.042 (0.038)
Significance levels: *** = 1%; ** = 5% and * = 10%.

45

Table A3 (continued): Estimates of year effects from main specification – with full set of
birth-level characteristics and province specific time-trends

Year FE: 1995
Year FE: 1996
Year FE: 1997
Year FE: 1998
Year FE: 1999
Year FE: 2000
Year FE: 2001
Year FE: 2002
Year FE: 2003
Year FE: 2004
Year FE: 2005
Year FE: 2006
Year FE: 2007
Year FE: 2008
Year FE: 2009
Year FE: 2010

No
controls
(0)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.014***
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.003)
0.030***
(0.003)
0.047***
(0.003)
0.064***
(0.004)
0.076***
(0.003)
0.090***
(0.002)
0.099***
(0.002)
0.108***
(0.002)
0.109***
(0.002)
0.115***
(0.002)
0.119***
(0.003)
0.119***
(0.003)
0.122***
(0.003)

Baseline specification
(1)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.007*
(0.004)
0.013***
(0.004)
0.023***
(0.004)
0.033***
(0.004)
0.044***
(0.004)
0.053***
(0.004)
0.062***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
0.068***
(0.005)
0.069***
(0.005)
0.069***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
0.067***
(0.005)
ü

Fee incentive and birth
controls
Province specific time
trends
Hospital fixed effects
Observations 4,084,755 4,084,755

(2)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
0.018***
(0.006)
0.027***
(0.007)
0.037***
(0.007)
0.047***
(0.007)
0.056***
(0.008)
0.061***
(0.008)
0.061***
(0.009)
0.063***
(0.009)
0.062***
(0.010)
0.060***
(0.011)
0.060***
(0.012)
ü

(3)
-0.004*
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)
0.005
(0.006)
0.015**
(0.006)
0.024***
(0.007)
0.034***
(0.007)
0.044***
(0.007)
0.051***
(0.008)
0.058***
(0.008)
0.058***
(0.009)
0.059***
(0.010)
0.059***
(0.011)
0.057***
(0.011)
0.057***
(0.012)
ü

Physician type
OB/GYN
GP
(4)
(5)
-0.001
-0.002
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.005
0.001
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.008
0.002
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.012*
0.004
(0.006)
(0.005)
0.021*** 0.008
(0.007)
(0.005)
0.036*** 0.014***
(0.008)
(0.005)
0.048*** 0.022***
(0.009)
(0.007)
0.061*** 0.028***
(0.010)
(0.008)
0.073*** 0.035***
(0.011)
(0.008)
0.084*** 0.039***
(0.012)
(0.010)
0.093*** 0.039***
(0.013)
(0.009)
0.095*** 0.039***
(0.014)
(0.010)
0.097*** 0.041***
(0.015)
(0.010)
0.099*** 0.038***
(0.016)
(0.010)
0.098*** 0.039***
(0.017)
(0.011)
0.099*** 0.038***
(0.019)
(0.011)
ü
ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

4,084,755

ü
4,084,755

ü
2,833,505

ü
1,251,250

Notes: Includes a full set of province fixed effects and year fixed effects, as well as a dummy variable for OB/GYN (except columns
4 and 5). Birth and province controls correspond to those in Table 4. Standard errors, in parenthesis, are clustered at the provinceyear level for columns 0 to 2, and at the hospital level for columns 3 to 5.
Significance levels: *** = 1%; ** = 5% and * = 10%.
F-statistics from column (3): Test that the year effects for 1995 to 1999 jointly equal has a p-value 0.27 (F stat of 1.30), and
decreases to 0.00 (F= 7.63) when testing the equality of the year effects for 1995 to 2000. Tests that each pair of years between
2000 and 2005 are jointly equal has a p-value of 0.00 (F=30.53) and testing the equality of the coefficients for each pair of these
years yields p-values of 0.00; Year effects for 2005-2010 are jointly equal has a p-value of 0.51 (F=0.85).

46

Appendix B: Changes in Fetal Monitoring Guidelines and Related Technologies
If the availability of electronic fetal monitoring or related technologies did not change
discretely at the new millennium, changes in the guidelines influencing its use could have
contributed to the pattern we observe in the early 2000s. While professional associations in
Canada, the U.S. and Australia/New Zealand did issue bulletins concerning the use of intrapartum
fetal monitoring in this period (e.g. SOGC 2002a-b, ACOG 2001, RANZCOG 2002), they did not
in general promote a more aggressive recourse to this procedure, but rather counselled more
conservative interpretation of its output. For example, the Canadian 2002 practice guidelines on
fetal health surveillance in labor, which replaced the guidelines published in 1995 noted that, “Over
the past two decades, research has challenged the clinical value of electronic fetal heart rate
monitoring” (SOGC 2002a). Noting that EFM had not systematically been proven to improve
outcomes, but had been associated with an increase in obstetrical interventions, the new guidelines
recommend EFM for cases of augmented or induced labor, increased risks of cerebral palsy,
perinatal death or neonatal encephalopathy and presence of abnormal fetal heart rate features
unresponsive to resuscitation measures. They also reiterate the appropriateness of intermittent
auscultation (IA) over EFM for low-risk/healthy pregnancies.
Similar recommendations were issued during the same period in the United States, as well
as in Australia and New Zealand, three jurisdictions in which we observe an acceleration of the
increase in C-section rates in the early 2000s. In the U.S., the 4th and the 5th editions of the
Guidelines for Perinatal Care, published in 1997 and in 2002, highlight that in most cases, EFM is
not preferred to intermittent auscultation performed at specific intervals, as the former is associated
with a higher rate of false positive cases of fetal distress leading to unnecessary C-section
deliveries (AAP and ACOG 1997, AAP and ACOG 2002). In 2002, the Royal Australian and New
47

Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists also published guidelines that advised caution
when using EFM (RANZCOG 2002). Based on reports from enquiries within their jurisdictions
and findings from the literature, they also called for education programs to be rolled out to help
practitioners use the technology, and interpret and report the data it produces. We note that the
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, in the United Kingdom, also published related
recommendations in 2001 (RCOG 2001).
It also seems unlikely that a rise in the use of newer technologies developed or refined in
the 1990s (such as ST waveform analysis combined with conventional cardiotocography, near
infrared spectroscopy, fetal pulse oximetry) to complement EFM and facilitate the interpretation
of its output lies behind the rapid rise in C-section births from 2000. Indeed, new guidelines in the
early 2000s generally refrained from recommending the use of such technologies. For example,
the US Food and Drug Administration gave, in May 2000, its conditional approval to a new device
to help assessing fetal oxygen status during labor (fetal pulse oximetry), which was regarded as a
major technological progress related to EFM since its introduction in obstetrics (Simpson and
Porter 2001, Dildy 2011). Following the publication of results from early randomized control trial
(e.g. Garite et al. 2000)20, the ACOG to publish a committee opinion in September 2001 in which
it refrained from formally endorsing the use of the device, arguing that it might increase the cost
associated with deliveries without improving outcomes for patients (ACOG 2001). Records of
deliberations of the FDA Obstetrics and Gynecology Devices Approval Advisory Panel suggest
that the publication of this opinion and the interruption of active marketing efforts by the company
producing the device contributed to limiting the use of the device (FDA 2003). In Canada, the

20

Garite et al. (2000) found that the combination of fetal pulse oximetry and electronic fetal monitoring reduced Csection rates in cases of non-reassuring fetal status at delivery compared to electronic fetal monitoring alone. However,
they found no impact on the total rate of C-sections among trial participants.

48

device had been approved in the late 1990s, before the observed break in the C-section trend, on
the basis that it might help reduce recourse to unnecessary C-section in cases of non-reassuring
fetal heart rate patterns. However, both the 1995 and the updated 2002 SOGC guidelines on EFM
refrained from recommending its use until further research was conducted (SOGC 1995, SOGC
2002a-b). Given the barriers to its diffusion and the mixed conclusions of several trials (e.g. Bloom
et al. 2006), it is therefore not clear that fetal pulse oximetry might have contributed to the rapid
acceleration in C-section rates observed in the early 2000s.
The STAN system (combining ST segment and T-wave analysis) is another technology
which a wave of trials in the 2000s suggested could help better understand EFM data and reduce
occurrences of unnecessary C-sections for deliveries starting with a normal initial heart rate
(Bloom et al. 2016). However, many of those trials were conducted later in the 2000s, and they are
unlikely to be relevant to changes in the C-section rate as early as 2000-2002. Moreover, most
trials were conducted in Europe, and North American authorities voiced scepticism about the
external validity of the findings in different contexts (Bloom et al. 2016). While the FDA approved
the STAN system in 2005 and the Cochrane Library endorsed its use alongside EFM in 2006,
further results from a U.S. RCT, published in 2015, did not support an impact of combining EFM
with ST-segment analysis on C-section rates (Bloom et al. 2016). In Canada, the Society of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists also mentioned in its 1995 and 2002 clinical guidelines that the
existing body of scientific evidence did not suffice to recommend the use of this technology
(SOGC 1995, SOGC 2002a-b). Overall, even if these trials had had for an impact to increase the
use of ST segment analysis in Canada and in the US, the results from existing RCTs suggest that
it could have reduced or left unchanged (not increased) recourse to C-section as a delivery method.

49

Other technological innovations of this period and related to improvements in the
mathematical models, software and devices used to gather and interpret fetal heart rates include an
algorithm developed in 2000 by Lai and Shynk to detect maternal and fetal heartbeat separately.
However, despite the development of a series of mathematical models aimed at improving EFM
data extraction and analysis, the most prevalent method used, averaging, had not changed by the
end of the 2000s (Hasan et al. 2009). Note that the 2002 Canadian guidelines stated that the, “use
of computer-based algorithms alone to interpret fetal heart rate patterns is not recommended as a
standard of care at the present time” (SOGC 2002a).

References – Appendix B
AAP and ACOG. Guidelines for Perinatal Care – 4th edition, American Academy of Pediatrics
Committee on Fetus and Newborn and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Committee on Obstetric Practice, 1997.
AAP and ACOG. Guidelines for Perinatal Care – 4th edition, American Academy of Pediatrics
Committee on Fetus and Newborn and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Committee on Obstetric Practice, 2002.
ACOG. Committee Opinion 258: Fetal Pulse Oximetry, Obstetrics and Gynecology, 98(3); 523-524,
2001.
Bloom, S. L., C. Y. Spong, E. Thom, M. W. Varner, D. J. Rouse, S. Weininger, S. M. Ramin, S. N.
Caritis, A. Peaceman, Y. Sorokin, A. Sciscione, M. Carpenter, B. Mercer, J. Thorp. F. Malone,
M. Harper, J. Iams and G. Anderson. Fetal Pulse Oximetry and Caesarean Delivery, New
England Journal of Medicine, 355(21); 2195-2202, 2006.
Bloom, S. L., M. Belfort and G. Saade. What we Have Learned About Intrapartum Fetal Monitoring
Trials in the MFMU Network, Seminars in Perinatalogy, 40(5); 307-317, 2016.
Dildy, G.A. Fetal Pulse Oximetry. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology, 54(1); 66-73.
FDA. Summary Minutes, Meeting of the Obstetrics and Gynecology Devices Advisory Panel, Food
and Drug Administration, Washington, DC, United States, June 9, 2003.
Garite, T.J., G.A. Dildy, H. McNamara, M. P. Nageotte, F. H. Boehm, E. H. Dellinger, R. A. Knuppel,
R. P. Porreco, H. S. Miller, S. Sunderji, M. W. Varner and D. B. Swedlow. A multicenter
controlled trial of fetal pulse oximetry in the intrapartum management of nonreassuring fetal
heart rate patterns. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 183(5); 1049-1058, 2000.
50

Hasan, M. A. M.B.I Reaz, M. I. Ibrahimi and J. Udding. Detection and processing techniques of FECG
signal for fetal monitoring, Biological Precedures Online, 11; 263-295, 2009.
RANZCOG. Clinical Guidelines: Intrapartum Fetal Surveillance, Royal Australian and New Zealand
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Victoria, Australia, December 2002.
RCOG. The Use of Electronic Fetal Monitoring. The Use and Interpretation of cardiotocography in
Intrapartum Fetal Surveillance, Clinical Effectiveness Support Unit, Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, London, United Kingdom, 2001.
SOGC. Policy Statement: Fetal Health Surveillance in Labor, Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Canada, 17(9); 859-901, 1995.
SOGC. Clinical Practice Guideline 112: Fetal Health Surveillance in Labor (Part I). Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada, 24(3), 250-262, 2002a.
SOGC. Clinical Practice Guideline 112: Fetal Health Surveillance in Labor (Part II). Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada, 24(4), 342-348, 2002b.
Simpson, K. R. and M. L. Porter. Fetal Oxygen Saturation Monitoring, Nursing for Women’s Health,
5(2); 26-33, 2001.

51

