NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW EVIDENCE ON THE IMPACT OF FINANCIAL CRISES IN ADVANCED
COUNTRIES
Christina D. Romer
David H. Romer
Working Paper 21021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21021
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

We are grateful to Steven Braun, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Jason Furman, Mark Gertler, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Luc Laeven, Daniel Leigh, Demian Pouzo, James Powell, Carmen Reinhart, Kenneth
Rogoff, and seminar participants at Harvard University, the University of California, Berkeley, the
University of Chicago, the Banque de France, and the National Bureau of Economic Research for
helpful comments and discussions; to Marc Dordal i Carreras, Dmitri Koustas, and Walker Ray for
research assistance; and to the Center for Equitable Growth at the University of California, Berkeley
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

New Evidence on the Impact of Financial Crises in Advanced Countries
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 21021
March 2015
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,N10,N20
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the aftermath of financial crises in advanced countries in the four decades before
the Great Recession. We construct a new series on financial distress in 24 OECD countries for the
period 1967–2007. The series is based on assessments of the health of countries’ financial systems
from a consistent, real-time narrative source; and it classifies financial distress on a relatively fine
scale, rather than treating it as a 0-1 variable. We find that output declines following financial crises
in modern advanced countries are highly variable, on average only moderate, and often temporary.
One important driver of the variation in outcomes across crises appears to be the severity and persistence
of the financial distress itself.
Christina D. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
cromer@econ.berkeley.edu
David H. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dromer@econ.berkeley.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The question of what happens to economies after a financial crisis is important to
identifying the sources of macroeconomic fluctuations, understanding interactions between the
financial sector and the real economy, and addressing a wide range of policy issues. In recent
years, a new conventional wisdom has emerged about the answer to this question:

the

aftermath of financial crises is typically severe and long-lasting. 1
Issues. Several aspects of previous research suggest that widespread acceptance of this
view may be premature, at least in the case of modern, advanced economies. A first issue is that
much of the evidence of severe effects of financial crises comes from the pre-World War II
period and from emerging economies.

Differences in institutions, policy responses, and

industrial composition may make the experiences of prewar and emerging economies
unrepresentative of the impact of crises in modern advanced countries. But relatively little work
has focused specifically on the aftermath of crises in such economies.
A second issue involves the identification of financial crises. A key input to any study of the
impact of crises is a chronology of when they occurred, and a number of such chronologies exist.
But there are reasons to be concerned about them. Most obviously, the existing chronologies
sometimes differ substantially from one another.

For example, both Reinhart and Rogoff

(2009a) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Systemic Banking Crises Database (Laeven
and Valencia, 2014) identify a crisis in Norway following the collapse of house prices in the late
1980s; but Reinhart and Rogoff date it as occurring from 1987 to 1993, while the IMF dates it as
running from the second half of 1991 to 1993.

More generally, the specification of what

constitutes a crisis is often imprecise. To the degree that it is made concrete, it often combines a
range of distinct phenomena, such as asset price declines, banking problems, and consumer or
business bankruptcies. This absence of precise criteria can produce inconsistencies in the
We discuss recent scholarly work on the aftermath of financial crises below. For a popular example
describing this as the conventional wisdom, see http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/01/bill-clintoneconomist-kenneth-rogoff-obama_n_2061734.html.
1

2
identification of crises.

Further, the interaction of the somewhat vague criteria for what

constitutes a crisis with the fact that the identification is typically done ex post is potentially
problematic. There is perhaps a natural tendency to look a little harder for a financial crisis
before a known severe recession, or to identify the start of a crisis earlier than was perhaps
apparent in real time. This may skew the empirical results toward finding that the effects of
financial crises are particularly severe and long-lasting.
A third issue is that existing crisis chronologies almost all use a 0-1 classification: either a
country experienced a crisis or it did not. A few studies differentiate between systemic and
nonsystemic crises, but do not go further than that. This binary classification surely obscures
some important information about the variation in the severity of crises. It also means that
errors in classification are likely very consequential. As a result, estimates of the real impact of
crises derived from such series are likely to be imprecise and potentially inaccurate.
A fourth issue is that most existing studies use relatively simple empirical techniques. For
example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) focus on the peak-to-trough fall in annual real GDP per
capita around the start of crises. Similarly, other studies, such as Bordo et al. (2001), compare
the severity of recessions accompanied by financial crises with those not experiencing financial
difficulties. While simple summary statistics are often helpful and illuminating, they may
sometimes lead to questionable conclusions. Looking at the peak-to-trough decline in output
around a financial crisis may understate the impact of a crisis in a country with very strong
trend growth. On the other hand, in cases where the crisis occurred relatively late in the
downturn, it may attribute to the crisis declines in output caused by other factors. More
generally, reverse causation is inherently a problem in the study of financial crises: crises may
depress output, but falls in output may also cause crises. While no statistical procedure can
avoid these problems entirely, using recessions as the unit of observation may tend to magnify
them.
Our Approach. Our paper seeks to provide new evidence on the impact of financial

3
crises in modern advanced countries that deals with some of the issues surrounding existing
studies. We create a new, semiannual measure of financial distress in a sample of 24 advanced
economies from 1967 to 2007. This measure is derived from real-time narrative accounts of
country conditions prepared by the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development
(OECD).
Our measure of financial distress is designed to capture a rise in the cost of credit
intermediation. Using a detailed reading of the relevant sections, we look for discussions in the
OECD Economic Outlook of such factors as perceived funding problems and rising loan defaults,
which could reduce the willingness of banks to lend at a given safe interest rate. In this way, we
focus on disruptions to credit supply, rather than on broader conceptions of financial problems.
We classify the degree of financial distress on a scale from 0 to 15. Compiling a continuous
measure allows us to take into account the severity and duration of financial distress, and to
analyze how crises emerge and progress.
We use the new series on financial distress to investigate the behavior of industrial
production and real GDP following financial crises. We run straightforward panel regressions to
describe the relationship between financial distress and economic activity. More specifically, we
use Jordà’s (2005) local projection method to estimate the response of output at different
horizons to an innovation in the financial distress variable.
Findings. Our new series on financial distress in advanced countries captures many wellknown modern crises, such as those in Japan and Sweden in the 1990s. At the same time, the
new series finds no financial distress in some other commonly identified crisis episodes, such as
that in Spain in the late 1970s. Even in the cases where the new series identifies the same
episodes as existing chronologies, the timing is often quite different. Moreover, the scaled
nature of the new measure provides useful information about the variation in the severity and
persistence of the crises. For example, we find that Japan experienced more than a decade of
distress, with periods of extreme crisis, while Sweden experienced only a very short, moderate

4
crisis. The scaled nature of our new measure also allows it to capture episodes of more modest
financial disruption, such as that in France in the mid-1990s following the rescue of Crédit
Lyonnais.
One concern about relying on a single narrative source to identify distress is that it might
be idiosyncratic. For a set of key episodes, we therefore check the assessments based on the
Economic Outlook against the information in three other real-time sources: the annual reports
of the central bank of the country, the staff reports prepared for the IMF’s Article IV
consultations, and the Wall Street Journal. We find that although these sources do not agree
with the OECD in every detail, they suggest that the assessments based on the Economic
Outlook provide a reasonably accurate summary of what a range of observers perceived at the
time. We also find that the evidence from the other sources further strengthens the case that
using an all-or-nothing measure of financial problems omits a large amount of information
about the evolution of distress.
Our panel regressions suggest that the impact of financial distress in advanced countries is
not large. For both industrial production and real GDP, a moderate crisis (a 7 on our scale from
0 to 15 of financial distress) is followed by a fall in output of 3 to 4 percent. The fall is very rapid
and highly statistically significant.
The two output measures give conflicting evidence about the persistence of these effects.
For industrial production, the effects are highly temporary: they start to recede after six months
and are completely gone after two years. For GDP, the effects are more persistent, lasting at
least five years after the shock to distress. This persistence, however, is driven entirely by the
experience of Japan, which had a large and prolonged slowdown in GDP growth starting around
the same time as its financial distress. When Japan is excluded from the sample, the results for
GDP show little persistence of the effects of financial distress. Taken together, these results
suggest that in the forty years before the 2008 global financial crisis, the output declines
following financial crises in advanced countries were on average moderate and largely

5
temporary.
Our source and approach do not allow us to separate financial distress arising from a
decline in output from financial distress due to more exogenous factors. When we examine the
behavior of the financial distress variable itself, we find that it is moderately predictable based
on lagged output—suggesting that omitted variable bias may be present. Thus, our estimates
are, if anything, likely to be an overestimate of the impact of financial distress. Consistent with
this, we find that the results, though quite robust to most differences in specification, are much
weaker when distress is not allowed to affect output contemporaneously.
We also compare the impact of financial crises estimated using our new series with those
estimated using alternative chronologies for the same sample of advanced countries in the
postwar era. The impacts using our same empirical approach and these alternative chronologies
are actually smaller than that using our new distress measure. This suggests that much of the
conventional wisdom that the output consequences of crises are very large is due to the simple
empirical approaches of previous studies, and to the inclusion of crises in developing countries
and the prewar era. While our new measure does not appear to be central to our finding that the
effects of crises in advanced countries in the postwar era are no more than moderate, it does
matter more noticeably for the estimated timing of the effects. More generally, it is a consistent,
scaled indicator of distress that may be useful in a range of applications.
Finally, the sensitivity of many of our findings to the inclusion of Japan leads us to
investigate the variation in the response of output to financial distress across advanced
countries. A comparison of simple autoregressive forecasts and actual outcomes following
periods of significant financial distress reveals substantial differences in experiences across
countries and episodes. For example, output fell little relative to its pre-crisis path following the
financial crises in Norway and the United States, but dramatically following the crises in Japan
and Turkey.

We also find that the severity and persistence of the financial distress itself

accounts for much of the observed variation.

6
Related Work. An obvious starting point of our research is Reinhart and Rogoff’s
influential book, This Time Is Different (2009a), and a number of their related papers (see, for
example, 2009b, 2014). Bordo et al. (2001) is another pathbreaking study of the impact of
financial crises. In identifying when modern financial crises occurred, both these studies draw
heavily on the work of Caprio and Klingebiel (1996, 1999, 2003). Caprio and Klingebiel base
their crisis chronology in part on the retrospective assessments of experts on financial
developments in various countries. In recent years, scholars at the IMF have refined the Caprio
and Klingebiel dates using more precise criteria and some quantitative indicators (see Laeven
and Valencia, 2014, for the most recent description of the IMF chronology).
Studies have investigated the impact of financial crises on the real economy in a variety of
ways. As described above, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) look at the peak-to-trough fall in output
per capita around crises; Cecchetti, Kohler, and Upper (2009) use a similar approach and also
conclude that the fall in output around crises is large. Bordo et al. (2001), IMF (2009a),
Schularick and Taylor (2012), Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013), and Claessens, Kose, and
Terrones (2014) not only examine recessions around financial crises, but explicitly compare
recessions with and without crises. These studies find that recessions accompanied by financial
crises are more severe. Similarly, Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2009) compare recessions
with and without “credit crunches,” where credit crunches are identified based on the
magnitudes in the declines in credit. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) look at simple averages of
the behavior of output and other variables before and after the start of crises, compared with
averages in “tranquil” times. 2
A few studies use standard regression analysis of postwar data. Cerra and Saxena (2008)

Several studies, such as Hoggarth, Reis, and Saporta (2002), IMF (2009b), and Laeven and Valencia
(2014), compare the path of output following crises with projections of pre-crisis trends. Those studies,
however, use asymmetric rules in making these comparisons. For example, if actual output following a
crisis is on average above the pre-crisis trend, Laeven and Valencia report an “output loss” of zero. As a
result, although the median output loss (as measured by the sum of the shortfalls of GDP from the precrisis trend in the four years following a crisis) in their sample is just 2½ percent of a year’s GDP, they
report an average output loss of 20 percent.
2

7
look at the behavior of output following the starting dates of the banking crises identified by
Caprio and Klingebiel (2003). They find large and persistent falls in output after the onset of
crises. Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012), combining dates of banking crises from a range of
existing chronologies, estimate updated versions of regressions analogous to the averages
reported by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). They mention that their findings indicate that
output is moderately but persistently below trend following the starts of banking crises in
advanced economies. 3
Most studies consider banking crisis in samples that combine advanced and other
countries. A few studies, such as Cerra and Saxena (2009), IMF (2009b), Gourinchas and
Obstfeld (2012), and Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2009, 2014), report results for advanced or
high-income countries separately. In general, these studies find that though the effects of
financial crises are less severe in advanced countries, they are still quite large. Schularick and
Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013) look just at a sample of advanced
countries, but over a very long sample period. They find substantial effects of crises, and also
that the size of the credit boom preceding crises is an important determinant of the size of the
impact.
Outline. Our paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the derivation of our new
measure of financial distress for advanced countries. It also presents the new measure, and
compares it with other chronologies of financial crises for the same sample of countries. Section

Two studies that are similar to ours in approach but that focus only on the United States are Jalil (2013)
and López-Salido and Nelson (2010). Jalil constructs a new series on banking panics for the United
States back to the early 1800s using contemporary newspaper accounts. He scales panics into major and
minor crises, and identifies a handful of panics that appear to have been caused by factors other than a
decline in output. Using simple time-series regressions, he finds that crises have large and persistent real
effects in the period before 1929. López-Salido and Nelson use a combination of real-time narrative
sources, retrospective assessments, and statistical evidence to argue that there was significant financial
distress in the United States in 1973–1975, 1982–1984, and 1988–1991, which differs substantially from
standard chronologies. They show that this alternative chronology implies that in the United States,
recoveries following crises are not much slower than other recoveries. A study that focuses on the United
States over both the prewar and postwar periods using more traditional business-cycle analysis is Bordo
and Haubrich (2012). They also find that recoveries following financial crises are not slower than other
recoveries.
3

8
III presents the statistical analysis of the relationship between financial distress and economic
activity in advanced countries. In addition to the baseline regressions, it discusses numerous
robustness checks and compares our results with those using other chronologies. Section IV
investigates the variation in the response of output to financial distress in different episodes.
Finally, Section V presents our conclusions and discusses the implications of our findings.

II. NEW MEASURE OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS
As we have discussed, there are reasons to be cautious about the accuracy of existing
chronologies of financial crises. Moreover, the 0-1 nature of most classifications potentially
suppresses important variation in the severity of financial distress both across and within
episodes. For these reasons, we create a new continuous measure of financial distress for 24
advanced countries for the period 1967–2007.
A. Definition and Approach
Conceptually, we think of financial distress as corresponding to increases in what Bernanke
(1983) refers to as the “cost of credit intermediation.” This cost includes both the cost of funds
for financial institutions relative to a safe interest rate, and their costs of screening, monitoring,
and administering loans and other types of financing. A rise in the cost of intermediation makes
it more costly for financial institutions to extend loans to firms and households, and thus
reduces the supply of credit. Importantly, we do not consider reductions in lending stemming
from increases in all interest rates (as a result of tighter monetary policy, for example) as
representing financial distress. The question of how monetary policy and the overall level of
interest rates affect the economy is different from the issue of the effects of disruptions to the
financial system, and we do not want to confound the two. 4
Bernanke also includes influences on credit flows and interest rates resulting from changes in the
creditworthiness of borrowers in his definition of the cost of credit intermediation. Because our goal is to
examine the effects of financial distress and because considering the creditworthiness of borrowers blurs
the line between loan supply and loan demand, we focus only on the condition of financial firms.
4

9
Following most previous work, we do not rely on statistical indicators of financial distress.
Using data on quantities, such as the growth rate of bank lending, would mix increases in the
cost of credit intermediation not just with shifts in monetary policy, but also with a host of
factors affecting credit demand and the creditworthiness of borrowers. Similarly, measures of
government intervention, such as spending to aid failed or distressed banks, may be only
remotely related to the cost of intermediation: aggressive government intervention, rather than
indicating a large rise in the cost of intermediation, might prevent any significant rise; or longdelayed intervention might clean up institutions that had long since become insolvent and
whose lending activities had already been superseded by healthier institutions.

Likewise,

measures of failures of financial institutions are at best very noisy indicators of financial
distress: most obviously, institutions’ cost of credit intermediation, and hence their ability to
lend, can change greatly without their outright failure—particularly in the presence of regulatory
forbearance, or of just enough government intervention to prevent outright failure.
A more promising avenue to a statistical measure of financial-market problems would
involve data on spreads between funding costs for financial institutions and safe interest rates.
However, two considerations prevent us from taking that route. The conceptual problem is that,
as many authors have emphasized, allocations in credit markets often occur through rationing
rather than through changes in interest rates. As a result, spreads may not rise greatly even in
times of substantial distress. The practical problem involves data limitations. The detailed
information that would be needed to construct a reasonably accurate measure of average
funding costs for the financial sector as a whole dating back several decades is not available even
for many advanced countries.
In light of these complications, we rely on more qualitative evidence about the health of the
financial system to construct our index of financial distress. A key feature of our approach is the
use of a consistent real-time source of this information. The use of contemporaneous accounts
should help us avoid the possibility of bias from the retrospective identification of financial

10
crises. The use of a single source that covers many countries over a long period of time helps
ensure consistency in the analysis across countries and episodes.
A second important feature of our measure is that we do not treat financial crises as a 0-1
variable, or divide crises into just two groups, such as minor and major or nonsystemic and
systemic.

Both logic and descriptions of actual episodes of financial distress suggest that

financial-market problems come much closer to falling along a continuum than to being discrete
events that are all of similar severities, or that fall into just a few categories.

Treating a

continuous variable as discrete introduces measurement error, both because the variation across
crises is omitted and because a small inaccuracy in evaluating an observation can cause a large
change in the value assigned to it.
B. Source and Methods
Source. The particular real-time source we use is the OECD Economic Outlook. This is a
semiannual publication that describes economic conditions in each member country of the
OECD at mid-year and year-end. The volumes have been published since 1967.
This source has several advantages.

First, and most obviously, it is relatively high

frequency, available over a long time period, and covers a large number of advanced countries.
Thus it allows us to construct a measure of distress for a large sample over much of the postwar
period. Second, the entries are analytical and of medium length (a typical entry is roughly 2000
words). As a result, they provide serious information in a relatively concise form. Third, the
format, topics covered, and level of analysis appear to be relatively consistent both across
countries and over time. Thus, the source can be used to derive a measure of financial distress
for a number of countries that is similarly consistent across countries and time.

Finally,

financial conditions and determinants of credit growth are discussed routinely in the volumes
from the beginning of the sample, and bank health is often mentioned. As a result, financial
distress is likely to be captured if it is present.

11
Because the OECD Economic Outlook is public and member countries have some input to
the country summaries, one possible concern is that some financial distress may not be revealed
for fear that it could worsen conditions or precipitate a crisis. The fact that we find financial
problems often being discussed strongly suggests that such covering up of problems is not a
major issue. Our use of a single source and a scaled indicator also provides important insurance
against this potential problem. Because we identify distress starting at quite minor levels, we
should capture most significant episodes, even if there is some downplaying of problems.
Finally, as discussed in Section II.E, other real-time sources produced through very different
processes largely agree with the OECD Economic Outlook.

This is perhaps the strongest

evidence that it is in general a reliable source for identifying financial distress.
To have a relatively consistent sample and to keep the focus on advanced countries, we
restrict the sample to the twenty-four members of the OECD as of 1973. 5 And because our goal
is to assess the evidence from before the recent financial crisis, we end the sample prior to the
widespread outbreak of the crisis. Concretely, the last issue of the OECD Economic Outlook we
examine is that for the first half of 2007, at which point only a few countries were facing
financial-market difficulties that the OECD considered noteworthy.
Methods. To derive our new scaled measure of financial distress, we read the Economic
Outlook to see if OECD analysts described a rise in the cost of credit intermediation for
individual countries. We put the most weight on factors that are clear markers for increases in
the cost of intermediation. We look for discussions of such developments as increases in
financial institutions’ costs of obtaining funds relative to safe interest rates; general increases in
the perceived riskiness of financial institutions; reductions in financial institutions’ willingness
to lend; disruptions in normal borrower-lender relationships that make it harder for financial
institutions to evaluate prospective borrowers; and difficulties of creditworthy borrowers
The countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

5

12
obtaining funds because of problems at financial institutions.

In addition to looking for

descriptions of factors directly linked to the cost of intermediation, we look for references to
developments likely to weaken financial institutions, and so reduce their ability to perform their
normal functions. Examples include rising loan defaults, increases in nonperforming loans,
balance sheet problems, and erosion of their capital.
For the accounts that suggest financial distress, we group them according to the severity of
the difficulties. To scale the degree of financial distress, we look for signs of more or less change
in the indicators mentioned above.

Was the rise in the perceived riskiness of financial

institutions relatively minor, or so large that it is described as a widespread panic? Was the
effect on the willingness to lend described as minor or extreme? Was the rise in nonperforming
loans thought to be small or large? In this ranking, we also consider some indirect proxies for
the size of the rise in the cost of intermediation.

For example, we put some weight on

descriptions of government intervention in the financial system as an indicator of the perceived
severity of balance sheet and funding problems. Likewise, the OECD’s description of the actual
or anticipated impact of financial troubles on spending and the economy is often a useful
summary statistic for the perceived severity of financial distress. 6
We view a central aspect of this classification as comparative:

we attempt to group

problems that the Economic Outlook describes in similar terms together, and to place ones that
it describes as more severe in higher categories. Thus, much of our classification involves
comparing episodes to try to make our assignments as consistent as possible.
Criteria for the Different Categories. The categories to which we assign episodes
have natural interpretations. Our main ones are “credit disruption,” “minor crisis,” “moderate
crisis,” “major crisis,” and “extreme crisis.” In keeping with the fact that the accounts suggest
that financial-market problems fall along continuum, we subdivide each category into “regular,”
6 Importantly, we see no evidence in the Economic Outlook that OECD analysts were deducing financial
distress from declines in spending and output. Rather, they viewed distress as one influence on those
outcomes.

13
“minus,” and “plus.” Thus, for example, an episode of relatively minor financial distress could
be classified as “credit disruption–minus,” “credit disruption–regular,” or “credit disruption–
plus.” In our empirical work, we convert these categories into a numerical scale. Cases where
there is no financial distress are assigned a zero. Positive levels of distress start at 1 for a credit
disruption–minus and go through 15 for an extreme crisis–plus.
As much as possible, we try to use specific criteria to classify episodes into categories. It is
therefore useful to describe the characteristics common to the various groupings briefly. The
hallmark of the episodes that we identify as credit disruptions is that the OECD perceived
financial-market problems or increases in the cost of credit intermediation that were important
enough to be mentioned, but that it did not believe were having significant macroeconomic
consequences. A common form for this to take was for the OECD to describe the problems not
as directly affecting its outlook for the country, but as posing a risk to the outlook. Other
possibilities are that the OECD viewed the problems as affecting only a narrow part of the
economy; that it mentioned them in passing or explicitly identified them as minor; or that it
described the financial system as improved but not fully healed following a situation that we
classify as a minor crisis. An example of a regular credit disruption occurred in Germany in
1974:2 (that is, the second half of 1974), where the OECD described “strains” in the banking
system and the extension of special credit facilities to help small and medium-sized companies
obtain credit (OECD, 1974:2, pp. 50 and 26, respectively).
A canonical case of a minor crisis has three characteristics: a perception by the OECD that
there were significant problems in the financial sector; a belief that they were affecting credit
supply or the overall performance of the economy in a way that was clearly nontrivial, and not
confined to a minor part of the economy; and a belief that they were not so severe that they were
central to recent macroeconomic developments or to the economy’s prospects. An example of a
regular minor crisis is France in 1996:1, where the OECD described significant problems in the
banking sector, including “high refinancing … costs and large provisions for bad debts,” as well

14
as government intervention to support some financial institutions, but did not give banking
problems a central role in its discussion of the outlook (OECD, 1996:1, p. 78).
A moderate crisis, in our classification, involves problems in the financial sector that are
widespread and severe, that are central to the performance of the economy as a whole, and that
are not so serious that they could reasonably be described as taking the form of the financial
system seizing up entirely. One specific criterion we use is whether the OECD mentioned the
financial-sector problems prominently—for example, in the opening summary of the entry on a
country. Another is whether the OECD discussed impacts on credit supply or real activity
repeatedly. We also take descriptions of sizeable government interventions in the financial
system as an indicator of a moderate crisis. Thus, our definition of a moderate crisis represents
a quite significant level of financial distress, and appears to roughly correspond to the cutoff in
other chronologies, such as Caprio et al. (2005) and Laeven and Valencia (2014), between a
crisis and no crisis, or between a systemic crisis and a nonsystemic crisis. An example of a
regular moderate crisis is Sweden in 1993:1, where the Economic Outlook referred to “the capital
bases of most major banks rapidly eroding,” and said government rescue operations could cost
up to 4½ percent of GDP (OECD, 1993:1, p. 115). It also said, “greater weakness of demand
could be accentuated by rising capital costs in the event of larger loan losses” (OECD, 1993:1, p.
115).
At the severe end of the spectrum are major and extreme financial crises. These are
situations where there are large impediments to normal financial intermediation throughout
virtually all of the financial system. We look for such markers as the unreserved use the term
“crisis” in referring to the financial system, and for such terms as “dire,” grave,” “unsound,” and
“paralysis.” We also look for clear-cut statements that the financial-sector disruptions were
having an important effect on credit supply and macroeconomic outcomes. In addition, we view
references to major government interventions as suggesting that the problems were severe.
There are only two episodes in our sample that we classify as major or extreme crises, Japan in

15
1998:1 and 1998:2. The more significant is 1998:2, which we classify as an extreme crisis–
minus. In that case, the OECD referred to the “breakdown in the credit creation mechanism,” to
the “the severe and prolonged crisis in the banking system,” and to banks being in “dire straits”
(OECD, 1998:2, pp. 44, 20, and 45, respectively).
Our subdivision of the broad categories into minor, regular, and plus is based on the
specifics of the discussions within these general rubrics. In the case of credit disruptions, for
example, we tend to place disruptions that the OECD described as posing major risks to the
outlook in higher categories than ones that it viewed as posing minor risks. Similarly, if the
OECD reported that a disruption was serious enough that it had caused authorities to make
some type of intervention in credit markets to improve credit flows, we tend to classify the
disruption as more serious.
Documentation. Online Appendix A provides more information about our criteria for
the different categories of financial distress and our procedures for classifying episodes using
the accounts in the Economic Outlook. Table 1 lists each episode for which we find that the
Economic Outlook was describing financial distress. The bulk of Appendix A provides episodeby-episode explanations of the analysis and discussion in the Economic Outlook that lead to our
classifications. Exhibit 1 reproduces the appendix entries for the four episodes cited above:
Germany in 1974:2 (credit disruption–regular), France in 1996:1 (minor crisis–regular), Sweden
in 1993:1 (moderate crisis–regular), and Japan in 1998:2 (extreme crisis–minus).
C. New Series
The semiannual publication of the OECD Economic Outlook means that our new measure
is semiannual as well. Figure 1 shows our new measure of financial distress for the period
1967:1 to 2007:1 for the ten OECD countries that had some nonzero values of our measure. The
other fourteen countries that we analyze had no times in our sample period where the OECD
noted financial distress.

16
Several features are clear from the figure.

Most obviously, there were essentially no

episodes of financial distress, and certainly nothing that would count as a significant crisis, in
the 1970s and 1980s. For advanced countries, these two decades were a time of financial calm,
despite oil price shocks and severe moves toward disinflation in many countries. In contrast,
the 1990s were a period of extensive financial distress. Our new measure captures the wellknown financial troubles in a number of Nordic countries and Japan in this period. It also
identifies significant distress in the United States at the turn of the decade related to the savings
and loan crisis and other disruptions.
Another thing that is clear from the figure is the tremendous variation in how crises evolve.
Some, such as the crisis in Sweden in 1992–1993, became acute almost instantaneously, and
then resolved just as quickly.

Others, such as the distress in Japan, built slowly before

eventually erupting into severe distress. Japan also stands out as a case where the financial
distress lingered—not just for years, but for well over a decade. In other episodes, such as
France in the mid-1990s, a country may suffer mild distress for a prolonged period, but never
have it erupt into a full-fledged crisis.
D. Comparison with Other Chronologies
It is natural to ask how our new measure of financial distress compares with other crisis
chronologies for the same countries over the period we consider. We focus on two alternatives:
the dates of crises given in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a), and the latest version of the dates in
the IMF Systemic Banking Crises Database (Laeven and Valencia, 2014). Both chronologies use
a 0-1 classification and typically date crises in years (for example, 1984–1991). To make each of
these series comparable to our semiannual series, we generally put the beginning of a crisis in
the first half of the year in which the chronology identifies the start of a crisis, and the end in the
second half of the year that it lists as the last one of the crisis. Occasionally, a chronology gives a
particular month for the start of a crisis; in this case, we place the start in the half-year

17
corresponding to that month. 7
The Reinhart and Rogoff chronology includes a fairly wide range of episodes, while the
IMF chronology identifies only systemic crises. The IMF chronology lists eight systemic crises
in advanced countries over the period 1970–2006: Spain in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the
United States in the late 1980s, Sweden, Finland, and Norway in the early 1990s, Japan in the
late 1990s and early 2000s, and Turkey in the early 1980s and around 2000. Reinhart and
Rogoff also identify crises in these same periods. But they list an additional sixteen crises in the
countries we consider over our sample period.
Our new measure derived from OECD reports identifies significant financial distress in six
of the eight episodes identified by the IMF. There is no discussion of financial distress in Spain
in the OECD Economic Outlook at any time, nor in Turkey in the 1980s. Figure 2 compares the
three crisis series in each of the remaining six episodes. In particular, for each episode, we show
the start and end dates as identified by Reinhart and Rogoff and the IMF, along with our
continuous indicator of financial distress over the same period. 8
The biggest differences are between Reinhart and Rogoff’s chronology and both the IMF
chronology and our new measure of financial distress. For example, for the crisis in Norway,
Reinhart and Rogoff identify the start in 1987:1, while the IMF dates it in 1991:2, and the new
measure does not spike up until the same half-year. Likewise, for the United States, Reinhart
and Rogoff date the crisis as running from 1984 to 1991, while the IMF chronology lists it as

The Reinhart and Rogoff dates are from their Table A.4.1, pp. 348–392. The IMF start dates are from
Laeven and Valencia (2014, Appendix Tables 2A.1 and 2A.3, pp. 94–112 and 118–135); the end dates are
from Laeven and Valencia (2013, Table A1, pp. 254–259). The Reinhart–Rogoff chronology covers the
period 1800–2008; the IMF chronology covers 1970–2007. Our comparison considers the period 1970–
2006. Reinhart and Rogoff present slightly different crisis dates on the website for their book
(http://www.reinhartandrogoff.com/data/). One difference is that the website only gives dates in years,
whereas their Table A.4.1 sometimes mentions particular months, allowing us to place those dates in half
years. Other than this, the only two differences for our sample of countries and years are that the crisis in
Japan is dated 1992–1997 in Table A.4.1 in the book and 1992–2001 on the website, and the crisis they
identify in Germany is just 1977 in the book but 1977–1979 on the website. Neither Table A.4.1 nor the
website provide crisis dates for one of the 24 OECD countries we consider (Luxembourg).
8 In panel (e) (Turkey), Reinhart and Rogoff identify four separate crises, two of which have start and end
dates in the same half-year (1991:1 and 1994:1).
7

18
being limited to just 1988, and the new measure identifies distress in the period 1990:1 to
1992:1. And for Japan, the new measure shows mild to moderate distress in the years Reinhart
and Rogoff identify as the crisis (1992 to 1997), but the peak in distress is after Reinhart and
Rogoff say the crisis ended. Peak distress in the new measure corresponds quite closely to the
IMF crisis period (1997:2–2001:2). 9
Though the differences between the new measure and the IMF chronology are smaller than
those with the Reinhart and Rogoff series, many are still substantial. As already described, for
the United States, the IMF chronology identifies a crisis as occurring two years before the new
measure derived from OECD records shows noticeable distress. Similarly, the IMF dates the
end of the Japanese crisis a half-year before the new measure shows a second acute rise in
distress, and several years before it shows the distress ending. And, the IMF chronology dates
the end of the crisis in Sweden two years after distress returns to zero in the new measure.
E. Additional Evidence on the Accuracy of the New Series
Given that the new measure of financial distress derived from OECD documents differs in
important ways from the previous chronologies, it is prudent to look for additional evidence
with which to check the new series. To do this, we consider the descriptions of financial distress
in three other real-time sources: the annual reports of the relevant central banks, the staff
reports from the IMF’s Article IV consultations, and the Wall Street Journal. While there is
overlap among the sources—for example, the IMF consults with the central banks—each appears
to contribute valuable independent real-time information. The central banks are particularly
focused on financial conditions, and so are likely to provide more detailed reports on credit
supply disruptions. The IMF reports were typically confidential and often quite frank, so it
seems particularly unlikely that they were reluctant to describe financial problems. Finally, the
articles in the Wall Street Journal are likely similarly free of any potential sugarcoating, and
As noted above, the spreadsheets available on the website for Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) move the end
date for the Japanese crisis to 2001, which makes the difference in this particular episode much smaller.

9

19
have the shortest lags between developments in the financial sector and publication.
To keep the task manageable, we consider these additional sources only around the eight
systemic crises in advanced countries between 1970 and 2006 identified in the IMF chronology.
Online Appendix B provides a detailed episode-by-episode discussion of this additional
evidence. Here, we summarize the findings from this analysis.
One important conclusion involves methodology.

Examining the additional sources

strengthens the case for a continuous measure of financial distress rather than a o-1 crisis
classification. Like the OECD, the other real-time sources described a range of financial troubles
in the various countries at different times. While it is clear that financial distress was worse in
some half-years than in others, it is often very hard to see where one would draw the line
between a “crisis” and not. This is particularly obvious in the case of Japan. Like the OECD, the
additional sources described growing financial troubles over the early and mid-1990s; much
more severe problems in the late 1990s; improvement and then another round of severe distress
in the early 2000s; then, finally, gradual recovery in the mid-2000s. Attempting to reduce this
complex experience to a limited period of crisis would be both difficult and counterproductive.
In terms of the accuracy of the new measure of financial distress, we find that the
descriptions in the additional sources are typically in close agreement with the new series. The
correlation is certainly not perfect, but it is high enough to suggest that the OECD Economic
Outlook is a reliable and accurate source.
The agreement between the new series and the additional sources is greatest in the cases
where the timing of crises in the new series differs most from the alternative chronologies. For
the United States, the additional sources agree with the new measure that distress was
concentrated in the early 1990s, and not significant in the mid-1980s as Reinhart and Rogoff
suggest or confined to 1988 as the IMF chronology places it. Likewise, for Japan, the other realtime sources agree that there was some distress over almost all of the period 1990:1 to 2005:1
when the new measure shows positive levels of distress, and that it peaked in 1998 and 2002

20
when the new series does. This is very different from the early crisis (1992 to 1997) shown by
the Reinhart and Rogoff chronology and the relatively short crisis (1997 to 2001) shown by the
IMF chronology. Finally, for Norway, where the new series and the IMF chronology identify the
start of problems in late 1991 and Reinhart and Rogoff date it in 1987, the additional sources
support the later date. 10
For the two cases where the IMF and Reinhart and Rogoff identify a crisis while the new
series shows no financial distress—Spain in the late 1970s and early 1980s and Turkey in the
1980s—the additional real-time sources strongly support the new measure for the first and are
somewhat mixed for the second.

For Spain, the IMF Article IV reports, like the OECD,

described no distress, and the other two sources reported only occasional mild problems. In the
case of Turkey, all three additional sources described significant distress—thus conflicting with
the new measure. However, the accounts in the additional sources are noticeably milder than in
episodes where all the chronologies identify a crisis, such as the Nordic countries in the early
1990s—thus supporting a view between that of the alternative chronologies and the new
measure derived from the OECD Economic Outlook.
In the cases of smaller differences in timing between the new series and the alternative
chronologies, the evidence from the additional sources broadly agrees with the OECD, but there
are some differences. Most notably, the OECD is occasionally somewhat slower to identify the
start of financial distress. In the cases of Finland, Sweden, and Turkey (in the early 2000s), the
new series does not depart from zero until about a half-year later than the start of descriptions
of distress in the additional sources. In part, this is due to the fact that, because of production
lags, the OECD Economic Outlook discussed events occurring late in the half-year in the

Importantly, while the additional evidence in these cases corroborates the new measure, it also often
provides clues as to why the alternative chronologies date crises as they did. For example, the records of
the Federal Reserve showed a small amount of concern about the banking system in 1984 and 1985 when
Reinhart and Rogoff date the start of the crisis. Similarly, the Norges Bank discussed minor financial
problems in 1987, the start date of the Norwegian crisis in the Reinhart and Rogoff chronology. In both
cases, however, the additional sources were quite clear that the problems were not of crisis proportions.
10

21
subsequent issue. 11 But it also seems to reflect either some inertia on the part of the OECD or a
slightly high bar for mentioning distress. Because the alternative chronologies also tend to date
crises somewhat earlier than the OECD, in these instances the additional evidence may be more
supportive of them. However, the early distress described in the additional sources is often
relatively limited, and thus perhaps not consistent with the start of a full-fledged crisis.
On the end of financial distress, the new series also differs occasionally from the evidence
in the additional sources. However, the differences are not systematic, nor typically in the
direction of the alternative chronologies.

Importantly, because all four real-time sources

suggested at least somewhat gradual changes, even where there are disagreements about when
distress reached zero, there is close accord that distress was low and falling.
The bottom line of this consideration of additional evidence is that the new series is surely
not perfect, but it is very good. And in the cases where it differs most from the alternative crisis
chronologies, the new series appears to be substantially more accurate. It also has the virtue of
being continuous, which the additional evidence suggests is appropriate and valuable.

III. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FINANCIAL DISTRESS AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Having created a new, continuous measure of financial distress for a sample of advanced
countries, the next step is to see what it shows about the relationship between financial distress
and economic activity.
A. Data and Specification
Data. We focus on two broad indicators of economic activity: industrial production and
real GDP. Both series are available quarterly from the OECD for the 24 countries in our
sample. 12 Industrial production has the virtue of being a relatively straightforward series to
The mid-year Economic Outlook contains information through roughly May, and the end-year volume
through November.
12 The data, which are ultimately collected and reported by the individual countries, are available on the
OECD website: http://www.oecd.org/statistics/. The industrial production data are from the Production
11

22
produce, and so is likely to be quite accurate and consistent across countries. GDP is more
complicated and less transparent; as a result, it may be less consistent across countries. Its
obvious virtue is that it is the broadest measure of economic activity available.
Our measure of financial distress is semiannual. We therefore convert the output data to a
semiannual frequency as well. We do this by taking the quarterly values for the second and
fourth quarters of each year. Since the OECD Economic Outlook is issued at mid-year and at
year-end, the timing of the output data roughly corresponds with the timing of the OECD’s
descriptions of country conditions. In this way, we create a panel dataset including output and
the new distress variable for the 24 OECD countries we consider for the period 1967:1 to 2007:1.
Specification. A key specification issue is the timing assumption of the relationship
between financial distress and economic activity. In deriving our new measure, we have sought
to identify the timing and severity of financial distress more consistently and accurately than
previous crisis chronologies. But our analysis tells us nothing about the ultimate cause of the
financial distress. In particular, our source does not allow us to separate distress caused by
relatively exogenous factors, such as managerial malfeasance, from financial problems caused or
exacerbated by a decline in output or by forces that reduce output directly. As a result, we do
not have enough information to persuasively identify the causal effects of financial distress.
Following the spirit of the previous literature, we take as our baseline specification the case
where financial distress is not affected by output contemporaneously, but output may be
affected by distress within the period. In Sections III.C and III.D, however, we investigate the
validity and importance of this assumption. To preview those findings, we find suggestive
evidence of important reverse causation. Thus, the results from the baseline specification likely
provide an upper-bound estimate of the causal effects of distress.
and Sales Dataset, production of total industry. The GDP data are from the Quarterly National Accounts
Dataset, series VPVOBARSA. Both series were downloaded 7/6/2014. There are some minor gaps in the
two series for some countries. Industrial production data are missing for Australia before 1974Q3;
Denmark before 1974Q1; Iceland before 1998Q1; Ireland before 1975Q3; New Zealand before 1977Q2; and
Turkey before 1985Q1. Real GDP data are missing for Iceland before 1997Q1 and for Greece after 1999Q4.

23
To estimate the behavior of output in the wake of distress, we use the Jordà (2005) local
projection method. The Jordà method runs separate regressions for output at various horizons
starting at time t on the crisis variable at time t and control variables.

The sequence of

coefficient estimates for the various horizons provides a nonparametric estimate of the impulse
response function. As we discuss below, estimating a conventional vector autoregression (VAR)
yields virtually the same results.
The particular specification that we estimate is:
𝑖
,
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 = 𝛼𝑗𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽 𝑖 𝐹𝑗,𝑡 + ∑4𝑘=1 𝜑𝑘𝑖 𝐹𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + ∑4𝑘=1 𝜃𝑘𝑖 𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + 𝑒𝑗,𝑡

(1)

where the j subscripts index countries, the t subscripts index time, and the i superscripts denote
the horizon (half-years after time t) being considered. yj,t+i is the log of output (either industrial
production or real GDP) for country j at time t+i. Fj,t is the financial distress variable for country
j at time t. We include four lags of both the distress variable and the output variable as
controls. 13 We also include country fixed effects (the α’s) to capture the fact that normal output
behavior may differ across countries. Similarly, we include time fixed effects (the γ’s) to control
for economic developments facing all countries in a given year.
We estimate equation (1) for values of i from 0 to 10 half-years. That is, we consider
horizons up to five years after time t. The sequence of coefficients on the financial distress
variable at time t shows the behavior of output in response to an innovation in the distress
variable of 1.

To make the interpretation of the impulse response function more

straightforward, we multiply the coefficients by 7, which is the value of our financial distress
measure corresponding to the start of the “moderate crisis” category. This transformed impulse
response function thus shows the behavior of output following a relatively large impulse in

13 Because we include four lags, the estimation begins in 1969:1. And because we do not want the behavior
of output in the recent period to be driving the results, we do not use output data past 2007:1. The sample
for horizon i therefore ends i half-years before 2007:1. For i = 4, for example, t runs from 1969:1 to
2005:1.

24
financial distress.
In the baseline estimates we include all 24 OECD countries for which we have the new
measure. As discussed above, a considerable fraction of the nonzero observations of financial
distress in our sample comes from Japan. Since this may give it an outsized weight in the
estimation, we also consider the 23-country sample excluding Japan. We consider a number of
additional variations of the baseline estimation in the subsection on robustness below.
B. Behavior of Output Following Financial Crises
We estimate equation (1) for the various horizons using both industrial production and real
GDP. Even at quite distant horizons, the sum of the coefficients on lagged output is close to one.
As a result, the country fixed effects essentially capture differences in average growth rates
across countries. The hypothesis that the country fixed effects are all zero is strongly rejected
for both output measures at all horizons (except the contemporaneous horizon for industrial
production). Similarly, the hypothesis that the time fixed effects are all zero is overwhelmingly
rejected for both output measures at all horizons.
Figure 3 shows the impulse response functions for the two output series estimated over the
full sample of 24 advanced countries, together with the two-standard-error bands. Panel (a)
shows the results for industrial production, and panel (b) for real GDP.
Industrial production falls noticeably at the time of the impulse to the financial distress
variable. The t-statistic on the contemporaneous relationship is over 4 (in absolute value). The
negative effect increases slightly in the half-year after the impulse. However, the absolute size of
the decline following a moderate crisis is modest: the peak effect is a decline of 3.9 percent (t =
–3.2).

To put this number in perspective, Romer and Romer (1989) find that industrial

production fell roughly 12 percent following relatively exogenous shifts to contractionary
monetary policy in the United States in the postwar period. Another noteworthy feature of the
response of industrial production is how quickly the negative impact of a financial crisis

25
dissipates. The effect is a decline of just 1.7 percent (t = –1.2) within a year after the impulse and
zero within two years.
Real GDP also appears to decline contemporaneously with the impulse in the financial
distress variable. The immediate impact of a moderate crisis is a decline in GDP of 3.0 percent
(t = –6.1). This negative effect grows slightly over the 3½ years following the impulse, peaking
at 4.2 percent (t = –2.6). The striking difference between the responses of industrial production
and GDP is that the effects of a crisis on GDP appear to be much more persistent. Though the
standard errors increase substantially at longer horizons, the point estimate of the impact of a
moderate crisis is strongly negative for the full five years that we consider.
This persistence, however, is driven almost entirely by the case of Japan, which, as
described above, gets an outsized weight in the estimation. Japanese real GDP growth slowed
from over 4 percent per year to under 2 percent around the time that its extended financial
troubles began in the early 1990s, and then remained low. As a result, Japan’s experience points
strongly in the direction of financial distress having persistent negative long-run effects. Panel
(b) of Figure 4 shows the impulse response function for GDP when the sample excludes Japan.
The maximum fall in GDP following a moderate crisis is now 3.0 percent (t = –5.2), compared
with a decline of 4.2 percent in the full sample. More notable is the difference in persistence.
Without Japan in the sample, the estimated impact of a financial crisis on GDP begins to
dissipate after six months. By two years after the crisis, the point estimate is effectively zero.
After that, the point estimates turn positive, though the standard errors also become large.
Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows that excluding Japan also affects the estimated impulse
response function for industrial production. The effects of a moderate crisis, which are small in
the full sample, are now virtually nonexistent. The contemporaneous effect is a fall in industrial
production of just 2.5 percent (t = –2.5). The effect, which dissipates fairly quickly in the full
sample, goes away almost instantaneously in the no-Japan sample. By a year after the crisis, the
effect is positive; by two years after, the positive effect is actually significant.

26
The bottom line of the focal empirical results is that the relationship between output and
financial crises is not as dire as the modern conventional wisdom would lead one to believe, at
least in advanced countries. Using our new measure of financial distress and standard timeseries estimation methods, we find that the impact of a financial crisis on output is quite small.
And, with the exception of Japan, the impact does not appear to be very long-lasting. Indeed,
for industrial production, the negative effects are remarkably transitory.
C. Behavior of Financial Distress
The local projection approach to estimating the impulse response function for output does
not provide any information about the evolution and determinants of the distress variable itself.
However, it is straightforward to examine these issues.
The Persistence of Financial Distress. We first consider the response of the financial
distress variable to itself. Given our baseline timing assumption that output does not affect
distress within the period, the approach analogous to our method of estimating the output
effects is to estimate equation (1), replacing the left-hand-side variable with distress at t+i, 𝐹𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 .
For i equal to zero, the coefficient is 1 by construction. We then estimate the equation for
horizons from 1 to 10 half-years after time t. We use GDP as the output control.
Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows the impulse response function of distress to itself, estimated
over the full sample of 24 countries. We again simulate the impact of an impulse of 7 in the
distress variable (a moderate crisis). The figure shows that there is important serial correlation
in financial distress. An impulse of 7 is followed by a value of the new measure of 5.9 a half-year
later. After two periods (1 year), the rate of decay speeds up noticeably, so that by 2½ years
after the impulse any effect of distress on itself is almost gone. 14
That there is substantial serial correlation in the distress variable, particularly at near

We also estimate the impulse response function for the sample excluding Japan. Excluding Japan,
where financial distress was extraordinarily persistent, results in a somewhat more rapid dying out of the
impulse, but otherwise, the results are similar.

14

27
horizons, suggests that some of the near-term persistence we find in the impact of financial
distress on output is likely due to persistence in the distress itself. It is not necessarily that
financial crises have long-lasting effects, but rather that crises themselves tend to last for a
while. This possibility, and the role that differences in the persistence of crises across episodes
play in explaining the variation in output behavior, is analyzed further in Section IV.
Endogeneity. To begin to consider the issue of the endogeneity of financial distress, we
also examine the response of distress to an impulse in output using a similar empirical
approach. Following our baseline timing assumption, we do not allow output to affect distress
contemporaneously. In particular, we estimate:
𝑖
3
𝜑𝑘𝑖 𝐹𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + ∑3𝑘=1 𝜃𝑘𝑖 𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + 𝑒𝑗,𝑡
,
𝐹𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 = 𝛼𝑗𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽 𝑖 𝑌𝑗,𝑡 + ∑𝑘=0

(2)

for horizons 1 through 10. The sequence of 𝛽 𝑖 ’s shows the response of distress at t+1 to t+10 to

output at t, controlling for distress at t. We continue to focus on GDP as our output measure.

Panel (b) of Figure 5 shows the resulting impulse response function of distress to an
innovation in output of −1 percent, along with the two-standard-error bands. The results
suggest that output changes affect financial distress in the expected direction: a fall in output
raises distress.

By assumption the contemporaneous impact is zero; the impact is also

effectively zero at horizons 1 and 2. It then becomes positive and statistically significant. 15 The
effects at longer horizons are small in absolute terms: a fall in output of 1 percent raises distress
by just 0.05 (one-twentieth of a step on our scale of 0 to 15). 16 That the effects are so small is
perhaps not surprising given that output moves around a great deal while nonzero values of
financial distress are relatively infrequent.
The regression for horizon 1 is the same that one would run for a conventional Granger causality test
(where the number of lags of both variables is 4). The F-statistic for the hypothesis that the coefficients
on all of the lags of output are zero is 3.93 with a p-value of 0.004.
16 When industrial production is used as the output variable, the results are qualitatively similar, but the
peak effects are smaller: the maximum impact is 0.03 (t = 3.00). Similarly, when Japan is excluded from
the sample (and GDP is used as the output variable), the qualitative effects are identical, but the point
estimates are slightly smaller than the full-sample GDP estimates.
15

28
At the same time, the fact that the effects are small in absolute terms does not necessarily
imply that reverse causation is unimportant. To set the groundwork for further analysis of this
issue, we consider the response of distress to output, but with the alternative timing assumption
that output can affect distress contemporaneously. This is equivalent to estimating equation (1)
with roles of Y and F reversed, for horizons from 0 to 10.

In this specification, the

contemporaneous effect of a 1 percent fall in output is a rise in distress of 0.05 (t = 6.14). The
effects at horizons 1 and 2 are roughly similar, and later effects are largely unchanged from those
in Figure 5b. Thus, even attributing all of the contemporaneous correlation between the two
series to an effect of output on distress yields a small estimate of the absolute impact.
D. Robustness
We examine the robustness of our findings along several dimensions. We discuss the most
important ones here; online Appendix C describes numerous others.
Alternative Timing Assumptions. One significant robustness check is to continue the
analysis of the alternative timing assumption that any contemporaneous relationship between
distress and output reflects the effect of output on distress.

Under this assumption, the

appropriate way to find the response of output to distress is to estimate equation (2) with the
roles of Y and F reversed, for horizons from 1 to 10. With this change, the coefficient on Fj,t
shows the relationship between output in period t+i and the component of financial distress in
period t that is uncorrelated not just with financial distress and output before period t, but also
with output in period t.
Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows the estimated impulse response function of GDP to distress
under this timing assumption. This change sharply reduces the estimated effects of a financial
crisis.

As before, we consider an impulse equal to 7 on our scale.

By construction, the

contemporaneous effect of a financial crisis on output is now zero. The response at longer
horizons is consistently negative as in the baseline specification, but the null hypothesis of no

29
relationship is now never even close to being rejected. Moreover, the maximum impact of a
financial crisis is only about one-third as large as in the baseline specification. That is, if one
does not interpret any of the contemporaneous correlation between movements in output and
financial distress as reflecting causation from distress to output, our results suggest that a
financial crisis has little impact on output. 17
The fact that distress has little impact on output under the alternative timing assumption
helps to put the size of the impact of output on distress from the previous section (under the
same timing assumption) into perspective. The absolute size of the potential reverse causation
may be small, but it is large enough to lower the estimated impact of distress on output
dramatically.
We also consider a variation on the timing assumption that not only returns to the baseline
specification that output does not affect distress contemporaneously, but goes even further in
assuming that causation runs mainly from distress to output. Our examination of other realtime sources in Section II.E finds that the OECD Economic Outlook was sometimes somewhat
slower than the other sources in identifying financial distress. Thus it is possible that distress
affects economic activity before the distress is reported in the Economic Outlook. To allow for
this possibility, we estimate equation (1) replacing Fj,t with Fj,t+1 (and controlling for Fj,t–k for
k = 0 to 3). With this specification, the impulse response function shows how output starting in
period t behaves when there is an impulse to distress in t+1. Since the evidence discussed in
Section II.E suggests that the average delay in describing distress in the Economic Outlook is
considerably less than a full half-year, this alternative specification almost certainly overstates
the effects of any lag in the OECD’s assessments.
Panel (b) of Figure 6 shows that the estimated effect of an impulse in distress in t+1 on
output at t (that is, at horizon 0) is small and insignificant. The full impulse response function is
17 The results for this alternative specification using industrial production as the output variable are even
more dramatic. The estimated impact of distress is effectively zero at horizon 1; for all later horizons, the
impact is positive, generally moderate in size, and in one case marginally significant.

30
very similar to that in our baseline specification, but with a one-period delay. 18
Overall, this analysis of alternative timing assumptions suggests that the baseline results
are likely to be a rough upper bound of the possible effects of distress on output. Even the
extreme assumption that output does not affect a lead of distress does not result in noticeably
larger estimated effects, and assuming that distress does not affect output contemporaneously
greatly reduces the estimated effects.
Possible Nonlinearities. A second significant robustness issue involves the scaling of
our distress variable. In constructing our measure, we attempted to choose the gradations so
that each step (such as credit disruption–regular to credit disruption–plus, or credit disruption–
plus to minor crisis–minus) is of roughly equal significance. However, since the descriptions in
the OECD Economic Outlook are qualitative rather than quantitative, we may not have been
completely successful in this effort. Moreover, even if each step is of equal importance in its
implications for the cost of credit intermediation, the response of economic activity to increases
in the cost of intermediation may not be linear.
As a simple way of shedding light on the possibility that the effects of financial distress are
nonlinear in our measure, F, we estimate a variant of our baseline specification that allows the
effects of distress to be quadratic in F. In this estimation, we use the baseline assumption that
distress can affect output contemporaneously (but output cannot affect distress within the
period). We then estimate the system of equations:
(3)

𝑖
4
𝜑𝑘𝑖 𝑓�𝐹𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 � + ∑4𝑘=1 𝜃𝑘𝑖 𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + 𝑒𝑗,𝑡
,
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 = 𝛼𝑗𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽 𝑖 𝑓�𝐹𝑗,𝑡 � + ∑𝑘=1

with 𝑓(𝐹) = 𝐹 + 𝑏𝐹 2 . b > 0 corresponds to the case where the gaps between successive steps of

our distress measure increase as one moves up the scale, or where the output effects of equal
increases in distress rise as distress rises. b < 0 corresponds to the opposite case. Our baseline
18 When industrial production is used as the output measure, the effect at horizon 0 is again small and
insignificant. The full impulse response function is similar to that in the baseline (with a one-period
delay), but shows slightly larger negative effects.

31
specification corresponds to the case b = 0. We estimate (3) using nonlinear least squares. For
simplicity, we focus on the results using GDP as the output measure.
The results suggest little nonlinearity. The estimate of b is –0.025 with a standard error of
0.017. Thus, the null hypothesis that the linear specification is correct cannot be rejected.
Moreover, the point estimate implies that the variation across categories is only slightly different
from what we assume in our baseline scaling. For example, in our baseline scaling, a regular
moderate crisis is 4 times as consequential as a regular credit disruption (8 versus 2); in the
quadratic specification, it is 3.4 times as consequential (8 – 0.025(82) versus 2 – 0.025(22)). 19
Other Robustness Issues. Appendix C discusses numerous other robustness checks of
the baseline results.

We examine alternative specifications, such as a single-equation

autoregressive model, a standard vector autoregression, a less parametric way of allowing for
nonlinearity, and including country-specific trends.

We also consider various alternative

samples of both time periods and countries. Finally, we discuss correcting the standard errors
for possible heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. The results in Appendix C show that none
of these permutations make the estimated effects of financial distress on output substantially
larger or more persistent. Indeed, a few of the changes make the effects noticeably weaker.
E. Comparison with Results Using Alternative Chronologies
Given that our new series on financial distress differs in important ways from existing
crisis chronologies, it is useful to compare our findings for the output response with ones
estimated using the other series. As in Section II, we consider both the Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009a) chronology and the dates from the IMF database.

We again only consider the

alternative chronologies for the 24 advanced countries in our sample.

To incorporate the

When we use industrial production as the output measure, the estimate of b is 0.15 with a standard
error of 0.15. Thus, the null hypothesis that the linear specification is correct is again not close to being
rejected. In this case, however, the point estimate suggests that the gaps between successive steps of our
distress measure increase slightly rather than decrease slightly as one moves up the scale. For example, it
implies that a regular moderate crisis is 6.8 times as consequential as a regular credit disruption, rather
than 4 times as consequential.
19

32
alternative chronologies into the empirical framework used above, we simply convert each to a
dummy variable equal to 1 in all half-years from the start to the end of a crisis in a given country,
and 0 otherwise. This allows us to create a panel dataset similar to that created using our new
continuous measure of financial distress.
We estimate equation (1) for various horizons using each of the alternative crisis series in
place of our financial distress variable (the F terms). 20 The resulting impulse response functions
show the effect of a realization of a 1 in the alternative chronology. Since the impulse response
functions we show for our new series are for a realization of a 7 on our scale from 0 to 15 (a
moderate crisis–minus), the experiments considered are roughly comparable.
The impulse response functions for real GDP for both alternative crisis measures are
shown in Figure 7. Panel (a) shows that GDP falls much more slowly when the Reinhart and
Rogoff crisis series is used instead of the new series. There is almost no response in the
contemporaneous half-year, and the impact builds gradually over the next year and a half. Panel
(b) shows that the response of GDP to the IMF crisis variable is substantially faster than that
estimated using the Reinhart and Rogoff series, but still more gradual than when our new
measure is used. With the IMF series, the contemporaneous impact is about one-third of the
maximum impact and only marginally significant. With the new series, the contemporaneous
impact is three-quarters of the maximum, and highly significant.
The difference in the speed of response is unsurprising given the comparison of the various
series in major episodes shown in Figure 2. Reinhart and Rogoff date crises much earlier than
does the new series. Similarly, the IMF chronology also dates crises somewhat before the new
series, and typically well before the new series shows an acute rise. The consideration of
additional real-time evidence in Section II.E suggests that the new measure may sometimes be
slightly late in registering distress. Thus, the actual speed of response of GDP to distress may lie

For the Reinhart and Rogoff series, the data are for 1967:1–2006:2; for the IMF series, they are for
1970:1–2006:2.

20

33
between the results for the new measure and that for the alternative chronologies.
Another feature of the impulse response function estimated using the Reinhart and Rogoff
crisis series is that the maximum impact is remarkably small. Following a crisis, real GDP falls
only 2.3 percent. 21 This is noticeably less than the 4.2 percent fall we find following a moderate
crisis in our new series. The maximum fall using the IMF series is 3.3 percent.
The small response of GDP in advanced countries that we find using the Reinhart and
Rogoff crisis series stands in stark contrast to the usual summary of Reinhart and Rogoff as
showing that the recessions following financial crises are particularly severe. Indeed, Figure
14.4 of This Time is Different (2009a, p. 230) shows that the average peak-to-trough decline in
real GDP per capita in a sample of crises is 9.3 percent.
Much of the smaller effect we find using Reinhart and Rogoff’s crisis dates in our empirical
framework is due to the fact that we are only considering crises in advanced economies in the
post-1967 period. Most of the large declines behind that 9.3 percent average come from postwar
crises in emerging economies (such as Argentina, Thailand, and Indonesia, where the declines in
output per capita were well over 10 percent) and from one crisis before World War II (the U.S.
Great Depression, where the peak-to-trough decline in per capita GDP was close to 30 percent).
Some of the difference also reflects the fact that we are considering the full universe of crises
that Reinhart and Rogoff identify in the 24 OECD countries after 1967. The 9.3 percent is the
average decline in a selected set of severe episodes. Finally, some of the difference reflects our
regression-based empirical approach. Reinhart and Rogoff’s measure of the peak-to-trough
decline in GDP per capita around crises often includes falls that predate the crisis. For example,
in Finland, where the fall in output was very large, most of the decline occurred before the onset
of significant banking problems.

In contrast, the regression procedure only looks at the

behavior of output following the crises. 22
The results using the Reinhart and Rogoff chronology are very similar if we use the dates from the
website for Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) instead of those from Table A.4.1 in the book.
22 In converting both the Reinhart and Rogoff and the IMF crisis dates into a dummy variable, we set the
21

34
A third feature of the impulse response functions for GDP using the alternative
chronologies involves the persistence of the decline. Recall that for the new series using the full
sample, the decline in GDP following a crisis is quite persistent. The same is true following a
crisis in the Reinhart and Rogoff series. In contrast, using the IMF series, there is substantial
bounce back: two-thirds of the GDP decline is reversed within five years after the start of the
crisis.
In the results using the new series, the persistence of the effect of a crisis on GDP is due
entirely to the case of Japan. Japan had a very prolonged period of financial distress, and so the
large slowdown in GDP growth in Japan after 1990 gets a great deal of weight in the estimation.
When Japan is excluded, the GDP effects disappear within two years. In contrast, the results
using the Reinhart and Rogoff series are not very sensitive to the inclusion of Japan. In their
non-scaled series with many crises, Japan gets only a small weight, so excluding it matters
relatively little. For the IMF series, excluding Japan lessens the maximum GDP decline in the
impulse response function by about 20 percent, and causes the effect to go away entirely after
five years. This happens even though the series is not scaled because there are only eight crises
in advanced economies in the period 1970 to 2006 in the IMF chronology—so the experience of
Japan is still getting substantial weight in the full-sample estimates.
The bottom line of the results using alternative crisis chronologies is that for no crisis
measure is the estimated impact of severe financial distress very large.

Using standard

regression techniques on the same sample of advanced economies since 1970 shows quite minor
effects on output. Financial crises just do not seem to be followed by large declines in output in
crisis dummy equal to 1 in all half-years for which the chronology indicates that a country was
experiencing a crisis. An alternative is to set it equal to 1 only in the half-year corresponding to the start
of the crisis. When we use this alternative in the estimation, the impact of a crisis is slightly more
negative and slightly less precisely estimated. For example, using the IMF chronology, the impact on GDP
in the full sample after five half-years is –3.3 percent (s.e. = 1.1) for the full dummy and –3.8 percent (s.e.
= 1.6) for the start-only dummy. Both of these differences make sense. The fall in GDP at the start of a
crisis tends to be sharper than the rise when the crisis ends. As a result, including late phases of a crisis in
the dummy leads to smaller estimated negative impacts. Looking only at the start of crises discards
information about how long crises last. Thus, it would be surprising if the standard errors did not rise
when the start-only dummy is used.

35
advanced economies in the modern period, whichever chronology is used. 23
Nevertheless, there are interesting differences across the results for the various crisis
measures. Using our new measure of financial distress, the impact of crises appears to be much
faster than when the alternative crisis measures are used. Also, when Japan is excluded from
the sample, any impacts of crises appear to be much less persistent when the new measure of
financial distress is used. Thus, using the new measure challenges the notion that the effects of
crises are particularly long-lasting.

IV. VARIATION IN THE AFTERMATH OF FINANCIAL CRISES ACROSS EPISODES
So far, we have used our new measure of financial distress in modern advanced economies
to examine the usual relationship between financial crises and economic activity. We turn now
to the question of how that relationship varies across episodes.
A. Analysis of Key Episodes
To investigate the variation across episodes, we focus on the cases where there was the
most significant financial distress. Specifically, we look at all of the cases where our new
measure reached at least 7 on our scale. There are seven of these: Finland in 1993:1; Japan in
1997:2 and again in 2002:1; Norway in 1991:2; Sweden in 1993:1; Turkey in 2001:1, and the
United States in 1990:2. For simplicity, we treat the two Japanese crises as a single episode
beginning in 1997:2.
That the effects of crises in advanced countries using the Reinhart and Rogoff and IMF chronologies are
modest is somewhat surprising given that Cerra and Saxena (2008) find large effects using a simple
autoregressive specification and the Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) crisis dates that were the precursor to
both of these later alternatives. Some of the difference is surely due to the specific crisis dates used; the
current IMF series, in particular, modifies the Caprio and Klingebiel dates substantially. But some of the
difference is due to the empirical specification. Cerra and Saxena do not include time fixed effects in their
regressions, but all of our specifications do (and the F-tests indicate strongly that they are important).
Omitting time fixed effects leads to substantially larger estimates of the fall in output following crises.
Also, in our baseline specification for the alternative chronologies, we use a dummy variable equal to 1 in
all half-years when there was a crisis; Cerra and Saxena use a dummy equal to 1 only at the start of a
crisis. Though this difference in specification has little impact when the Jordà approach is used, it
matters more in the one-equation autoregressive specification used by Cerra and Saxena—mainly through
its effect on the experiment simulated.
23

36
We compare what actually happened in each country following its crisis with what one
would have predicted based only on the previous behavior of real GDP. In many of the episodes,
our measure shows noticeable financial distress one half-year before it reached 7. Since output
in that half-year might already have been affected by that distress, we ask what one would have
predicted given the behavior of GDP through two half-years before our measure reached 7.
To construct these forecasts, we run the same type of regressions as before, but without any
of the financial distress variables. That is, using our panel dataset of GDP in the 24 countries,
we estimate:
(4)

𝑖
,
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 = 𝛼𝑗𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡𝑖 + ∑4𝑘=1 𝜃𝑘𝑖 𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + 𝑒𝑗,𝑡

where the definition of all of the variables is the same as before. We estimate (4) for various
values of i. 24 The equations show how for our sample of countries and years taken altogether,
output forecasts future output. To form the forecast for each episode, we take the relevant fitted
values for the particular country and period from the sequence of regressions. 25 Consider, for
example, the moderate crisis in the United States in 1990:2, for which we want to use GDP data
through 1989:2. The forecast for 1990:1 is the fitted value from the regression for horizon 0 for
the United States for t = 1990:1; the forecast for 1990:2 is the fitted value from the regression for
horizon 1 for t = 1990:1; and so on. The univariate forecast results for each episode are shown
by the red lines in Figure 8. The blue lines in each panel show the actual path of output.
In one case, Norway in 1991:2 (panel c), actual output is consistently above the univariate
forecast. This suggests that conditional on what had happened to GDP up through a year before
the crisis, there was no negative impact of the acute financial distress at all. In another case, the
United States in 1990:2 (panel f), actual GDP is less than 2 percent below the forecast—again
24 The starting date for the estimation is 1969:1. As before, we do not use any GDP data after 2007:1. This
means that the end date of the sample moves back by one half-year for each step forward in the horizon.
25 Because the forecasting regression estimation includes all observations for every country, actual
outcomes in the key episodes are influencing the forecasts. However, because there are many countries
and many years, that influence is limited for any one episode.

37
suggesting at most small effects of the acute financial distress. And in two other cases, Finland
in 1993:1 (panel a) and Sweden in 1993:1 (panel d), actual GDP is 2 to 4 percent below the
univariate forecast for roughly a year following the acute distress. This could be consistent with
acute financial distress having some impact, but not a large one.
Finally, in two cases, Japan in 1997:2 (panel b) and Turkey in 2001:1 (panel e), the
difference between actual and forecasted GDP is very large. This could suggest that the effects
of a financial crisis were particularly large in these two episodes. Interestingly, the time pattern
of the forecast errors is very different in the two cases. For Turkey, the largest forecast errors
are in the contemporaneous period and six months after the acute distress. At six months, the
difference between actual and forecasted output is –11 percent. But the gap then fades rapidly;
by three years after the crisis, GDP is above the univariate forecast. For Japan, the difference is
initially only moderate, but then rises dramatically. By three years after the crisis, actual output
is 16 percent below the forecast based on output up through a year before the acute financial
distress.
The key point of these forecasting exercises is that the behavior of output following
financial crises is highly variable. It ranges from the same or better than predicted from a
univariate autoregressive forecasting equation to dramatically worse.
B. Explaining the Variation
Having found substantial variation in the behavior of output following acute financial
distress in six key episodes, the natural next step is to try to understand it. The explanation that
can be tested most readily is that the variation in the behavior of output following a crisis
depends on what happens to the financial distress itself. Even conditional on hitting a 7 on our
scale of financial distress, some crises are more severe or more persistent than others. Perhaps
those differences explain the variation in the output response.
To test this hypothesis, we expand our simple forecasting equation to include the financial

38
distress variable up through the horizon of the output variable. That is, we estimate:
(5)

𝑖
.
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+𝑖 = 𝛼𝑗𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡𝑖 + ∑𝑖𝑘=−4 𝜑𝑘𝑖 𝐹𝑗,𝑡+𝑘 + ∑4𝑘=1 𝜃𝑘𝑖 𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑘 + 𝑒𝑗,𝑡

As before, we estimate the regression for various values of i. To form the forecasts for each
episode, we take the relevant fitted values from the sequence of regressions. Because the
financial distress variable has the same horizon as the output variable, we are using the actual
evolution of the distress variable in the prediction. As before, we only use output up through a
year before our measure reached 7.
The green line in each panel of Figure 8 shows the forecast including the actual path of the
financial distress variable. The results suggest that the severity or persistence (or both) of the
financial distress explains much of the discrepancy between the simple univariate forecast of
output and what actually happened in the key episodes.
The most striking case is Japan (panel b). The green and blue lines are very close for the
first year following the distress variable reaching 7. That is, the forecast including the actual
realizations of the distress variable matches actual GDP closely. After a year, the two diverge.
But then the forecast including the actual evolution of the distress variable falls again and
remains anemic, concurrent with the second bout of acute distress in Japan in the early 2000s.
After 5 years, the forecast including the actual evolution of the distress variable deviates from
actual GDP behavior by only about one-quarter as much as the forecast based on output alone.
This suggests that much of Japan’s dismal economic performance following its initial bout of
acute financial distress is related to the fact that the distress was particularly severe and longlasting. At the same time, the shortfall of GDP from the forecast that includes the actual path of
distress remains substantial in absolute terms.
For both Finland and Sweden (panels a and d), where the univariate forecast and actual
GDP are moderately different, including the evolution of financial distress again brings the
forecast much closer to the actual series, both in the near term and at longer horizons. Indeed,

39
for Finland, the forecast including the evolution of distress is virtually identical to actual output.
For Turkey (panel e), the forecast including the actual evolution of the financial distress
variable is certainly closer to the actual behavior of GDP than is the forecast based only on
lagged output. The forecast error in the first half-year after the onset of acute distress falls from
–11 percent to –7 percent. However, that a very large discrepancy remains suggests that factors
other than acute financial distress played a role in this episode. For example, the fact that
Turkey’s financial crisis was accompanied by a severe currency crisis may have exacerbated the
output decline. Turkey is also one of the least advanced economies in our sample. It is possible
that financial crises have larger impacts or that real GDP is simply more volatile in less
developed economies.
For the United States (panel f), the forecast including the actual evolution of distress is
substantially worse than what actually happened.

That is, including distress more than

eliminates the univariate forecast error. At the same time, in the year following the acute
distress, the expanded forecast is closer to actual output than the univariate forecast, suggesting
that the evolution of distress may explain some of the unusual behavior of output in the United
States in this period.
Finally, for Norway, where the univariate forecast is consistently below actual output,
including the actual evolution of distress makes the forecast errors even larger. Based on the
fact that Norway had a relatively severe panic, with a second acute phase a year after the first,
the forecast including the evolution of the distress variable is quite weak for nearly two years.
Yet actual output barely paused. This suggests that the behavior of distress provides little
insight into the behavior of the Norwegian economy in this period.
The bottom line of the analysis of this section is that there is substantial variation in the
behavior of output following financial distress. The severity and persistence of this distress in
particular episodes appears to explain much, but certainly not all, of this variation.

40
V. CONCLUSION
The conventional wisdom has become that financial crises are followed by large downturns
and weak recoveries. Yet at least for advanced countries, the prior evidence supporting this
conclusion is limited. It is based on chronologies for crises that differ substantially from one
another; that were constructed after-the-fact, often using imprecise criteria; and that simplify a
continuum of possible degrees of financial distress to a 0-1 variable or just a handful of
categories. Moreover, the conclusions about the aftermath of crises are typically based on
samples dominated by crises in developing countries or in the prewar era; and they are often
derived using relatively simple empirical techniques, such as comparisons of recessions with and
without crises.
Findings. This paper therefore revisits the aftermath of financial crises in advanced
countries in the postwar era. We construct a new financial distress series for 24 countries from
1967 to 2007 using accounts of member country conditions prepared twice a year by the OECD.
Our new series classifies financial distress into numerous gradations, which we scale from 0 to
15.
The new series displays both important similarities and important differences with
previous crisis chronologies. There is agreement about the presence and approximate timing of
many of the most severe crises. But the timing of distress in the new measure sometimes differs
substantially from the dates identified in earlier chronologies. In addition, the new series often
shows important variation over time within episodes in the severity of distress; by construction,
other chronologies do not show such variation. Finally, a few episodes that previous series
identify as important crises do not show up at all in our new measure. Analysis of three other
real-time sources largely confirms the accuracy of the new series.
Studying the aftermath of crises using our new series and standard regression techniques
leads to a view that is very different from the conventional wisdom.

Crises in advanced

countries are associated with falls in output, but the falls are only moderate. When measured

41
using industrial production, output quickly rebounds and returns to its pre-crisis path. When
measured using GDP, output does not bounce back, but this pattern is driven entirely by the
experience of Japan. Interestingly, these findings are due only partly to our new measure of
financial distress.

Using conventional regression techniques with previous chronologies of

postwar financial crises in advanced countries also does not provide strong support for the view
that the aftermaths of crises are persistently grim.
We also find considerable variation in the aftermath of significant crises. In some cases,
there was hardly any departure of output from its pre-crisis path. In others, output fell below
the pre-crisis path but was soon noticeably above it. And in the case of Japan in the late 1990s,
output fell further and further below the pre-crisis path.

One factor that appears to be

important to the variation is the severity and persistence of the crisis itself. Cases where the
financial distress was more limited and resolved quickly were associated with more favorable
outcomes.
Understanding the Aftermath of the 2008 Crisis. Our study was motivated in part
by a desire to understand the experience following the 2008 financial crisis. Why was the
downturn in 2008–2009 so extreme and the subsequent recovery so anemic in many advanced
countries? Our finding that the fall in output following financial crises in such countries is
typically modest suggests that the easy explanation for the poor economic performance—this is
what always happens after a financial crisis—is unlikely to be true. Rather, factors specific to the
2008 episode are likely to have been key.
The factor most directly linked to our results involves the severity and persistence of the
recent financial distress. The 2008 crisis was the worst in nearly a century in the United States
and Europe. And, although it has been over half a decade since the acute phase of the crisis,
banks in many European countries are still viewed as troubled and as constraining the
availability of credit. Since we find that greater severity and persistence of financial distress is
associated with worse performance following a crisis, the extreme nature of the recent distress is

42
one likely reason for the severe and continuing economic weakness.
A related factor is that the recent financial crisis was essentially worldwide, while other
postwar episodes of severe financial distress were limited to individual countries or narrow
regions.

When a crisis is confined to a single country or to just a few, healthy financial

institutions abroad may offset some of the reduction in credit supply from domestic lenders. A
worldwide crisis means that there are few healthy lenders to step into the void. More generally,
a crisis in one country may have adverse spillovers to others. One would therefore expect a
given rise in domestic financial distress to be associated with worse outcomes when distress also
increases in other countries.
While the greater severity and worldwide nature of the financial distress may be part of the
explanation for the terrible aftermath of the 2008 crisis, there are other possibilities. For
example, the period before the crisis witnessed large housing booms and accumulations of
household debt in many major countries. Mian and Sufi (2014) argue that these developments,
rather than the financial crisis itself, were the main drivers of the downturn and, especially, of
the weak recovery. Similarly, worldwide fiscal retrenchment may have played a role. The shifts
to tighter fiscal policy that began in continental Europe in late 2009 and early 2010, the United
Kingdom in 2010, and the United States in 2011 cannot explain the severity of the downturn, but
they may have been important to the slow recovery.
Finally, the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates may have exacerbated the effects of
the recent financial crisis. Central banks in advanced countries often respond to financial
distress by reducing their policy rates. But those rates have been at or near zero in most major
advanced countries since 2009. The constraint on this usual cushioning mechanism may have
magnified the effects of the financial crisis. This possibility is consistent with our finding that,
even accounting for the actual behavior of financial distress, Japan’s output performance
following its crisis was worse than would have been predicted. Japan’s policy rate has been
close to zero almost without interruption since shortly after the peak of its financial crisis in the

43
late 1990s, and it is the only country in our sample that encountered the zero lower bound in the
period we consider.
Limitations and Questions for Further Study. In many ways, our findings raise
more questions than they answer. With respect to the recent episode, much research is needed
to determine if one of the possibilities mentioned above, a combination of those factors, or
something else explains the poor economic performance of advanced countries since 2008.
With respect to the effects of crises more generally, one important limitation of previous
work that our paper does not address involves the issue of causation. Lower output is likely to
weaken financial institutions and so contribute to financial distress, and there may be factors
that cause both higher distress and lower output. As a result of this omitted variable bias, the
correlation between distress and output estimated in our baseline specification is likely to
overstate the adverse effect of crises.

One indication that the overstatement may be

considerable is that essentially all of the relationship between distress and output that we find
arises from the contemporaneous relationship.

Isolating the causal effects of crises is a

challenging and important topic for future work.
Another limitation of our analysis is that it only looks at the experience of advanced
countries. This may in fact be a virtue if the response of advanced countries to financial distress
is different from that in developing countries. At the same time, it means that our results do not
provide any direct information about the impact of financial distress in emerging economies.
Importantly, such issues as difficulties in the identification of crises and complications arising
from the use of simple summary statistics may also be relevant to investigations of the aftermath
of financial crises in developing countries. Indeed, because output in developing countries is
generally more volatile and the data are typically of lower quality, these problems could be even
more serious in that setting. Thus, addressing these concerns for developing countries is
another important area for future research.
In addition, we consider only one source of variation in the aftermath of crises—differences

44
in the severity and persistence of the financial distress itself. As suggested in the case of the
2008 crisis, many other factors may play a role. Thus another valuable area for future research
is identifying and determining what else might explain the variation in the effects of distress
across episodes.
Finally, there is still a great deal that we need to understand about the role of policy. In the
conventional view that the aftermath of financial crises is uniformly awful, the policy focus is
naturally just on preventing crises.

But our finding that there is substantial variation in

outcomes suggests different questions. Are there policies that can be undertaken in normal
times not just to reduce the chances of crises, but to make their consequences less grave if they
occur? What policy actions when a crisis occurs—in addition to steps to lessen the crisis and
resolve it quickly—could minimize its effects? The answers to these questions are important for
ensuring not just that each time is different, but that none is terrible.

45
TABLE 1
Financial Distress in OECD Countries, 1967:1–2007:1

Finland
1992:1
1992:2
1993:1
1993:2
1994:1

Credit disruption–regular
Minor crisis–plus
Moderate crisis–regular
Minor crisis–regular
Credit disruption–plus

France
1991:2
1995:1
1995:2
1996:1
1996:2
1997:1

Credit disruption–minus
Credit disruption–regular
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Minor crisis–regular
Credit disruption–plus

Germany
1974:2
2003:1

Credit disruption–regular
Credit disruption–minus

Iceland
2006:2
2007:1

Minor crisis–regular
Credit disruption–regular

Italy
1997:1

Credit disruption–minus

Japan
1990:2
1991:1
1991:2
1992:1
1992:2
1993:1
1993:2
1994:1
1994:2
1995:1
1995:2
1996:1
1996:2
1997:1
1997:2
1998:1
1998:2

Credit disruption–plus
Credit disruption–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Credit disruption–plus
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Credit disruption–plus
Credit disruption–plus
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Minor crisis–plus
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Moderate crisis–minus
Major crisis–regular
Extreme crisis–minus

Japan (continued)
1999:1
Moderate crisis–plus
1999:2
Minor crisis–plus
2000:1
Minor crisis–minus
2000:2
Credit disruption–plus
2001:1
Minor crisis–plus
2001:2
Minor crisis–plus
2002:1
Moderate crisis–regular
2002:2
Moderate crisis–minus
2003:1
Minor crisis–plus
2003:2
Minor crisis–regular
2004:1
Minor crisis–minus
2004:2
Credit disruption–plus
2005:1
Credit disruption–regular
Norway
1991:2
1992:1
1992:2
1993:1
1993:2
1994:1

Moderate crisis–plus
Minor crisis–regular
Moderate crisis–regular
Minor crisis–plus
Credit disruption–plus
Credit disruption–regular

Sweden
1992:2
1993:1

Minor crisis–regular
Moderate crisis–regular

Turkey
2001:1
2001:2
2002:1
2002:2
2003:1
2003:2

Moderate crisis–regular
Moderate crisis–regular
Minor crisis–plus
Minor crisis–minus
Minor crisis–minus
Credit disruption–regular

United States
1986:1
1990:1
1990:2
1991:1
1991:2
1992:1
1998:2
2007:1

Credit disruption–minus
Minor crisis–regular
Moderate crisis–regular
Minor crisis–minus
Credit disruption–plus
Credit disruption–regular
Credit disruption–plus
Credit disruption–minus

Notes: Based on the OECD Economic Outlook. The Economic Outlook does not describe any disruptions
or crises in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The sample period is 1967:1–
2007:1 for all countries except Australia (1971:2–2007:1), Finland (1969:1–2007:1), and New Zealand
(1973:1–2007:1). Countries that joined the OECD after 1993 are not considered.

46
EXHIBIT 1
Sample Descriptions of Episodes from Online Appendix A
A. Credit Disruption–Regular
Germany, 1974:2. The OECD reported that during the summer, “considerable losses of exchange
reserves and the imminent danger of a confidence crisis imposed particular strains on the banking
system,” and that “[s]pecial credit facilities were extended to small and medium-sized companies and
reserve requirements were reduced in September and October” (p. 26; see also p. 51). And in a discussion
of Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States, it stated, “Recent strains on the banking system
in all three countries have underlined the unfavourable climate in bank lending markets. … There is
evidence in all three countries that smaller companies have been particularly severely rationed or priced
out of bank lending markets” (p. 50). Notably, there was no mention of financial-market difficulties in the
section that was specifically devoted to Germany. Given that omission, it is clear that the OECD did not
view financial-market problems as being a major factor in the behavior of the German economy. On the
other hand, it identified strains on the banking system, and Germany had perceived a need for special
facilities to support lending to certain types of businesses.
This disruption seems similar to that in the United States in 1992:1 (which we classify as a regular
credit disruption), and less serious than that in the United States in 1991:2 (which we classify as a credit
disruption–plus). We code this episode as a credit disruption–regular.

B. Minor Crisis–Regular
France, 1996:1. The OECD reported (p. 78):
In 1995, the banking sector continued to suffer from low credit demand, high refinancing and
operating costs and large provisions for bad debts. As a result, profitability has been very low
by international comparison. The State has provided financial support to some banks and
insurance companies, and several financial companies have created special corporate
structures in order to assure that prudential ratios are higher than required. Lower short-term
interest rates will reduce refinancing costs and help the financial sector to restore profitability.
However, the current level of provisions still does not cover all doubtful credits as the real
estate market has softened again and the restructuring of the banking sector is advancing only
slowly.
The combination of the significant problems in the banking sector, the statement that banks faced high
refinancing costs, and the fact that the banking problems were not given a central role in the OECD’s
discussion of the outlook causes us to identify this episode as a minor crisis–regular. This classification is
consistent the fact that we classify France in 1995:2 as a minor crisis–minus, and that the description of
the health of the banking sector in this issue is slightly more negative.

C. Moderate Crisis–Regular
Sweden, 1993:1. In the summary of its entry, the OECD said, “Steeply falling property values have
led to a sharp increase in corporate bankruptcies and heavy loan losses in banks’ balance sheets” (p. 113).
A paragraph devoted to the financial system reported (p. 115):
Falling asset values and corporate bankruptcies linked to the collapse in the commercial
property market have provoked an unprecedented increase in banks’ loan losses. These
reached Skr 70 billion in 1992 (7.7 per cent of outstanding loans), up from Skr 36 billion in
1991. Losses are widely expected to remain high in 1993. With the capital bases of most major

47
banks rapidly eroding, the Government has guaranteed that banks can meet their
commitments. Government rescue operations are officially estimated to burden the 1992/93
budget by Skr 22 billion (1½ per cent of GDP), with off-budget loans and guarantees
amounting to an additional Skr 46 billion (over 3 per cent of GDP). It is not known what scale
of rescue operations will be needed in the 1993/94 budget.
Finally, in discussing risks to the outlook, the OECD stated, “greater weakness of demand could be
accentuated by rising capital costs in the event of larger loan losses. This would … risk reducing credit
supply” (p. 115).
This episode is similar to Norway in 1992:2 and Finland in 1993:1. The most obvious difference is
that in this case, the OECD devoted a sentence in its summary to the financial-market problems. But the
financial system was starting from a slightly better position than Finland’s was (as described above, we
code Sweden in 1992:2 as a minor crisis–regular, whereas we classify Finland in 1992:2 as a minor crisis–
plus). And, in contrast to the discussion of Norway, there was no explicit reference to firms facing
difficulties in obtaining financing. We therefore also classify this episode as a moderate crisis–regular.

D. Extreme Crisis–Minus
Japan, 1998:2. As just discussed, we classify Japan in 1998:1 as a major crisis–regular. Here, the
OECD described a situation that was notably worse. Among its stronger phrases were “financial
paralysis” (p. 20); the “breakdown in the credit creation mechanism, and the resulting widening of
creditor risk premia” (p. 44); “banks remain in dire straits as risk premia widen” (p. 45); “the increasingly
serious situation in the banking sector” (p. 45); and “credit crunch” (which it used repeatedly). In
addition, it discussed major government interventions in the financial system: “a broad agreement was
achieved in the Diet to revitalise the financial system. The new legislation includes important measures to
deal with financial sector problems. To support this, the Government has made an unprecedentedly large
sum of public funds available to recapitalize the banking system, amounting overall to around ¥ 60
trillion, or about 12 per cent of GDP” (p. ix).
The OECD made it clear that those developments were having an important impact on the economy.
For example, it said, “a profound lack of confidence, in large part due to the severe and prolonged crisis in
the banking system, has depressed private spending” (p. 20); reported that “the balance sheet problems of
the banking sector remain unresolved, and the resulting uncertainty has led to diminished confidence
among consumers and investors, leading to sharp declines in private spending” (p. 42); and referred to
“risks of a deflationary spiral arising in part from the unresolved problems in the banking sector” (p. 44).
However, although there had clearly been a nontrivial deterioration from 1998:1, the OECD did not
describe the situation as qualitatively changed. For example, it said, “banking sector problems were not
improving” (p. ix), and referred to “continued concerns about the health of the financial system” (p. 12).
And in the summary of its entry, it stated, “The credit crunch is continuing” (p. 42). Also, as noted above,
it commented that “banks remain in dire straits” (p. 45).
Thus, the financial-sector problems had become significantly but not dramatically worse. We
therefore classify this episode as two steps more serious than in 1998:1, which corresponds to an extreme
crisis–minus.

48
FIGURE 1
New Measure of Financial Distress for Advanced Countries

12
10
8
6
4

Finland

France

Germany

Iceland

Italy

Japan

Norway

Sweden

Turkey

United States

2007:1

2005:1

2003:1

2001:1

1999:1

1997:1

1995:1

1993:1

1991:1

1989:1

1987:1

1985:1

1983:1

1981:1

1979:1

1977:1

1975:1

1973:1

1971:1

0

1969:1

2

1967:1

Measure of Financial Distress (0 to 15)

14

Notes: See text and Appendix A for details about the derivation of the new measure. The data are
available semiannually from 1967:1 to 2007:1. The figure only shows the data for the ten OECD countries
that had some nonzero values of our measure. In the new measure, 0 corresponds to no financial distress;
1, 2, and 3 correspond to gradations of credit disruptions; 4, 5, and 6 to gradations of minor crises; 7, 8,
and 9 to gradations of moderate crises; 10, 11, and 12 to gradations of major crises; and 13, 14, and 15 to
gradations of extreme crises.

49
FIGURE 2
Comparison of the New Measure and Other Crisis Chronologies for Key Episodes
a. Finland

b. Japan
14

2

Romer
& Romer

c. Norway
14

4

e. Turkey

8

1998:1

1997:1

1996:1

1995:1

6
4

IMF

1993:1

1992:1

1991:1

1990:1

0

1989:1

2
1988:1

2005:1

2003:1

2001:1

1999:1

1995:1

1993:1

1991:1

1989:1

1987:1

1985:1

1997:1

Romer
& Romer

2

Romer
& Romer

1987:1

4

10

1986:1

6

Reinhart
& Rogoff

1984:1

8

12

1983:1

New Distress Measure

IMF

10

1983:1

1994:1

14

Reinhart
& Rogoff

1981:1

New Distress Measure

1992:1

f. United States

14
12

1993:1

2
0

1996:1

1995:1

1994:1

1993:1

1992:1

1991:1

1990:1

1989:1

1988:1

1987:1

2

6

1991:1

4

8

1985:1

6

IMF
Romer
& Romer

1990:1

Romer
& Romer

10

1989:1

8

Reinhart
& Rogoff

12

1988:1

New Distress Measure

IMF

10

1986:1

New Distress Measure

Reinhart
& Rogoff

12

0

2006:1

d. Sweden

14

0

2004:1

1998:2

1997:2

1996:2

1995:2

1994:2

1993:2

1992:2

1991:2

1990:2

0
1989:2

0

4

2002:1

2

6

2000:1

4

8

1998:1

6

IMF

1996:1

8

10

1994:1

Romer
& Romer

Reinhart
& Rogoff

12

1992:1

10

IMF

1990:1

12

New Distress Measure

Reinhart
& Rogoff

1988:2

New Distress Measure

14

Notes: The vertical lines represent the start and end date of financial crises in the Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009a) and IMF (Laeven and Valencia, 2013, 2014) chronologies, converted to semiannual observations
as described in the text.

50
FIGURE 3
Impulse Response Functions, Output to Financial Distress, Full Sample
a. Industrial Production
8

Response of IP (Percent)

6
4
2
0
-2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

-4
-6
-8
Half-Years After the Impulse

b. Real GDP

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
Half-Years After the Impulse

Notes: The figures show the impulse response function for output to an impulse of 7 in our new measure
of financial distress derived from estimating equation (1) for the full sample of 24 OECD countries. The
dashed lines show the two-standard-error confidence bands.

51
FIGURE 4
Impulse Response Functions, Output to Financial Distress, Sample Excluding Japan
a. Industrial Production
20

Response of IP (Percent)

15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

-5
-10
Half-Years After the Impulse

b. Real GDP

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

8
6
4
2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-2
-4
-6
Half-Years After the Impulse

Notes: The figures show the impulse response function for output to an impulse of 7 in our new measure
of financial distress derived from estimating equation (1) for the sample of countries excluding Japan.
The dashed lines show the two-standard-error confidence bands.

52
FIGURE 5
Impulse Response Functions, Distress to Distress and Distress to Output, Full Sample
a. Distress to Distress

Response of Distress (Level)

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

Half-Years After the Impulse

b. Distress to Output

Response of Distress (Level)

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.02
-0.04
Half-Years After the Impulse

Notes: Panel (a) shows the response of the new measure of financial distress to an impulse to itself of 7.
See text for a discussion of the regression specification. Panel (b) shows the response of financial distress
to a fall in output of 1 percent derived from estimating equation (2) for the full sample of 24 OECD
countries, using GDP as the output variable. The dashed lines show the two-standard-error bands.

53
FIGURE 6
Impulse Response Functions, GDP to Financial Distress, Alternative Timing Assumptions
a. Distress in t Cannot Affect Output in t

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

4
2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-2
-4
-6
-8
Half-Years After the Impulse

b. Distress in t+1 Can Affect Output in t

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
Half-Years After Time t

Notes: Panel (a) shows the impulse response function for GDP to an impulse of 7 in our new measure of
financial distress derived from estimating equation (2) with F and Y reversed for the full sample of 24
OECD countries. Panel (b) shows the impulse response function for GDP derived from estimating
equation (1), but replacing Ft with Ft+1; see text for details. The dashed lines show the two-standard-error
confidence bands.

54
FIGURE 7
Impulse Response Functions, GDP to Crisis, Other Chronologies
a. Reinhart and Rogoff

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

3
2
1
0
-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
Half-Years After the Impulse

b. IMF

Response of Real GDP (Percent)

3
2
1
0
-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
Half-Years After the Impulse

Notes: The figures show the response of GDP to an impulse of 1 in the Reinhart and Rogoff and IMF crisis
series, respectively, derived from estimating equation (1) for the same sample of OECD countries we
analyze. The dashed lines show the two-standard-error confidence bands.

55
FIGURE 8
Actual and Forecasted GDP Following Crises
a. Finland, 1993:1

b. Japan, 1997:2
25

20

Forecasted and Actual GDP

Forecasted and Actual GDP

25
Actual

15
10
5

Forecast Based on Output

0
-5

Forecast Including Distress
-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

20

Forecast Including Distress

10
5
0
-5

10

Forecast Based on Output

15

Actual
-2

-1

0

1

2

Half-Years

c. Norway, 1991:2
Forecasted and Actual GDP

Forecasted and Actual GDP

Actual

6

7

8

9

10

15
10

Forecast Based on Output

5
0
Forecast Including Distress
-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

20
15

Forecast Based on Output

10
5
Forecast Including Distress

0
-5

10

Actual
-2 -1

0

1

2

Half-Years

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

9

10

Half-Years

e. Turkey, 2001:1

f. United States, 1990:2

35

25

30

Forecasted and Actual GDP

Forecasted and Actual GDP

5

25

20

Actual

25
20
15
10

Forecast Based on Output

5
0

Forecast Including Distress

-5
-10

4

d. Sweden, 1993:1

25

-5

3

Half-Years

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Half-Years

6

7

8

9

10

20
15

Actual

10
5

Forecast Based on Output

0
Forecast Including Distress
-5

-2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Half-Years

Notes: All values are expressed as 100 times the difference between the log of the series and the log of
actual GDP a year before the distress variable hit 7. Thus it is an index equal to zero a year before the
crisis. The forecast based on output is derived by estimating equation (4), and uses actual data up
through a year (two half-years) before the distress variable hit 7. The forecast including distress is derived
by estimating equation (5), and uses output through a year before the distress variable hit 7 and the actual
financial distress series through the date being forecast.

56
REFERENCES
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression.” American Economic Review 73 (June): 257–276.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria.
2001. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 16 (April): 51–82.
Bordo, Michael D., and Joseph G. Haubrich. 2012. “Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and
Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record.” NBER Working Paper No. 18194
(June).
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. 1996. “Bank Insolvencies: Cross-Country
Experience.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1620 (July).
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. 1999. “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline
Financial Crises.” Unpublished paper, World Bank (October).
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. 2003. “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline
Financial Crises.” Unpublished paper, World Bank (January).
Caprio, Gerard, Daniela Klingebiel, Luc Laeven, and Guillermo Noguera. 2005. “Appendix:
Banking Crisis Database.” In Patrick Honohan and Luc Laeven, eds., Systemic Financial
Crises: Containment and Resolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 307–
340.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Marion Kohler, and Christian Upper. 2009. “Financial Crises and
Economic Activity.” In Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy. Kansas City:
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 89–135.
Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic
Recovery.” American Economic Review 98 (March): 439–457.
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones. 2009. “What Happens during
Recessions, Crunches, and Busts?” Economic Policy 24 (April): 653–700.
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones. 2014. “The Global Financial Crisis:
How Similar? How Different? How Costly?” In Stijn Claessens, M. Ayhan Kose, Luc
Laeven, and Fabián Valencia, eds., Financial Crises: Causes, Consequences, and Policy
Responses. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, pp. 209–237.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories of the Twentieth Century for
the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (January): 226–265.
Hoggarth, Glenn, Ricardo Reis, and Victoria Saporta. 2002. “Costs of Banking System
Instability: Some Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Banking and Finance 26 (May): 825–
855.
International Monetary Fund. 2009a. “From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How
Strong?” Chapter 3 of World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery (April): 97–132.

57
International Monetary Fund. 2009b. “What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics
after Financial Crises.” Chapter 4 of World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery
(October): 121–151.
Jalil, Andrew. 2013. “A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825–1929:
Construction and Implications.”
Unpublished paper, Occidental College (March).
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.”
American Economic Review 95 (March): 161–182.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. “When Credit Bites Back.” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 45 (December, Supplement): 3–28.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89 (June):
473–500.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia. 2013. “Systemic Banking Crises Database.” IMF Economic
Review 61 (June): 225–270.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia. 2014. “Systemic Banking Crises.” In Stijn Claessens, M.
Ayhan Kose, Luc Laeven, and Fabián Valencia, eds., Financial Crises:
Causes,
Consequences, and Policy Responses. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund,
pp. 61–137.
López-Salido, David, and Edward Nelson. 2010. “Postwar Financial Crises and Economic
Recoveries in the United States.” Unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System (May).
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great
Recession, and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development. Various years. OECD Economic
Outlook. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009a. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009b. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.”
American Economic Review 99 (May): 466–472.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2014. “Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence
from 100 Episodes.” American Economic Review 104 (May): 50–55.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1989. “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test
in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 121–170.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008.” American Economic Review 102
(April): 1029–1061.

