                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY AND FINANCIAL HEALTH

                                            Will Dobbie
                                      Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
                                            Crystal Yang

                                        Working Paper 21032
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21032


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




We thank Tal Gross, Matthew Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang for providing the bankruptcy data used
in this analysis. We also thank Lanier Benkard, Raj Chetty, Roland Fryer, Edward Glaeser, Guido
Imbens, Lawrence Katz, Geng Li, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions.
Jessica Wagner provided outstanding research assistance. Financial support from the Harvard Business
School is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Will Dobbie, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Crystal Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Bankruptcy and Financial Health
Will Dobbie, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Crystal Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 21032
March 2015
JEL No. D14,K35

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effect of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-filing financial outcomes
using a new dataset linking bankruptcy filings to credit bureau records. Our empirical strategy uses
the leniency of randomly-assigned judges as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Over the first
five post-filing years, we find that Chapter 13 protection decreases an index measuring adverse financial
events such as civil judgments and repossessions by 0.316 standard deviations, increases the probability
of being a homeowner by 13.2 percentage points, and increases credit scores by 14.9 points. Chapter
13 protection has little impact on open unsecured debt, but decreases the amount of debt in collections
by $1,315.


Will Dobbie                                         Crystal Yang
Industrial Relations Section                        Harvard Law School
Princeton University                                1585 Massachusetts Avenue
Firestone Library                                   Griswold 301
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098                            Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                            cyang@law.harvard.edu
wdobbie@princeton.edu

Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
paulgp@gmail.com
    America is a nation of debtors. The amount of debt held by the average American consumer
increased from $31,840 to $45,500 between 2003 and 2013, with more than 14 percent of consumers
having at least one debt in collections by 2013 (Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2014). The-
oretical work has long suggested that excessive debt and financial distress can distort repayment,
consumption, and labor supply decisions (e.g. Myers 1977, Krugman 1988). For example, borrow-
ers with excessive debt have an incentive to avoid repayment through strategies with significant
deadweight costs, such as leaving the formal banking system to avoid seizure of assets or leaving
the formal labor market to avoid wage garnishment. Consistent with this literature, recent empir-
ical work shows that debt overhang reduces labor supply (Dobbie and Song 2015) and increases
mortgage default rates (Melzer 2012).1 Perhaps the most important program meant to alleviate the
adverse consequences of financial distress is the consumer bankruptcy system, the legal process to
resolve unpaid debts in the United States.
    The consumer bankruptcy system allows debtors to choose between Chapter 7 bankruptcy,
which provides debt relief and protection from wage garnishment in exchange for a debtor’s non-
exempt assets, and Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which adds the protection of most assets in exchange
for a partial repayment of debt. Each year, more than one million Americans file for bankruptcy
protection, with nearly one in ten American households having filed for bankruptcy at some point
in their lifetimes (Stavins 2000). In terms of financial distress, bankruptcy filers are nearly two and
half times as likely to have a delinquent debt before filing compared to the typical credit user, twice
as likely to have a debt in collections, and three times as likely to have a lien or repossession. Even
after filing, bankruptcy filers are much more likely to experience financial distress than otherwise
similar individuals.2
    Despite over one percent of American households filing for bankruptcy each year, little is
known about whether bankruptcy protection reduces or exacerbates financial distress. In theory,
bankruptcy protection benefits debtors directly by improving their balance sheets and preventing
the seizure of important assets such as a home or car. These direct benefits may in turn indirectly
benefit debtors by increasing their credit score or access to credit. Yet, in practice, there is lit-
tle empirical evidence that bankruptcy protection provides any economically significant benefits to
debtors. Cross-sectional comparisons suggest that bankruptcy filers work about the same number
of hours and accumulate less wealth than non-filers (Han and Li 2007, 2011), and within-individual
comparisons show that filers have less access to credit after receiving bankruptcy protection (Cohen-
Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2013, Jagtiani and Li 2014). However, much of this
   1
     There is also evidence that financial distress imposes negative externalities on nearby individuals. For example,
home foreclosures can reduce nearby home values (e.g. Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak 2011, Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi
2011) and consumer debt overhang can depress regional consumption and employment (e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni
2011, Hall 2011, Midrigan and Philippon 2011, Eggertsson and Krugman 2012, Farhi and Werning 2013, Mian, Rao,
and Sufi 2013, Mian and Sufi forthcoming).
   2
     See Table 1 for details and additional summary statistics.


                                                          1
prior work has been hampered by the lack of a plausible comparison group. Bankruptcy filers likely
had worse outcomes even before filing, biasing cross-sectional estimates, and the most commonly
reported causes of filing, such as job loss, also impact later outcomes, biasing within-individual
estimates.3
    This paper uses a new dataset linking bankruptcy filings to credit bureau records to estimate the
impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-filing financial outcomes. We estimate the ex-
post causal effect of Chapter 13 protection by comparing the outcomes of filers randomly assigned
to bankruptcy judges with different propensities to grant bankruptcy protection. The identified
parameter measures the treatment effect for filers whose bankruptcy decision is altered by the judge
assignment due to disagreement on whether or not they should receive bankruptcy protection (i.e.
the marginal recipients of bankruptcy protection). The estimates hold fixed any independent effects
of bankruptcy filing, such as having a bankruptcy flag on a credit report (Han, Keys, and Li 2013),
and any ex-ante impacts of bankruptcy, such as over-borrowing, moral hazard in the workplace
(White 2011), entrepreneurial risk-taking (Fan and White 2003, Armour and Cumming 2008), or
the crowding out of formal insurance (Mahoney 2015). Using the same identification strategy,
Dobbie and Song (2015) find that Chapter 13 protection increases earnings and decreases mortality
risk.4
    There are three main contributions of this paper relative to Dobbie and Song (2015). First,
we estimate the effect of Chapter 13 protection on a broad range of financial outcomes that shed
new light on the well-being of debtors. We employ a new dataset constructed for the purposes of
this study that links over 175,000 bankruptcy filings to credit bureau records. These data allow
us to examine the effects of consumer bankruptcy on post-filing adverse financial events, unsecured
debt, secured asset holdings, credit access, and credit score. Moreover, because we observe detailed
information on distressed borrowers both before and after bankruptcy, we are able to provide new
evidence on the long-term consequences of excessive debt and the extent to which bankruptcy
protection mitigates these adverse consequences. Second, we describe the characteristics of filers
who are more likely to be affected by judge assignment. We find that young filers are more likely to
be affected by a lenient judge assignment, but that there are no differences by baseline credit score
or homeownership status. These results provide new evidence on the types of cases for which the
   3
      The most commonly reported causes of bankruptcy are unexpected income or expense shocks. Sullivan, Warren,
and Westbrook (2000) find that 67.5 percent of bankruptcy filers report job loss as a factor in filing for bankruptcy,
22.1 percent report family issues such as divorce, and 19.3 percent report medical expenses, with subsequent work
suggesting a somewhat larger role for medical expenses (Domowitz and Sartain 1999, Warren, Sullivan, and Jacoby
2000, Himmelstein et al. 2009). Using data from the PSID, Fay, Hurst, and White (2002) find that households are
also more likely to file for bankruptcy protection when there are larger financial benefits to doing so.
    4
      Kling (2006) uses a similar empirical strategy to estimate the ex-post impact of sentence length on earnings, and
subsequent papers have used similar methodologies to estimate the ex-post effects of foster care (Doyle 2007, 2008),
juvenile incarceration (Aizer and Doyle forthcoming), corporate bankruptcy (Chang and Schoar 2008), temporary-
help employment (Autor and Houseman 2010), and Disability Insurance (Maestas, Mullen, and Strand 2013, French
and Song 2014).


                                                          2
instrumental variables estimates are most likely to apply, and the types of filers who are most likely
to be affected by changes in bankruptcy laws. Finally, we estimate a variety of non-experimental
specifications that allows us to reconcile our estimates with a literature finding negative impacts of
bankruptcy protection on post-filing finances (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011, Cohen-Cole, Duygan-
Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2013, Jagtiani and Li 2014).
   In our empirical analysis, we find that Chapter 13 protection is largely successful in alleviating
the most direct adverse consequences of excessive debt. Over the first five post-filing years, Chapter
13 protection decreases an index measuring adverse financial events such as civil judgment and
repossession by 0.316 standard deviations, and significantly decreases seven of the eight individual
measures of financial strain that compose the index. Chapter 13 protection has little impact on the
amount of open unsecured debt, but the amount of debt in collections decreases by $1,315, a 31.2
percent change from the dismissed filer mean of $4,217. These results suggest that the marginal
recipient of Chapter 13 protection reduces his or her unsecured debt through the bankruptcy system,
while the marginal non-recipient is unable to prevent his or her unsecured debts from being sold to
a third-party debt collector. Chapter 13 protection also increases the probability that the marginal
recipient retains his or her home by 13.2 percentage points, a 36.4 percent increase from the dismissed
filer mean of 36.3 percent, but there are no discernible effects on the probability of having a car.
   Chapter 13 protection also has important impacts on credit access proxies and credit score, two
financial outcomes not directly affected by bankruptcy protection. Over the first five post-filing
years, Chapter 13 protection decreases revolving credit utilization by 16.1 percentage points, a 34.5
percent change from the dismissed filer mean, and decreases the number of non-mortgage inquiries
by 0.293, a 18.5 percent change from the dismissed filer mean. Chapter 13 protection increases the
marginal recipient’s credit score by 14.9 points over the first five post-filing years, a 2.6 percent
increase from the dismissed filer mean.
   We find suggestive evidence that protection from debt collectors and debt forgiveness are both
important mechanisms that help explain our results, although large standard errors make definitive
conclusions impossible. To test the importance of protection from debt collectors, we compare
treatment effects in states that do and do not allow wage garnishment. Consistent with there
being significant costs of not being protected from debt collectors, we find large and statistically
significant effects of Chapter 13 protection in states that allow wage garnishment, but small and
imprecisely estimated effects in the four states that prohibit wage garnishment where creditors have
fewer options to collect unpaid debts from dismissed filers. However, only one of eight differences
is statistically significant due to large standard errors. To test the importance of debt forgiveness,
we compare treatment effects in states with higher and lower Chapter 7 homestead exemption
levels. Since Chapter 13 requires that creditors are repaid at least as much as they would have
received in Chapter 7, homeowners that file for Chapter 13 in high exemption states are required to


                                                  3
repay creditors less than filers in low exemption states. Consistent with the benefits of Chapter 13
protection increasing in the amount of debt that is forgiven, we find that the effects of Chapter 13
protection are larger for homeowners in states with high Chapter 7 exemption levels compared to
homeowners in low Chapter 7 exemption states. However, once again, only two of eight differences
are statistically significant due to the imprecision of our estimates.
    The results reported in this paper stand in sharp contrast to the prior literature showing few
benefits of filing for bankruptcy protection using non-experimental methods (e.g. Han and Li 2007,
2011, Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2013, Jagtiani and Li 2014). Descriptive
results show that the outcomes of both dismissed and granted bankruptcy filers deteriorate one to
two years before filing. Outcomes for both groups remain depressed after filing, though much more
so for dismissed filers. These descriptive trends suggest that non-experimental estimates are likely
to be biased downwards due to selection into bankruptcy filing. Consistent with this scenario, we
find that OLS estimates using a non-filer comparison group and within-individual estimates suggest
negative effects of bankruptcy protection in our data. Conversely, OLS estimates using a dismissed
filer comparison group are broadly consistent with our judge IV estimates, suggesting that selection
into filing accounts for most of the bias in non-experimental specifications.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of
the consumer bankruptcy system in the United States. Section II describes our data and provides
summary statistics. Section III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV estimates the impact
of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-filing financial outcomes. Section V reconciles our
estimates with the prior literature, and Section VI concludes. A data appendix provides additional
information on the outcomes used in our analysis.


                              I. Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Protection
                                                  A. Overview

Under Chapter 13 bankruptcy, filers propose a three- to five-year plan to partially repay their unse-
cured debt in exchange for a discharge of the remaining unsecured debt, a hold on debt collection,
and the retention of most assets.5 Chapter 13 requires filers to use all of their disposable income,
defined as their predicted income less predicted expenses, to repay creditors. Creditors must receive
at least as much as they would have received if the filer’s assets were liquidated under Chapter 7, a
requirement known as the “best interest of creditors” test. Chapter 13 filers are also required to fully
repay priority claims, such as child support and alimony, unless the claimant agrees to a reduced
payment. If a filer wants to keep any collateral securing a claim, he or she must keep up to date on
all current payments and include any arrears in the repayment plan. The filer can also choose to
   5
     During our sample period, Chapter 13 filers were able to choose the length of their repayment plan. In our data,
granted filers took an average of 3.7 years to complete their plan.


                                                         4
give up the collateral and discharge the remaining debt. Thus, Chapter 13 allows filers to avoid a
costly home foreclosure and the repossession of a car by including any arrears in the repayment plan,
with the original debt contract reinstated on the completion of the Chapter 13 repayment plan. In
a sample of Delaware cases, 71 percent of filers included mortgage arrears in their repayment plans,
41 percent included car loans, and 38 percent included priority debt (White and Zhu 2010). Survey
evidence suggests that approximately seventy percent of filers choose Chapter 13 in order to avoid
foreclosure (Porter 2011).
    Chapter 13 cases begin with the debtor filing the proposed repayment plan, a bankruptcy peti-
tion, a statement of financial affairs, a copy of his or her most recent tax return, executory contracts
and unexpired leases, and schedules of current income, expenditures, and assets and liabilities. The
bankruptcy trustee then holds a meeting with the debtor and any interested creditors in order to
resolve problems with the proposed repayment plan.6 After this meeting, the bankruptcy judge
decides whether the repayment plan is feasible and meets the standards for confirmation set forth
in the Bankruptcy Code. If the judge confirms the repayment plan, the debtor makes biweekly or
monthly payments to the trustee until the plan is complete. The judge may later dismiss or con-
vert the case to Chapter 7 if the filer fails to make any payments, any post-filing domestic support
obligations, or any post-filing taxes. If a Chapter 13 filing is dismissed, debtors may refile for either
Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 after 180 days.
    Debtors also have the option of filing under Chapter 7, which discharges unsecured debts and
stops collection efforts in exchange for any non-exempt assets. Chapter 7 bankruptcy does not allow
debtors to retain non-exempt assets or collateral securing delinquent debt. Our analysis focuses on
the effects of Chapter 13 protection due to limited variation in the treatment of Chapter 7 cases. See
Dobbie and Song (2015) for additional details and a discussion of the differences between Chapter
7 and Chapter 13.
    We estimate the benefits of Chapter 13 protection, net the costs of repayment, compared to the
best outside option for the marginal dismissed filer. During our sample period, approximately 27
percent of dismissed filers convert or refile for Chapter 7 bankruptcy within one year, with another
one percent refiling under Chapter 7 at some point after one year. Conditional on converting or
refiling under Chapter 7, 95 percent of dismissed Chapter 13 filers are able to discharge at least some
of their debt through Chapter 7. About another 13 percent of dismissed filers refile under Chapter
13 and are dismissed a second time, with about 2.5 percent of dismissed filers refiling under Chapter
13 successfully. The remaining 57 percent of dismissed Chapter 13 filers never file for bankruptcy


   6
     There is typically one Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee who works with all judges in an office. If an office has a
particularly high Chapter 13 caseload, judges may have their own Chapter 13 trustee. As a result, it is not possible to
isolate the independent impact of trustees on the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection using our empirical
methodology.


                                                          5
protection again.7


                                            B. Bankruptcy Judges

Bankruptcy judges are federal judges appointed to 14-year terms by the Court of Appeals in their
judicial district. There are a total of 94 federal bankruptcy courts in the United States, including
at least one bankruptcy court in each state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Each
bankruptcy court hears all cases originating from counties in its jurisdiction, and are often further
divided into offices that hear all cases originating from a subset of counties in the court’s jurisdiction.
Bankruptcy judges often hear cases across multiple offices within their court, but only hear cases
filed in their bankruptcy court. These cases are typically assigned to judges using a random number
generator or a blind rotation system within each office.8
    The assigned bankruptcy judge decides all matters connected to a case, including whether the
repayment plan is feasible and meets the standards for confirmation set forth in the Bankruptcy
Code. Common reasons for dismissal include the debtor being able to repay his or her debts without
bankruptcy protection, the repayment plan repaying creditors too little, or the repayment plan being
infeasible given the debtor’s predicted income and expenses (Hynes 2004). In Section III, we discuss
how we use systematic differences in the probability that a judge dismisses a filing to estimate the
causal impact of bankruptcy protection. The variation in judge behavior that we measure is likely
to be driven by differences in how judges interpret the above criteria.
    Our empirical strategy also assumes that judges only impact future outcomes through the prob-
ability of receiving bankruptcy protection. This exclusion restriction would be violated if judges
affect debtor outcomes in other ways, such as by providing financial counseling. The assumption that
judges only systematically affect debtor outcomes through bankruptcy is fundamentally untestable,
and our estimates should be interpreted with this potential caveat in mind. However, we argue that
the exclusion assumption is not unreasonable in our setting. Despite the central role of bankruptcy
judges, debtors typically have only limited interaction with the assigned judge. Chapter 13 filers
appear before the bankruptcy judge at the plan confirmation hearing, but all other administrative
aspects of the bankruptcy process are conducted by the bankruptcy trustee and not the judge. Thus,
it seems unlikely that judges would significantly impact debtors other than through the probability
of receiving Chapter 13 protection.



   7
      Authors’ calculations using all available PACER data from 2002 - 2005.
   8
      The median court in our sample is divided into three offices, with little systematic pattern to the number of
offices in each court. There is considerable variation in the number of bankruptcy judges in each bankruptcy court
and office, with courts serving more populous regions tending to have more judges. Of the 205 offices we observe in
our data, 110 have only one Chapter 13 judge, 52 have two Chapter 13 judges, 25 have three Chapter 13 judges, and
18 have four or more Chapter 13 judges. See Dobbie and Song (2015) for additional details.


                                                        6
                                C. Potential Benefits of Chapter 13 Protection

There are at least three reasons that debtors may directly benefit from Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection. First, filing for and obtaining bankruptcy protection puts a hold on current and future
debt collection efforts.9 Bankruptcy protection may therefore decrease the incentive to avoid re-
payment through strategies with significant deadweight costs, such as leaving the formal banking
system to avoid seizure of assets or leaving the formal labor market to avoid wage garnishment.10
Second, Chapter 13 protection discharges any unsecured debts not repaid under the proposed plan,
significantly improving a debtor’s balance sheet. Third, Chapter 13 bankruptcy allows debtors to
restructure secured debts such as a car or mortgage loan. Creditors are allowed to seize assets
securing a delinquent loan if a debtor has not filed for bankruptcy protection or after a case has
been dismissed, suggesting that Chapter 13 may allow debtors to retain important assets and avoid
a potentially costly repossession or foreclosure.
    There are also several potential indirect benefits of bankruptcy protection. Most importantly,
bankruptcy protection may benefit debtors by increasing their access to credit through an improved
balance sheet and fewer adverse collection events reported on a credit record. This may allow
debtors to avoid more costly forms of credit, such as pawn or payday loans. Bankruptcy protection
may also prevent any sharp drops in consumption that have important long-term consequences,
such as becoming sick due to the lack of medical care. Finally, bankruptcy protection may increase
economic stability by allowing debtors to avoid foreclosure or eviction.
    There are also many reasons to believe that Chapter 13 protection will have little impact on
debtors. First, it is possible that the bankruptcy process may exacerbate financial distress by forcing
filers to devote all of their disposable income to the repayment plan. It is also possible that debtors
are able to avoid most debt collection efforts at a relatively low cost or that collections strategies do
not significantly affect most debtors. Finally, bankruptcy protection will have little impact if filers’
financial distress stems from broader economic conditions, or immutable individual characteristics
such as low human capital.




    9
      Dismissed filers receive a temporary stay on collections activity that lasts until the filing is dismissed. Estimates
on debt collections activity are therefore likely to be biased downwards, at least in the short run.
   10
      Creditors have a number of options to collect unpaid debts if a debtor has not filed for bankruptcy protection
or after a case is dismissed, including wage garnishment, collection letters or phone calls, in-person visits at home or
work, and seizing of assets through a court order. Debtors can make these collection efforts more difficult by ignoring
collection letters and calls, changing their telephone number, or moving without leaving a forwarding address. Debtors
can also leave the formal banking system to hide their assets from seizure, change jobs to force creditors to reinstate
a garnishment order, or work less so that their earnings are not subject to garnishment. See Hynes, Dawsey, and
Ausubel (2013) for additional discussion of the debt collection process.


                                                            7
                                             II. Data
                            A. Data Sources and Sample Construction

Our empirical analysis uses data from individual bankruptcy filings merged to credit bureau records
from TransUnion. The bankruptcy records come from the 72 (out of 94) federal bankruptcy courts
that allow full electronic access to their dockets. These data include approximately 75 percent of
all filings during our sample period. Each record includes information on the filer’s name, address,
bankruptcy chapter, filing date, court, office, outcome, and the name of the judge and trustee
assigned to the case.
    Following Dobbie and Song (2015), we make four restrictions to the bankruptcy data. First,
we drop filings from 110 offices that only have a single Chapter 13 bankruptcy judge and filings
from counties that assign all cases to a single judge, as in both scenarios there is no variation in
judge leniency that allows us to estimate the impact of Chapter 13 protection. Second, we drop
office-by-year bins where a retiring judge’s cases were reassigned with no documentation as to the
original judge. Third, we restrict the sample to debtors who filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy for
the first time between June 2002 and December 2005, ensuring that we obtain at least five years
of post-filing outcomes and at least one year of pre-filing baseline outcomes for all debtors. This
restriction also ensures that filings occurred before the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform Act came into
effect. Finally, we drop office-by-year-by-judge bins with fewer than ten cases where we are unlikely
to be able to accurately measure judge leniency. These sample restrictions leave us with 253,863
filings.
    We matched these 253,863 filings to credit bureau records from TransUnion using name and
address at the time of filing. We were able to successfully match 68.9 percent of our estimation
sample to the TransUnion data. Our match rate is similar to Finkelstein et al. (2012), who matched
68.5 percent of Oregon Medicaid applicants to TransUnion data using name, address, and date of
birth. The probability of being matched to the credit report data is not significantly related to
judge leniency (see Panel F of Table 1).
    The TransUnion data are available from June 2002 to June 2010. We observe each individual
in the credit bureau data annually in June. The TransUnion data are derived from public records,
collections agencies, and trade lines data from lending institutions. The data also include geographic
location at the ZIP code-level and age. No other demographic information is available at the
individual level. See Avery et al. (2003) and Finkelstein et al. (2012) for additional details on the
TransUnion data.
    Our estimation sample includes the 253,863 filings matched to at least one post-filing year of
credit bureau data. This sample consists of 175,076 filers from 39 offices and 29 bankruptcy courts.
The sample includes 348 office-by-year-by-judge observations – the level of variation that drives our


                                                  8
empirical design. The number of cases in each office-by-year-by-judge bin ranges from 31 to 2,040,
with a median of 799. Appendix Table 1 provides additional details on each of the offices in our
estimation sample.


                                 B. Measures of Financial Outcomes

We use the linked dataset to estimate the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on financial
strain, unsecured debt, asset holdings, credit access, and credit score. This section briefly describes
how we construct the measures used in our main analysis. The data appendix provides additional
details on all of the measures used in our analysis.
   Financial strain is measured using indicators for delinquency, creditor charge-offs, collections,
bankruptcy, foreclosure, civil judgments, liens, and repossessions within the last 12 months. Delin-
quency occurs when at least one trade is reported 30 or more days past due, and is our most common
measure of financial strain. Credit charge-offs typically occur after 180 days of non-payment on an
account, implying that this measure therefore captures a more severe form of non-payment than
delinquency. Collections indicate that at least one account has been transferred to a third-party
collections agency or is in the process of collection at some point in the last 12 months. Our collec-
tions measure does not include debts sent to collection agencies that do not report to credit bureaus,
and therefore represents a lower bound on total collections activity. Bankruptcy indicates a new
filing in the last 12 months. Foreclosures indicate any foreclosure related action during the last 12
months, including a foreclosure being initiated, a foreclosure being discontinued, and a foreclosure
being redeemed. The foreclosure measure used in this paper is therefore more inclusive than the
foreclosure measure used in Dobbie and Song (2015), which only included foreclosure sales and
transfers. Civil judgments include all wage garnishment orders, liens against property, and levies on
checkings or savings accounts in the last 12 months. Civil judgments are often difficult and costly
to obtain, meaning that this measure is likely proxying for particularly large unpaid bills. Liens
indicate at least one public records claim on a lien in the past 12 months. Public record liens include
federal and state tax liens, hospital liens, and judicial liens. Repossession indicates that a creditor
has attempted to take back a secured asset, such as a car or boat, in the last 12 months.
   Each financial strain measure is the average of five indicator variables for having experienced
the listed event from the filing year to the fifth post-filing year, with two exceptions. We measure
both charge-offs and new bankruptcies from the first full post-filing year to fifth year after filing to
exclude the mechanical effect of the original Chapter 13 filing on these outcomes in the year of filing.
Appendix Table 2 reports results using the number of adverse events in the first five post-filing years
and the cumulative probability of an event occurring at least once in the first five post-filing years
for each of the eight adverse financial events in our data.
   We also report results using a financial strain index, a summary index of these eight adverse

                                                   9
events designed to broadly capture financial distress associated with collections activity. Following
Fryer and Katz (2013), for each post-filing year, we first standardize each component in the financial
strain index using the mean and standard deviation of the component for the dismissed filer group
in the baseline year. Next, we sum the eight components in each year, restandardizing using the
mean and standard deviation of the index for the dismissed filer group in the baseline period. To
exclude the mechanical effect of filing on charge-offs and new bankruptcies in the year of filing, the
financial strain index in the year of filing is composed of the other six measures of adverse financial
events. Finally, we average these annual index measures over the first five post-filing years. Because
each of the financial strain components represent adverse events that negatively impact access to
credit, a higher index represents worse outcomes throughout.
   Unsecured debt and collections activity are measured using the current balance of open revolving
loans, and the amount of debt currently in collections. Revolving loans includes all current bank
cards, retail cards, and check credit accounts. Collections debt include all loans that have been
transferred to a collection agency or that are in the process of collection. Following the above
discussion, our measure of collections debt is likely a lower bound. Our unsecured debt data do
not include information on some non-bank and non-retail forms of unsecured credit, such as pawn
and payday loans. The data also do not include information on the cost of revolving debt. We are
therefore unable to estimate the impact of Chapter 13 on these outcomes.
   Retention of secured assets is measured using indicators for having an open mortgage loan within
the past 12 months and having an open auto loan within the past six months, and the current balance
of all open mortgages and open auto loans. All of the debt balance measures are captured in June
of each year. Having an active mortgage or auto loan proxies for ownership of these assets, but is
an underestimate of actual ownership as some filers have likely fully paid off their mortgage or auto
loans.
   We measure credit access using the total utilization on revolving accounts, and the number of
non-mortgage inquiries in the last six months. TransUnion does not provide credit line information
for each category of non-mortgage debt, so we proxy for credit supply using revolving trades, the
largest category of non-mortgage credit among all credit users and our estimation sample. Revolving
trades include any bank card accounts, retail accounts, and check credit accounts. Results are
qualitatively similar using bank card trades, a subset of revolving trades. Utilization is defined as
the current balance divided by the credit limit, where TransUnion measures the credit limit using
either the reported credit limit, or the highest amount ever owed on an account if the credit limit is
unreported. Avery et al. (2003) discuss this imputation procedure, concluding that the credit limit
variable is likely a lower bound. Accordingly, utilization measures likely reflect an upper bound
for accounts where the credit limit is imputed. Importantly, estimates using utilization may be
biased if Chapter 13 protection impacts the highest amount ever owed on an account, as credit


                                                  10
limits will appear higher for these individuals. Our utilization estimates should be interpreted with
this potential measurement bias in mind. Our second measure of credit access is the number of
non-mortgage inquiries. Inquiries are made to ensure that an applicant for credit, apartment rental,
insurance, or employment meets minimum standards, and is considered a proxy for excess credit
demand.
    Credit score is measured using an ordinal credit score variable calculated by TransUnion to
capture credit risk. The TransUnion credit score variable is used by creditors to determine the price
and eligibility for credit, and is similar to the FICO score commonly referenced in the consumer
finance literature. Our credit score variable should therefore be interpreted as a summary measure
of a debtor’s financial risk, and incorporates many of the potential effects on the outcomes discussed
above. We report estimates using the scale provided by TransUnion.


                                           C. Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for our data. Column 1 reports summary statistics for a
random sample of the population of credit users in the TransUnion database.11 Column 2 reports
summary statistics for individuals in this random sample that file for bankruptcy protection during
our sample period. The TransUnion data does not report chapter of filing, so these individuals
include a mix of Chapter 7, Chapter 11, Chapter 12, and Chapter 13 filers. Because very different
types of individuals file under various bankruptcy chapters, bankruptcy filers in the national sample
are likely to differ in substantial ways from Chapter 13 filers.12 Columns 3 and 4 report summary
statistics for Chapter 13 filers in our estimation sample assigned to judges with below and above
median judge leniency as defined in Section III.
    Bankruptcy filers are younger and more likely to own a home than the typical credit user in the
United States. The typical bankruptcy filer in the national sample is 43.7 years old, compared to
48.5 years old for all credit users. Fifty-two percent of bankruptcy filers own a home. In comparison,
47.0 percent of all credit users own a home. In our estimation sample, 65.5 percent of Chapter 13
filers are homeowners and the average age is 44.8 years old.
    Perhaps not surprisingly, bankruptcy filers are far more likely to suffer an adverse financial event
than the typical credit user even before filing. In the national sample, 41.3 percent of bankruptcy
filers have at least one delinquency before filing, 29.6 percent have at least one debt in collections,
18.8 percent have at least one creditor charge-off, 3.4 percent have at least one civil judgment, 1.0

  11
      See Dobbie and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2014) for additional details on the credit user sample. The data contain
approximately two percent of all credit users in the United States during this time period.
   12
      The TransUnion data do not provide information on the date of bankruptcy filing or the chapter of bankruptcy,
but each calendar year pull provides information on the number of bankruptcy filings in the last 12 months. From
this bankruptcy filing flag, we define bankruptcy filers as those individuals who filed for bankruptcy for the first
time in the last 12 months based on credit report data between 2003 and 2006. Individuals whose bankruptcy flag is
turned on in multiple years between 2003 and 2006 are excluded.


                                                        11
percent have experienced a foreclosure, 1.1 percent have at least one property lien, and 1.2 percent
have at least one repossession. Chapter 13 filers in our estimation sample are even more likely to
have suffered an adverse financial event before filing compared to the typical credit user, with 67.7
percent having had a delinquency in the past 12 months, 46.3 percent having a debt in collections,
30.9 percent having a charge-off, 6.3 percent having a judgment, 5.1 percent having a foreclosure,
2.1 percent having a lien, and 2.1 percent having a repossession. In comparison, only 14.8 percent of
all credit users have a delinquency in the past 12 months, 13.7 percent have a debt in collections, 6.5
percent have a charge-off, 0.9 percent have a judgment, 0.3 percent have a foreclosure, 0.4 percent
have a lien, and 0.3 percent have a repossession.
   Bankruptcy filers also have significantly higher unsecured debt and collections activity compared
to the typical credit user. Bankruptcy filers in the national sample have $13,083 in revolving debt
and $1,432 of debt in collections. Chapter 13 filers in our estimation sample have $10,460 in revolving
debt and $2,460 of debt in collections. In comparison, the typical credit user has $6,011 in revolving
debt and $601 of debt in collections.
   Bankruptcy filers are more likely to have an open mortgage than the typical credit user. In the
national sample, 43.4 percent of bankruptcy filers have at least one open mortgage, compared to
36.7 percent for all credit users. In our estimation sample, 57.9 percent of Chapter 13 filers have at
least one open mortgage. Note that active mortgage rates are generally lower than homeownership
rates in both the national sample and estimation sample, suggesting that approximately seven to
ten percent of homeowners have already paid off their mortgages.
   While bankruptcy filers in the national sample are more likely to have a mortgage, they have
mortgage balances that are $2,612 lower than the typical credit user, while Chapter 13 filers in
our estimation sample have mortgage balances that are $12,615 more than the typical credit user.
Home mortgage balances are likely higher among Chapter 13 filers than bankruptcy filers in the
national sample because national bankruptcy filers comprise those who file under Chapter 7 as well
as Chapter 13, and Chapter 7 filers are less likely to be homeowners.
   Bankruptcy filers are also 17.1 percent more likely to have an open auto loan compared to the
typical credit user, with Chapter 13 filers in our estimation sample 19.1 percent more likely to have
an active auto loan than the typical credit user. Accordingly, bankruptcy filers in the national
sample have auto balances that are $3,412 more than the typical credit user. Chapter 13 filers in
our estimation sample have auto balances $3,892 more than the typical credit user.
   Bankruptcy filers in the national sample have higher utilization on revolving accounts and more
credit inquiries than the typical credit user, suggesting that bankruptcy filers have excess credit
demand conditional on credit supply. Specifically, bankruptcy filers in the national sample have
utilization rates that are 35.9 percentage points higher than the average credit user, and also have
1.0 more non-mortgage inquiries in the last six months than the typical credit user. In our estimation


                                                  12
sample, Chapter 13 filers have 45.4 percentage points higher utilization on revolving accounts than
the typical credit user, and 1.5 more non-mortgage inquiries.
   Bankruptcy filers also have lower credit scores than the typical credit user in the United States.
Average pre-filing credit scores are 630.0 for bankruptcy filers in the national sample. In comparison,
average credit scores are 739.5 for all credit users. In our estimation sample, the average credit score
is 580.7.


                                      III. Research Design

Consider a model that relates post-filing outcomes such as credit score to the receipt of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection:
                                yit = α + βXi + γBankruptcyi + εit                                  (1)

where i denotes individuals, t is the year of observation, γ is the causal impact of bankruptcy
protection, Xi includes controls such as age and lagged outcomes, and εit is noise. Our key empirical
problem is that OLS estimates of equation (1) may be biased if bankruptcy protection is correlated
with the unobservable determinants of later outcomes, explored further in Section V.
   We estimate the impact of Chapter 13 protection on debtors using judge leniency as an instru-
ment for bankruptcy protection. Our empirical strategy exploits the fact that judges are randomly
assigned to filings, and that those bankruptcy judges have differing tendencies to grant Chapter 13
protection. In this specification, we interpret any difference in post-filing outcomes as the causal
effect of the change in the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection operating through judge
assignment. The second stage estimating equation is:

                             yit = α + αot + βXi + γBankruptcyi + εit                               (2)

where αot are office-by-filing-month fixed effects and Xi includes baseline age bins, homeownership,
financial strain, revolving, mortgage, auto, and collections debt, indicators for open mortgage and
open auto loans, revolving utilization, non-mortgage inquiries, and credit score. Xi also includes
indicators for missing age and baseline characteristics.
   The corresponding first stage estimating equation associated with equation (2) is:

                             Bankruptcyit = α + αot + βXi + δσj + εit                               (3)

where σj is the systematic component of judge behavior and δ represents the impact of judge
behavior on the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. We cluster standard errors at the
office level in both the first and second stage regressions to account for any serial correlation across
filers at the level of randomization. Results are qualitatively similar if we cluster at the office-by-

                                                  13
judge or office-by-filing-month level.
   Following the previous literature (e.g. Kling 2006, Chang and Schoar 2008, Doyle 2007, 2008,
Autor and Houseman 2010, French and Song 2014, Aizer and Doyle forthcoming, Maestas, Mullen,
and Strand 2013, and Dobbie and Song 2015), we define judge leniency Zioj as the leave-one-out
fraction of filings granted by judge j in office o minus the leave-one-out fraction granted in office o:

                                         noj                !              no
                                                                                              !
                                  1      X                           1     X
                      Zioj   =                 (Bk ) − Bi       −                (Bk ) − Bi              (4)
                               noj − 1                            no − 1
                                         k=1                               k=1


where i again denotes individuals, o denotes offices, j is the assigned judge, Bi is an indicator for
receiving bankruptcy protection, noj is the number of cases seen by a judge in office o, and no is the
number of cases seen by an office. We calculate judge leniency using all filings in the full sample of
filings, including those not matched to TransUnion credit records.
   Our preferred measure of judge leniency uses the final decision on each bankruptcy filing, not
whether a plan is initially confirmed or dismissed. We focus on this measure of judge leniency
for two reasons. First, the resulting two-stage least squares estimates can be interpreted as the
causal effect of receiving bankruptcy protection, which has clearer policy implications than plan
confirmation. Second, we do not observe the reason for case dismissal in our data, and are therefore
unable to measure plan confirmation directly. In Section IV.G, we present estimates that use judge
leniency measured over the first 90 days, a proxy for plan confirmation. These results are nearly
identical to our preferred estimates discussed below. See Section IV.G for additional details on this
alternative measure of judge leniency and other robustness checks.
   Consistent with Dobbie and Song (2015), we find considerable variation in the treatment of
Chapter 13 cases within an office.13 The standard deviation of Zioj is 0.025 for Chapter 13 filers
in our sample. There is also significant persistence in our measure of judge behavior. Appendix
Figure 1 plots current and lagged judge discharge rates, with each point representing a separate
judge-by-office-by-year observation. Discharge rates are highly correlated across time, with an OLS
regression relating each judge-by-office-by-year discharge rate to the lagged discharge rate yielding
a coefficient of 0.902. These results suggest that we are capturing systematic differences in judge
behavior, not random year to year noise.
   Using our measure of judge leniency Zioj as an instrument for the receipt of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection, two-stage least squares estimates from equation (2) measure the local av-
erage treatment effect of Chapter 13 protection for filers whose bankruptcy outcomes are altered
by judge assignment. Three conditions must hold to interpret these estimates as the local aver-
age causal impact of bankruptcy protection: (1) judge assignment is associated with bankruptcy

  13
     See Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook (1994) and Norberg and Compo (2007) for additional discussion on the
variation in bankruptcy judge behavior.


                                                       14
protection, (2) judge assignment only impacts debtor outcomes through the probability of receiv-
ing bankruptcy protection, and (3) the impact of judge assignment on the probability of receiving
bankruptcy protection is monotonic across filers.
   Appendix Figure 2 tests the first assumption by plotting average discharge against our leave-one-
out measure of judge leniency. The estimation sample includes first-time filers between 2002 and
2005 in the 39 offices in the 29 courts that randomly assign Chapter 13 filings to judges. Appendix
Figure 2 is constructed by calculating the mean residuals from a regression of an indicator for
receiving Chapter 13 protection on office-by-filing-month fixed effects. For ease of interpretation,
we add the mean discharge rate to the mean residual in each judge-by-year bin. The plotted line
and corresponding coefficient show the best linear fit estimated on the underlying individual-level
data, controlling for office-by-filing-month fixed effects and with standard errors clustered at the
office level. Table 2 presents analogous individual-level estimates with and without controls.
   Appendix Figure 2 and Table 2 indicate that judge leniency is highly predictive of the probability
of receiving bankruptcy protection. With no controls, a one percentage point increase in Zioj
increases the probability that a debtor receives bankruptcy protection by 0.889 percentage points.
Controlling for all baseline characteristics in column 6, our measure of judge leniency remains highly
predictive of the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection, with a one percentage point increase
in Zioj increasing the probability that a debtor receives bankruptcy protection by 0.811 percentage
points. Thus, a one standard deviation (2.5 percentage point) increase in judge leniency increases
the likelihood of receiving bankruptcy protection by about 2.0 percentage points, corresponding to
a 4.5 percent change from the mean discharge rate of 44.6 percent.
   Consistent with the first stage results in Dobbie and Song (2015), the probability of receiving
Chapter 13 protection does not increase one-for-one with our measure of judge leniency, likely
because of measurement error that attenuates the effect toward zero. For instance, the accuracy
of our leave-one-out measure will be reduced if judge leniency drifts over the course of the year or
fluctuates with case characteristics. Nevertheless, our first stage results confirm that our measure
of judge leniency is highly predictive of case outcomes.
   The coefficients on our baseline controls are of independent interest for understanding the types
of individuals more or less likely to receive Chapter 13 protection. The probability of receiving
bankruptcy protection is increasing in filer age. Homeowners are also more likely to receive Chapter
13 protection than non-homeowners. The probability of receiving Chapter 13 protection is decreas-
ing in most measures of financial strain and the amount of debt in collections. The probability of
receiving bankruptcy protection is also decreasing in mortgage and auto debt, although individuals
with open mortgage and auto loans are more likely to receive Chapter 13 protection. Conversely,
filers with higher unsecured debt are more likely to receive bankruptcy protection, as are filers with
more revolving accounts. Finally, the probability of receiving Chapter 13 is decreasing with the


                                                 15
number of credit inquiries in the last six months, and increasing with credit score.
   Following Doyle (2008), we also present first stage results for different subsamples to shed light
on the characteristics of filers who are more likely to be affected by judge assignment. In the case of
a binary instrument, the relative likelihood that a complier has a given characteristic is equal to the
first-stage coefficient for that group divided by the first-stage coefficient for the full sample. Similar
logic applies to the case of a continuous instrument. Given that filers likely differ in how much they
benefit from Chapter 13 protection, these results provide new evidence on the types of cases for
which the instrumental variables estimates are most likely to apply, that is, those filers for whom
judges most disagree on whether to grant bankruptcy protection. These results also provide insight
into the likely impacts of debt-relief policy interventions that target different types of debtors.
   Appendix Table 3 shows the first-stage estimates for subgroups of interest. We also present the
ratio of the subgroup first-stage coefficient to the overall first-stage coefficient from column 6 of
Table 2. The most striking first-stage result is for filers 25 to 39 years old at the time of filing, who
have a first stage coefficient that is 16.5 percent higher than the overall first stage, although the
ratio is not significantly different from one due to variability in the data. Conversely, filers who are
60 and up have a first-stage coefficient that is only 52.3 percent of the overall first stage, significantly
different from one. First-stage results are not substantially different between filers with below and
above median baseline credit scores, and by baseline homeownership status. These results suggest
that young filers are most likely to be affected by a lenient judge assignment, indicating greater
judicial disagreement over these types of filers.
   Our second identifying assumption is that judge assignment only impacts debtor outcomes
through the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. This assumption would be violated
if judge leniency is correlated with unobservable determinants of future outcomes. We partially
test this assumption by assessing whether observable filer characteristics differ based on whether
filers are assigned to a judge with either a high or low propensity to grant Chapter 13 protection.
Following Aizer and Doyle (forthcoming), columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 present summary statistics
separately for filers assigned to judges with above and below median leniency. Column 5 reports
results from a series of OLS regressions of each observable filer characteristic on an indicator for
being assigned to a judge with above median leniency and office-by-filing-month fixed effects with
standard errors clustered by office. Consistent with our identifying assumptions, there is only one
statistically significant difference in the 26 variables we consider.
   Our third identifying assumption is that there is a monotonic impact of judge assignment on the
probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. The monotonicity assumption implies that being
assigned to a more (less) lenient judge does not decrease (increase) the likelihood of receiving Chapter
13 protection. Following Dobbie and Song (2015), we partially test the validity of the monotonicity
assumption by examining how judges treat filings from observably different filers. Any significant


                                                    16
differences in the way that judges treat these filings would suggest that the monotonicity assumption
is violated. Appendix Figure 3 plots judge leniency measures calculated separately by age at filing,
baseline credit score, baseline home ownership, and baseline financial strain. Each plot reports
the coefficient and standard error from an OLS regression relating each measure of judge leniency.
Consistent with our monotonicity assumption, we find that judge tendencies are very similar across
observably different filers.
   In unreported results, we also examine whether measures of judge leniency for subcategories of
individuals, such as young versus old filers, are additionally predictive beyond the average leniency
for a judge. If the monotonicity assumption holds, these subgroup specific measures of judicial
leniency should not be predictive of case outcomes after we condition on average judge leniency.
Consistent with our monotonicity assumption, we find that only the average measure of judge
leniency is a statistically significant predictor of case outcomes. None of the subgroup specific
measures of judicial leniency are statistically significant, and a joint test of significance yields a
p-value of 0.776. Using principal component analysis, we also find no evidence of clustering in each
judge’s subgroup specific leniency measures. These results further suggest that judicial leniency
does not vary across different types of filers. None of our results suggest that the monotonicity
assumption is likely to be invalid in our setting.


                                           IV. Results

We begin by exploring the impact of Chapter 13 protection on financial strain associated with debt
collection, the amount of unsecured debt, and retention of assets. We then estimate the indirect
effects of Chapter 13 protection on credit access and credit score. We conclude by examining the
most likely mechanisms driving our results and testing the robustness of our empirical design.


                                         A. Financial Strain

Panel A of Table 3 reports two-stage least squares estimates for our financial strain index and each
individual component of the index. As discussed above, each individual component of the financial
strain index is the average of five indicator variables for having experienced the listed event from
the filing year to the fifth post-filing year. For all of our financial strain measures, our estimates
should be interpreted as the average change in the probability of experiencing an event each year.
The financial strain index combines all eight adverse financial events, as described previously. Our
estimation sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from offices that randomly
assign filers to judges between 2002 and 2005 that are linked to the credit report data in the year
of filing. Column 1 reports the mean post-filing average probability for each event for dismissed
filers. Column 2 presents two-stage least squares estimates using our leave-one-out measure of judge


                                                     17
leniency controlling only for office-by-filing-month fixed effects. Column 3 adds controls for baseline
age bins, homeownership, financial strain, revolving, mortgage, auto, and collections debt, indicators
for open mortgage and open auto loans, revolving utilization, non-mortgage inquiries, and credit
score. Details on these measures can be found in the data appendix. We report standard errors
clustered at the office level throughout.
    We find that Chapter 13 significantly improves financial well-being by reducing the likelihood
of adverse financial events and creditor actions. Over the first five post-filing years, Chapter 13
protection decreases the marginal recipient’s level of financial strain by 0.316 to 0.369 standard
deviations. Turning to each individual component, we find that Chapter 13 protection decreases
the marginal recipient’s probability of having a debt in collections by 14.9 to 20.1 percentage points,
a 25.5 to 34.4 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean of 58.4 percent. Credit charge-offs
decrease by 6.5 to 6.7 percentage points, a 30.0 to 31.0 percent decrease from the dismissed filer
mean of 21.6 percent. Subsequent bankruptcy filings (of all chapters) decrease by 6.4 percentage
points, a 58.7 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean of 10.9 percent. Foreclosures decrease
by 1.6 to 3.0 percentage points, a 22.9 to 42.8 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean of
7.0 percent. Creditor judgments decrease by 3.1 to 3.9 percentage points, a 46.9 to 59.0 percent
decrease from the dismissed filer mean of 6.6 percent. Liens decrease by 3.4 percentage points, a
100.0 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean of 3.4 percent. Repossessions decrease by 1.5
percentage points, a 78.9 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean of 1.9 percent. Conversely,
there is no impact of Chapter 13 protection on delinquency, defined as the probability of any trade
being at least thirty days past due.14
    Table 4 presents two-stage least squares results from our preferred specification separately by
age, baseline credit score, and baseline homeownership. Chapter 13 reduces financial strain by
0.416 standard deviations for homeowners compared to just 0.165 standard deviations for non-
homeowners, though the difference is not statistically significant. There are no economically or
statistically significant differences by age or baseline credit score.
    Consistent with Dobbie and Song (2015), we find that our results are driven by a deterioration
of outcomes among dismissed filers rather than gains among granted filers (see Appendix Figure 4).
Taking repossession as an illustrative example, we see that both dismissed and granted filers are
more likely to experience a repossession than non-filers even before filing. In the four years before
filing, repossession rates average 0.7 percent and 1.4 percent among granted and dismissed filers,
respectively. Repossession rates increase to 1.1 percent for granted filers and 1.6 for dismissed filers
in the year before filing, before peaking at 2.4 and 3.4 percent, respectively, in the year of filing.
Repossession rates for dismissed filers remain elevated at approximately 1.4 percent throughout our
  14
     Panel A of Appendix Table 4 presents additional financial strain results. We find that Chapter 13 protection
decreases both the number of paid and unpaid collections, but has no impact on the number of medical collections.
The decrease in judgments is due to a decrease in unpaid judgments.


                                                       18
sample period, while the rates for granted filers fall to about 0.5 percent, comparable to non-filers.
These results are consistent with bankruptcy protection mitigating the long-term consequences of
financial shocks that might otherwise harm debtors, but not conferring benefits in the absence of a
financial shock.
    We conclude this section by comparing the magnitude of our two-stage least squares estimates to
the deterioration of outcomes for dismissed filers. This calculation provides a back-of-the-envelope
approximation of the extent to which Chapter 13 protection mitigates the adverse consequences of
financial distress. Specifically, we calculate the change in outcomes for dismissed filers by subtracting
the average post-filing outcomes for the first five post-filing years from the pre-filing outcomes in
the third to fourth years pre-filing. This calculation implies that Chapter 13 protection mitigates
approximately 91.1 percent of the deterioration in the financial strain index. For our other financial
strain measures, Chapter 13 protection mitigates approximately 28.6 percent of the deterioration in
the probability of having a foreclosure and approximately 100 percent of the potential deterioration
in the probability of having collections debt, a charge-off, a new bankruptcy, a judgment, a lien,
and a repossession.


                                    B. Unsecured Debt and Collections

Panel B of Table 3 reports two-stage least squares estimates on open unsecured debt and collections
debt. Each dependent variable is the average amount of debt reported in each category. We report
results using the year of filing to the fifth post-filing year.
    There is little impact of Chapter 13 protection on open unsecured debt. Point estimates are
small and not statistically different from zero. However, the marginal recipient of Chapter 13 has
$1,315 to $1,842 less debt in collections, a 31.2 to 43.6 percent decrease from the dismissed filer
mean of $4,217. The impact of Chapter 13 on collections debt is higher for filers with high baseline
credit scores, but does not vary by age or homeownership.15
    Comparison of means shows that open unsecured debt falls for both granted and dismissed filers
post-bankruptcy. Collections debt increases for both groups before filing, but falls to pre-filing
levels for granted filers only in the post-filing years. Taken together with our above results, these
trends suggest that the marginal recipient of Chapter 13 protection reduces his or her unsecured
debt through the bankruptcy system, while the marginal non-recipient is unable to prevent his or
her unsecured debts from being sold to a third-party debt collector. Using these trend results, we
estimate that Chapter 13 protection mitigates approximately 63.7 percent of the potential increase
in collections debt.


  15
    Panel B of Appendix Table 4 presents results for student debt, a form of unsecured debt that is not discharged
under Chapter 13 protection. We find no impact of Chapter 13 on active or deferred student debt.


                                                       19
                                           C. Secured Assets

Panel C of Table 3 reports two-stage least squares estimates for the probability of having an open
mortgage, the average amount of mortgage debt, the probability of having an open auto loan, and
the amount of auto debt. We report results using the year of filing to the fifth post-filing year.
   We find that Chapter 13 protection significantly increases the probability of having a mortgage
by 11.0 to 13.2 percentage points, a 30.3 to 36.4 percent increase from the dismissed filer mean of 36.3
percent. Chapter 13 protection also increases the marginal recipient’s mortgage debt by $12,196 to
$14,267, a 45.4 to 53.2 percent increase from the dismissed filer mean of $26,833. Unsurprisingly, the
impact of Chapter 13 on both homeownership and mortgage debt is higher for baseline homeowners.
Effects are also larger for filers who are 60 or older at the time of filing.
   The increase in mortgage debt may be the result of dismissed filers decreasing their mortgage
debt by downsizing or becoming renters, or by granted filers increasing their mortgage debt by
buying a new home. Panel C of Appendix Table 4 sheds light on this issue by estimating the impact
of Chapter 13 protection on the probability of living in the same residence, the probability of moving
to a rental, and the probability of moving to a home. Each dependent variable is measured in the
fifth post-filing year, with identical results for earlier years. Chapter 13 protection increases the
probability of staying in the same residence by 25.0 to 27.0 percentage points and decreases the
probability of moving to a rental by 25.0 to 26.7 percentage points. These results are consistent
with Chapter 13 decreasing the probability that filers sell or lose their homes.
   Comparison of means provides additional evidence on this issue. The probability of having
a mortgage increases in the years before filing for both granted and dismissed filers, peaking the
year before filing at 59.8 percent and 56.2 percent, respectively. For granted filers, the probability
of having a mortgage falls modestly after filing to around 45 percent. For dismissed filers, the
probability of having a mortgage falls all the way to 21.8 percent by the fifth year after filing. These
trend results suggest that Chapter 13 protection alleviates more than 100 percent of the potential
fall in homeownership rates.
   We also explore the impact of Chapter 13 protection on whether a debtor has an open auto
loan and average auto debt. Because at least some car owners do not have an open car loan, our
measures of car ownership are lower bounds. Chapter 13 protection does not have a statistically
significant effect on the probability of having a car loan or on auto debt. In Appendix Figure 4, we
find that the probability of having a car loan falls in the year of filing for both granted and dismissed
filers, suggesting that most debtors give up their cars. These results suggest that the retention of a
home may be a more important priority for Chapter 13 filers. This interpretation is consistent with
survey results showing that over seventy percent of dismissed filers choose to file under Chapter 13
bankruptcy to avoid foreclosure (Porter 2011).



                                                   20
                                                 D. Credit Access

Panel D of Table 3 reports two-stage least squares estimates for the total utilization on revolving
accounts, and the number of non-mortgage inquiries. Each dependent variable is a five-year average
from the year of filing to the fifth post-filing year. As discussed previously, while these outcomes have
a less clear economic interpretation than our other outcomes, they are still suggestive of potential
economic benefits to bankruptcy protection.
    We find that Chapter 13 protection decreases revolving credit utilization, as measured by the
balance to credit limit ratio. These revolving trades include bank credit cards, retail credit cards
and check credit accounts. Revolving accounts are the most common type of credit accounts,
representing 63 percent of all credit accounts, and about 71 percent of all open accounts (Avery et
al. 2003). Utilization decreases by 15.1 to 16.1 percentage points, a 32.3 to 34.5 percent decrease
from the dismissed filer mean of 46.7 percent. Chapter 13 protection also decreases the number of
non-mortgage inquiries in the past six months by 0.293 to 0.410, a 18.5 to 25.9 percent decrease from
the dismissed filer mean of 1.584. The impact of Chapter 13 on credit utilization is larger among
younger filers, and the impact on non-mortgage inquiries is larger among baseline homeowners.
Overall, these results suggest that Chapter 13 protection increases credit access.16
    However, a comparison of means shows that utilization rates and non-mortgage inquiries fall (i.e.
improves) for both granted and dismissed filers after filing, with larger falls for granted filers. For
dismissed filers, average revolving utilization decreases by 19.3 percent and average non-mortgage
inquiries decrease by 0.8 from the pre- to post-filing periods. These results are consistent with the
pre-filing levels of credit usage being unsustainable for all filers. This suggests that our two-stage
least squares estimates may be more correctly interpreted as Chapter 13 protection decreasing unmet
credit demand, rather than increasing credit supply. Following our earlier back-of-the-envelope
calculations, our estimates suggest that Chapter 13 protection further augments the fall in utilization
by an additional 78.2 percent, and further augments the fall in the number of inquiries by an
additional 36.5 percent.


                                                  E. Credit Score

Panel E of Table 3 reports two-stage least squares estimates for credit score, an aggregate measure
of financial health or credit risk. The dependent variable is the mean credit score from the year of
filing to the fifth post-filing year.
    There is a large and precisely estimated impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-
filing credit score. The two-stage least squares results with no controls suggest that Chapter 13
   16
     The increase in credit access is most likely the results of improved financial health documented above, as opposed
to any limits on future bankruptcy filing. While discharged Chapter 13 filers have to wait six years before filing under
Chapter 7, filers are still in the process of making plan payments during three to five years post-filing.


                                                          21
protection increases the marginal recipient’s post-filing credit score by 28.5 points, a 5.0 percent
increase from the dismissed filer mean of 565.4 points. With controls, the estimated impact is 14.9
points, a 2.6 percent increase from the dismissed filer mean. The smaller point estimate when
baseline controls are included is likely due to baseline credit scores being modestly different for
filers assigned to more and less lenient judges in our matched sample. Estimates are larger for
homeowners and filers with higher baseline credit scores.
    Consistent with our earlier results, a comparison of means shows that credit scores for both
granted and dismissed bankruptcy filers deteriorate several years before filing. In the years prior to
filing for bankruptcy, Chapter 13 filers experience a 40 to 50 point decline in credit score. Credit
scores increase slightly for both dismissed and granted filers after filing, with granted filers experi-
encing a quicker score increase. Following our above calculations, we find that Chapter 13 protection
mitigates about 50.8 percent of the potential deterioration in credit scores.


                                            F. Potential Mechanisms

In this section, we explore two potential mechanisms that might explain our findings: (1) protection
from debt collectors and (2) debt forgiveness.17
    We test the importance of the Chapter 13 provision that puts a hold on debt collection efforts
using across-state variation in state garnishment laws. In the four states that do not allow wage
garnishment – Florida, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Texas – creditors have fewer options to
collect unpaid debts from dismissed filers. Treatment effects in states that allow wage garnishment
include the effect of the hold on debt collection, debt forgiveness, and asset retention. Treatment
effects in states that do not allow wage garnishment only include the effect of debt forgiveness and
asset retention. If the two sets of estimates are different, this implies that the hold on debt collection
is empirically important.18 Table 5 presents two-stage least squares results for filers in states that do
and do not allow wage garnishment. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find large and statistically
significant effects of Chapter 13 protection in states that allow wage garnishment, and small and
imprecisely estimated effects in the four states that prohibit wage garnishment. However, only one
   17
       The retention of assets is a third potential mechanism that we are unable to fully test. One partial test of
this hypothesis is to compare treatment effects for baseline homeowners to baseline renters. In Table 4, we find
positive benefits of Chapter 13 protection for both homeowners and non-homeowners, but results are somewhat
larger for homeowners. These results suggest that retention of important assets, such as a home, is a modest but
important mechanism explaining our results. An alternative test of this mechanism is to compare treatment effects
for homeowners and non-homeowners in states with and without judicial foreclosure. In states without judicial
foreclosure, creditors can initiate foreclosure proceedings more easily. It is plausible that Chapter 13 protection may
have a larger impact for homeowners in these states if the retention of the home is an important driver of our results.
Appendix Table 5 presents these results. Consistent with the results discussed above, the point estimates suggest
that the retention of assets is a somewhat important driver of our results. However, the imprecision of the estimates
makes definitive conclusions difficult.
    18
       It is plausible that the decision to file for Chapter 13 is influenced by state wage garnishment laws. If the
effects of Chapter 13 protection are different for these filers, our estimates will also incorporate this heterogeneity of
treatment effects. The same logic applies to our Chapter 7 exemption results in Table 6.


                                                           22
of the eight differences is statistically significant due to the imprecision of the point estimates in
states that do not allow wage garnishment. These results are therefore consistent with there being
significant costs of not being protected from debt collectors that may help explain the deterioration
of outcomes among dismissed filers, but are far from conclusive evidence.
    Next, we test the importance of debt forgiveness using across-state variation in Chapter 7 home-
stead exemption levels. Recall that the Chapter 13 repayment plan must pay unsecured creditors
at least as much as they would receive under Chapter 7. Moreover, the amount that unsecured
creditors receive under Chapter 7 depends on state home exemption levels. If debt forgiveness is
empirically important, the effect of Chapter 13 protection should therefore be larger in states that
have high exemptions where filers are able to discharge a larger fraction of their debt. Table 6
presents two-stage least squares results for baseline homeowners and renters in states with above
and below median home exemption levels. The results are broadly consistent with the idea that
benefits of Chapter 13 protection are larger when more debt is forgiven. However, once again, only
two of the eight differences are statistically significant due to large standard errors. The effect of
Chapter 13 protection on financial strain is 0.175 standard deviations larger for homeowners in
high exemption states compared to homeowners in low exemption states (p-value=0.116), and the
effect on mortgage balance is $27,709 larger (p-value=0.008). For renters, we find that the effect of
Chapter 13 protection on auto balance is larger in high exemption states because states with high
home exemptions also have high auto exemptions.19 These results suggest that debt forgiveness also
plays an important role in explaining our findings, though again the evidence is far from conclusive.


                                       G. Additional Robustness Tests

Appendix Table 6 explores the robustness of our main results to alternative measures of judge
leniency. Column 1 replicates our preferred estimates from Table 3 using the leave-one-out measure
of judge leniency as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Column 2 uses a leave-month-out
version of judge leniency as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection that purges any remaining
correlation between a filer’s outcomes and our instrument introduced by the estimation of the
office-by-filing-month fixed effects in our first and second stage regressions. Column 3 uses a leave-
one-out measure of judge leniency calculated using decisions after only 90 days to proxy for the
initial judicial decision to confirm or dismiss a filing.20 Column 4 uses a randomly selected subset
of 25 percent of filers to calculate a leave-month-out measure of judge leniency that is used as an
instrument in the mutually exclusive subset of filers. We also test the robustness of our results
  19
      The correlation between a state’s homestead exemptions level and auto exemptions level is 0.43.
  20
      We calculate judge leniency using decisions after 90 days because the bulk of dismissals occur within 90 days of
filing. Under the Bankruptcy Code, the Chapter 13 trustee must hold a meeting of creditors between 21 and 50 days
after the debtor files for bankruptcy. A judge is required to hold a confirmation hearing for the proposed repayment
plan no later than 45 days after the meeting of the creditors. Our results are qualitatively similar using decisions
after 60 and 120 days post-filing.


                                                         23
using judge fixed effects directly rather than our reduced form measure of judge leniency. Columns
5 through 7 present results that use judge fixed effects as instruments for bankruptcy protection
estimated using two-stage least squares, LIML, and jackknife IV, respectively. Results across all
specifications are nearly identical to our preferred specifications. None of the estimates suggest that
our preferred estimates are invalid.
    Appendix Table 7 examines the persistence of our findings using outcomes for an unbalanced
panel of filers in the sixth through eighth post-filing years. In the sixth through eighth post-filing
years, Chapter 13 protection reduces the marginal recipient’s financial strain by 0.127 standard
deviations, reduces the amount of debt in collections by $1,931, increases the probability of being a
homeowner by 26.0 percentage points, and increases credit score by 28.8 points. While there is no
change in the probability of having an open auto loan in the first five post-filing years (see Table 3),
Chapter 13 protection increases the probability of having an auto loan by 12.6 percentage points
by the sixth to eighth post-filing years, suggesting that dismissed filers are more likely to lose their
cars several years after filing.


                       V. Reconciling Estimates with Prior Literature

Our results from Section IV show that Chapter 13 protection has an economically and statistically
significant impact on the marginal recipient’s financial health. These results stand in sharp contrast
to the prior literature showing few benefits of filing for bankruptcy protection using non-experimental
methods (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011, Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2013,
Jagtiani and Li 2014). In this section, we explore the extent to which these contrasting results can
be explained by bias in the non-experimental specifications used in this literature.21
    We begin by revisiting the descriptive results comparing the means of granted and dismissed
filers before and after filing. Outcomes for both dismissed and granted filers are worse than non-
filers even before filing. Moreover, the outcomes of both dismissed and granted bankruptcy filers
deteriorate one to two years before filing, and remain depressed after filing. For example, consider
our credit score results discussed above. Four years before filing, credit scores for both granted and
dismissed filers are over 100 points lower than non-filers. In the years prior to filing for bankruptcy,
both groups of filers experience a 40 to 50 point decline in credit score. Credit scores increase
   21
     There are at least two other reasons why our estimates would deviate from the prior literature. First, the
prior literature has largely relied on either small samples of survey responses (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011), or
administrative credit bureau data over a limited time span (e.g. Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga
2013). Our analysis uses administrative credit data linked to bankruptcy filings that cover at least five post-filing
years for all filers. It is possible that the benefits of bankruptcy protection are only detectable with the larger sample
size and a longer time horizon afforded by our data. Consistent with this explanation, we find that our results are
more modest one year after filing compared to subsequent post-filing years. Second, many analyses have considered
the effects of filing for Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy together (e.g. Han and Li 2011, Cohen-Cole, Duygan-
Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2013). Dobbie and Song (2015) find that the effects of Chapter 7 protection on labor
supply and mortality are smaller than the effects of Chapter 13.


                                                           24
slightly for both dismissed and granted filers after filing, with granted filers experiencing a quicker
score increase.
    These descriptive results suggest that non-experimental estimates are likely to be biased down-
wards for at least two reasons. First, there are important differences between filers and non-filers
that may not be fully accounted for by the controls that are typically available in survey data.
Second, there is significant selection into filing even conditional on pre-filing characteristics. Our
descriptive data suggests that bankruptcy filings are often the result of adverse shocks that have
independent effects on outcomes even after filing. In this scenario, both OLS estimates with a non-
filing comparison group and within-individual estimates will be downward biased. The magnitude
of the bias is likely to be decreasing in the number of available baseline controls that can account
for pre-filing differences, and the number of available baseline observations before the pre-filing
deterioration of outcomes.22
    Table 7 presents formal OLS and within-individual estimates that test these predictions. Columns
1 and 2 of Table 7 present OLS results comparing discharged Chapter 13 filers to non-filers living
in the same zip code. We exclude dismissed Chapter 13 filers from this comparison to focus on the
effects of receiving Chapter 13 protection.23 Column 1 only controls for zip code-by-filing year fixed
effects. Column 2 adds our standard set of baseline controls to account for observable differences
between discharged filers and non-filers. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. We
find that discharged Chapter 13 filers have lower credit scores and higher financial strain compared
to non-filers. We also find that Chapter 13 filers have lower revolving, mortgage, and auto balances
compared to non-filers. Collections balances, revolving utilization, and non-mortgage inquiries are
higher among Chapter 13 recipients in our specification without controls, but lower when we include
our baseline controls. These results are broadly consistent with those reported in Han and Li (2011),
who use data from the Survey of Consumer Finances to show that bankruptcy filers have less wealth
compared to non-filers.
    Column 3 presents within-individual estimates comparing the pre- and post-filing outcomes of
discharged Chapter 13 filers. We use three years of baseline data to estimate the individual fixed
effects, and cluster standard errors at the individual level. We find that these within-individual
estimates yield incorrectly signed point estimates for financial strain, mortgage balance, and credit
scores. As discussed above, this finding is likely due to adverse shocks that independently affect post-
filing outcomes. These results are also consistent with Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump, and Montoriol-


  22
       The pre-filing fall in outcomes is similar to the drop in earnings among participants in job training programs.
See Ashenfelter (1978), Ashenfelter and Card (1985), and Heckman and Hotz (1989) for additional discussion.
    23
       To remain consistent with the panel format of our judge sample, we create pseudo filing events for non-filers
in the national sample. We randomly assign all credit users in the national sample one of four pseudo filing years
between 2003 and 2006. We then exclude individuals who filed for bankruptcy in any of the years prior to this pseudo
filing date. Remaining individuals comprise the non-filer comparison group.


                                                         25
Garriga (2013), who find that filers have less access to credit after filing using credit bureau data.24
    Columns 4 through 6 present results comparing dismissed and discharged Chapter 13 filers. This
approach is in the spirit of Bound’s (1989) analysis of accepted and rejected Disability Insurance ap-
plicants, and more recent work estimating the effects of job loss on subsequent outcomes (Jacobson,
Lalonde, and Sullivan 1993, von Wachter, Song, and Manchester 2009, Sullivan and von Wachter
2009). With the exception of Dobbie and Song (2015), the previous bankruptcy literature has not
used dismissed filers as a comparison group. Following our earlier results with a non-filer compar-
ison group, column 4 presents results with zip code-by-filing year fixed effects, column 5 adds our
standard set of baseline controls, and column 6 adds individual fixed effects. We cluster standard
errors at the office level for columns 4 and 5, and at the individual level for column 6. In contrast to
the non-experimental estimates discussed above, the non-experimental estimates with a dismissed
filer comparison group are broadly consistent with our judge IV estimates. We find that Chapter
13 filers granted bankruptcy protection have lower financial strain than dismissed filers, and have
less collections debt, higher mortgage balances, more credit access, and higher credit scores.
    In sum, the results from Table 7 are consistent with both OLS estimates using a non-filer compar-
ison group and within-individual estimates being biased against finding any benefits of bankruptcy
protection. Using these non-experimental approaches, we find qualitatively similar results to the
prior literature (Han and Li 2007, 2011, Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump, and Montoriol-Garriga 2013).
In contrast, estimates using a dismissed filer comparison group are broadly consistent with our judge
IV estimates, suggesting that selection into filing accounts for most of the bias in non-experimental
specifications.


                                                  VI. Conclusion

In this paper, we exploit the random assignment of bankruptcy filers to judges to estimate the impact
of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-filing financial outcomes. We find that Chapter 13
protection reduces financial strain, increases the probability of being a homeowner, and reduces the
amount of debt in collection. Chapter 13 protection also increases credit scores and credit access
proxies. The effects of Chapter 13 protection are largest in states with more creditor-friendly laws
and states with higher Chapter 7 exemption levels, suggesting that protection from debt collectors
and debt forgiveness are key drivers of our results.
    Our results complement earlier work by Dobbie and Song (2015) showing that Chapter 13
protection increases earnings and reduces mortality risk among marginal recipients. The results in

   24
     Specifications that use only one year of pre-filing data to estimate the individual fixed effects yield point estimates
that are correctly signed for most outcomes. This surprising result is due to the individual fixed effects being measured
in a year where outcomes are most depressed. As a result, mean reversion in the outcomes of granted filers generates
upwards bias.


                                                            26
this paper suggest that Chapter 13 protection also has important impacts on financial well-being
and economic stability. Importantly, and contrary to much of the prior literature, we find that
Chapter 13 decreases the likelihood of adverse financial events, allows debtors to retain important
assets such as a home, and increases both credit access measures and credit scores. These results
suggest that the benefits of bankruptcy protection are much broader than previously realized.
   Both papers also find that the benefits of bankruptcy protection are driven by a deterioration of
outcomes among dismissed filers, rather than gains among granted filers. These results provide new
evidence on the mechanisms through which excessive debt and financial distress distort borrower
behavior. In particular, our results suggest that both excessive debt and the debt collection process
have significant long-term consequences, and that bankruptcy protection can ameliorate many of
these adverse consequences.
   The findings from this paper and Dobbie and Song (2015) will also help inform ongoing efforts
to evaluate the welfare impact of the consumer bankruptcy system. These evaluations typically
use quantitative models to weigh the trade-off between the ex-post consumption smoothing benefits
provided by bankruptcy protection estimated in this paper, with the ex-ante increased borrowing
costs suggested by economic theory (e.g. Athreya 2002, Li and Sarte 2006, Livshits, MacGee, and
Tertilt 2007, Chatterjee and Gordon 2012). An important limitation of this literature has been
the lack of empirical evidence on the magnitude of the benefits provided by bankruptcy protection
for the marginal recipient. Our results suggest that the ex-post benefits of consumer bankruptcy
on important outcomes, such as credit access and debt repayment, are significantly larger than
previously assumed by this literature. Moreover, we find that consumer bankruptcy also impacts
a number of outcomes previously assumed to fixed, such as asset holdings and labor supply. We
therefore view the incorporation of our empirical estimates into a general equilibrium model of the
credit market as an important area for future research.




                                                 27
                                          References

 [1] Aizer, Anna, and Joseph Doyle, Jr. Forthcoming. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and
        Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
 [2] Armour, John, and Douglas Cumming. 2008. “Bankruptcy Law and Entrepreneurship.” Amer-
       ican Law and Economics Review, 10(2): 303-350.
 [3] Ashenfelter, Orley. 1978. “Estimating the Effect of Training programs on Earnings.” The Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 60(1): 47-57.
 [4] Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. 1985. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to
        Estimate the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings.” The Review of Economics and
        Statistics, 67(4): 648-660.
 [5] Athreya, Kartik. 2002. “Welfare Implications of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1999.” Journal
        of Monetary Economics, 49(8): 1567-1595.
 [6] Autor, David, and Susan Houseman. 2010. “Do Temporary-Help Jobs Improve Labor Mar-
        ket Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from “Work First.” American Economic
        Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 96-128.
 [7] Avery, Robert, Paul Calem, and Glenn Canner. 2003. “An Overview of Consumer Data and
        Credit Reporting.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 89 (February): 47-78.
 [8] Bound, John. 1989. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.”
        The American Economic Review, 79(3): 482-503.
 [9] Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Forced Sales and House Prices.”
       American Economic Review, 101(5): 2108-2131.
[10] Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar. 2008. “Judge Specific Differences in Chapter 11 and Firm
       Outcomes.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[11] Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Grey Gordon. 2012. “Dealing with Consumer Default: Bankruptcy vs
       Garnishment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(15): S1-S16.
[12] Cohen-Cole, Ethan, Burcu Duygan-Bump, and Judit Montoriol-Garriga. 2013. “Who Gets
        Credit After Bankruptcy and Why? An Information Channel.” Journal of Banking and
        Finance, 37(12): 5101-5117.
[13] Domowitz, Ian, and Robert Sartain. 1999. “Determinants of the Consumer Bankruptcy Deci-
       sion.” The Journal of Finance, 54(1): 403-420.
[14] Dobbie, Will, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. 2014. “Debt Protections and the Great Recession.”
       Unpublished Working Paper.
[15] Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2015. “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects
       of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection.” American Economic Review, 105(3): 1272-1311.
[16] Doyle, Joseph. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
        Care.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1583-1610.
[17] Doyle, Joseph. 2008. “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
        Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(4): 746-770.
[18] Eggertson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap:
        A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469-1513.
[19] Fan, Wei, and Michelle White. 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
        Activity.” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 543-567.

                                                28
[20] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2013. “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Pres-
        ence of Nominal Rigidities.” NBER Working Paper No. 19313.
[21] Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle White. 2002. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision.”
        American Economic Review, 92(3): 706-718.
[22] Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2014. Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit.
[23] Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
        Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The
        Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” The Quarterly Jour-
        nal of Economics, 127(3): 1057-1106.
[24] French, Eric, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 291-337.
[25] Fryer, Roland, and L Katz. 2013. “Achieving Escape Velocity: Neighborhood and School In-
        terventions to Reduce Persistent Inequality.” American Economic Review (Papers and Pro-
        ceedings), 103(3): 232-237.
[26] Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. 2011. “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
       the Liquidity Trap.” NBER Working Paper No. 17583.
[27] Han, Song, and Geng Li. 2007. “Fresh Start or Head Start? The Effect of Filing for Personal
       Bankruptcy on Labor Supply.” Journal of Financial Services Research, 31(2): 123-152.
[28] Han, Song, and Geng Li. 2011. “Household Borrowing after Personal Bankruptcy.” Journal of
       Money, Credit and Banking, 43(2-3): 491-517.
[29] Han, Song, Benjamin J. Keys, and Geng Li. 2013. “Unsecured Credit Supply over the Credit
       Cycle: Evidence from Credit Card Mailings.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[30] Heckman, James, and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989. “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental
        Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training.”
        Journal of the American Statistical Association, 84(408): 862-874.
[31] Himmelstein, David, Deborah Thorne, Elizabeth Warren, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2009. “Med-
        ical Bankruptcy in the United States, 2007: Results of a National Study.” American Journal
        of Medicine, 122 (8): 741-746.
[32] Hynes, Richard. 2004. “Why (Consumer) Bankruptcy?” Alabama Law Review, 56(1): 121-179.
[33] Hynes, Richard M., Amanda E. Dawsey, and Lawrence M. Ausubel. 2013. “Non-Judicial
       Debt Collection and the Consumer’s Choice Among Repayment, Bankruptcy and Infor-
       mal Bankruptcy.” American Bankruptcy Law Journal, 87(1): 1-26.
[34] Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
        Workers.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709.
[35] Jagtiani, Julapa and Wenli Li. Forthcoming. “Credit Access After Consumer Bankruptcy Filing:
        New Evidence.” American Bankruptcy Law Journal.
[36] Kling, Jeffrey. 2006. “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings.” American Economic
        Review, 96(3): 863-876.
[37] Krugman, Paul. 1988. “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang.” NBER Working Paper No.
        2486.
[38] Li, Wenli and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. 2006. “U.S. Consumer Bankruptcy Choice: The Importance
         of General Equilibrium Effects.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(3): 613-631.

                                                29
[39] Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh
        Start.” American Economic Review, 97(1): 402-418.
[40] Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance
       Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
       Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797-1829.
[41] Mahoney, Neale. 2015. “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance.” American Economic Review,
       105(2): 710-746.
[42] Melzer, Brian. 2012. “Mortgage Debt Overhang: Reduced Investment by Homeowners with
        Negative Equity.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[43] Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2013. “The Political Economy of the Subprime
        Mortgage Credit Expansion.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 8(4): 373-408.
[44] Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
        and the Economic Slump.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687-1726.
[45] Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. Forthcoming. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?”
        Econometrica.
[46] Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Thomas Philippon. 2011. “Household Leverage and the Recession.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 16965.
[47] Myers, Stewart. 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial Economics,
       5(1977): 147-175.
[48] Norberg, Scott, and Nadia Compo. 2007. “Report on an Empirical Study of District Variations,
        and the Roles of Judges, Trustees and Debtor’s Attorneys in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Cases.”
        The American Bankruptcy Law Journal, 81(4): 431-493.
[49] Porter, Katherine. 2011. “The Pretend Solution: An Empirical Study of Bankruptcy Outcomes.”
        Texas Law Review, 90(103): 104-162.
[50] Sullivan, Daniel, and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
        Using Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1265-1306.
[51] Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Westbrook. 2000. The Fragile Middle Class: Amer-
        icans in Debt. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
[52] von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “Long-Term Earnings Losses due to
        Mass-Layoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal Administrative
        Data from 1974 to 2004." Unpublished Working Paper.
[53] Warren, Elizabeth, Teresa Sullivan, and Melissa Jacoby. 2000. “Medical Problems and
       Bankruptcy Filings.” Norton Bankruptcy Law Advisor, May 2000.
[54] White, Michelle, and Ning Zhu. 2010. “Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy.” Journal
       of Legal Studies, 39(1): 33-61.
[55] White, Michelle. 2011. “Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy Law.” Annual Review of Law and
       Social Science, 7: 139-164.
[56] Zywicki, Todd J. 2005. “An Economic Analysis of the Consumer Bankruptcy Crisis.” North-
        western University Law Review, 99(4): 1463-1541.




                                               30
                                                  Table 1
                            Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Balance
                                                 All Credit Users                      Judge Sample
                                               Full     Bankruptcy            Harsh       Lenient
                                              Sample        Filers            Judge        Judge   p-value
         Panel A: Judge Leniency                (1)          (2)                (3)         (4)      (5)
           Judge Leniency                        -            -               -0.013       0.012    0.000

         Panel B: Baseline Characteristics
           Age                           48.549                43.699         44.843      44.863      0.229
           Homeowner                       0.470               0.520           0.668      0.643       0.175

         Panel C: Baseline Financial Events
           Delinquency                   0.148                 0.413           0.681       0.675      0.962
           Collection                    0.137                 0.296           0.460       0.467      0.897
           Charge-off                    0.065                 0.188           0.308       0.310      0.630
           Bankruptcy                    0.010                 0.007           0.046       0.048      0.318
           Judgment                      0.009                 0.034           0.067       0.060      0.403
           Foreclosure                   0.003                 0.010           0.055       0.048      0.632
           Lien                          0.004                 0.011           0.021       0.021      0.445
           Repossession                  0.003                 0.012           0.022       0.020      0.491

         Panel D: Baseline Unsecured Debt and Collections
           Revolving Balance            6.011       13.083                    10.939      10.007      0.440
           Collection Balance           0.601        1.432                     2.421       2.497      0.676

         Panel E: Baseline Secured Assets
           Have a Mortgage                0.367                 0.434          0.591      0.567       0.274
           Mortgage Balance              42.460                39.848         56.804      53.437      0.213
           Have an Auto Loan              0.283                 0.454         0.479       0.468       0.778
           Auto Balance                   4.391                 7.803         8.359       8.207       0.913

         Panel F: Baseline Credit Access
           Revolving Utilization         25.495                61.443         70.869      70.968      0.858
           Non-Mortgage Inquiries         0.807                1.841           2.355      2.362       0.186

         Panel G: Baseline Credit Score
           Credit Score                 739.538             630.096          581.373      580.155     0.730

         Panel H: Data Characteristics
           Matched to Credit Report       -                      -             0.692      0.687       0.823
           Missing Age                  0.169                  0.062           0.091      0.098       0.751
           Missing Baseline Outcomes      -                    0.137           0.028      0.029       0.037
           Missing Credit Score         0.053                  0.014           0.019      0.023       0.043
         Observations                  3308824                 56906           85173      89903      175076
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The all credit user sample consists of a two percent random sample
of credit users in the United States from 2002-2005. Bankruptcy filers consist of individuals who filed for any
bankruptcy chapter from 2002-2006. The judge sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from
offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of
filing. Column 5 reports p-values calculated from separate regression models of each baseline characteristic on an
indicator for being assigned to a judge with above median leniency. Column 5 also controls for office-by-filing-month
fixed effects and clusters standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details on the data and variable
construction.



                                                          31
                                               Table 2
                               Judge Leniency and Chapter 13 Protection
                                      (1)       (2)         (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)
      Judge Leniency                0.88872∗∗∗ 0.83789∗∗∗ 0.84220∗∗∗        0.85585∗∗∗  0.85780∗∗∗ 0.81092∗∗∗
                                   (0.04873) (0.05299) (0.04777)           (0.05243)   (0.04588) (0.05186)
      Age at Filing                            0.00305∗∗∗ 0.00235∗∗∗        0.00424∗∗∗  0.00310∗∗∗ 0.00072∗∗∗
                                              (0.00016) (0.00018)          (0.00017)   (0.00017) (0.00018)
      Homeowner                                0.03749∗∗∗−0.01142           0.02574∗∗∗  0.00205 −0.00827
                                              (0.01047) (0.01305)          (0.00512)   (0.01222) (0.00536)
      Delinquency                             −0.06518∗∗∗                                           0.03066∗∗∗
                                              (0.00908)                                            (0.00402)
      Collection                              −0.12082∗∗∗                                         −0.04848∗∗∗
                                              (0.00765)                                            (0.00428)
      Charge-off                               0.00413                                              0.00117
                                              (0.00320)                                            (0.00267)
      Bankruptcy                              −0.13191∗∗∗                                         −0.08388∗∗∗
                                              (0.01038)                                            (0.00809)
      Judgment                                −0.07933∗∗∗                                         −0.04120∗∗∗
                                              (0.01277)                                            (0.01031)
      Foreclosure                             −0.17495∗∗∗                                         −0.12185∗∗∗
                                              (0.01508)                                            (0.01319)
      Lien                                    −0.10001∗∗∗                                         −0.06406∗∗∗
                                              (0.00847)                                            (0.00842)
      Repossession                            −0.02670∗∗∗                                           0.00054
                                              (0.00855)                                            (0.00804)
      Revolving Balance                                    0.00575∗∗∗                               0.00487∗∗∗
                                                          (0.00025)                               (0.00021)
      Collection Balance                                 −0.00617∗∗∗                              −0.00206∗∗∗
                                                          (0.00051)                               (0.00038)
      Have a Mortgage                                                       0.00883                 0.04324∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.01359)                (0.00972)
      Mortgage Balance                                                    −0.00028∗∗∗             −0.00039∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00007)                (0.00005)
      Have an Auto Loan                                                     0.10670∗∗∗              0.06466∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.00488)               (0.00463)
      Auto Balance                                                        −0.00065∗∗∗             −0.00068∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.00024)               (0.00022)
      Revolving Utilization                                                           −0.00004      0.00009∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.00003) (0.00002)
      Non-Mortgage Inquiries                                                          −0.01126∗∗∗−0.00861∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.00081) (0.00069)
      Credit Score                                                                      0.00075∗∗∗ 0.00142∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.00008) (0.00005)
    Observations                    175076       175076       175076       175076      175076      175076
Notes: This table reports first stage results. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from
offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of
filing. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned
judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. All characteristics are
measured one year prior to the bankruptcy filing. All regressions control for office-by-filing-month fixed effects and
cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details on the data and variable construction.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        32
                              Table 3
           Chapter 13 Protection and Financial Well-Being
                                    Dismissed
                                      Mean         2SLS Results
Panel A: Adverse Financial Events       (1)       (2)         (3)
  Financial Strain Index              -0.068    −0.369∗∗∗ −0.316∗∗∗
                                     (0.575)    (0.070)     (0.071)
  Delinquency                         0.596      0.019       0.013
                                     (0.292)    (0.017)     (0.018)
  Collection                          0.584     −0.201∗∗∗ −0.149∗∗
                                     (0.305)    (0.053)     (0.061)
  Charge-off†                         0.216     −0.065∗∗∗ −0.067∗∗∗
                                     (0.227)    (0.017)     (0.020)
  New Bankruptcy†                     0.109     −0.064∗∗∗ −0.065∗∗∗
                                     (0.167)    (0.023)     (0.025)
  Foreclosure                         0.070     −0.030∗∗∗ −0.016∗
                                     (0.139)    (0.009)     (0.008)
  Judgment                            0.066     −0.039∗∗   −0.031∗
                                     (0.128)    (0.016)     (0.016)
  Lien                                0.034     −0.034∗∗∗ −0.034∗∗
                                     (0.099)    (0.012)     (0.013)
  Repossession                        0.019     −0.015∗∗∗ −0.016∗∗
                                     (0.064)    (0.006)     (0.006)

Panel B: Unsecured Debt and Collections
  Revolving Balance                   2.563      0.199       −0.920
                                     (6.065)    (0.720)       (0.745)
  Collection Balance                  4.217     −1.842∗∗∗    −1.315∗∗∗
                                     (5.898)    (0.449)       (0.432)

Panel C: Secured Assets
  Have a Mortgage                      0.363     0.110∗∗       0.132∗∗∗
                                      (0.369)   (0.045)       (0.021)
  Mortgage Balance                    26.833    12.196∗∗∗    14.267∗∗∗
                                     (41.359)   (4.132)       (4.955)
  Have an Auto Loan                    0.178     0.046∗        0.020
                                      (0.263)   (0.028)       (0.032)
  Auto Balance                         4.067    −0.500       −0.904
                                      (5.797)   (0.500)       (0.581)

Panel D: Credit Access
  Revolving Utilization               46.729    −15.132∗∗∗ −16.148∗∗∗
                                     (46.437)    (3.884)    (3.282)
  Non-Mortgage Inquiries               1.584     −0.410∗∗∗ −0.293∗∗
                                      (1.487)    (0.121)    (0.118)

Panel E: Credit Score
  Credit Score                       565.433     28.511∗∗∗   14.981∗∗∗
                                     (44.543)    (4.234)     (3.270)
Controls                                 –         No         Yes
Observations                          97006      175076      175076




                                    33
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on
post-filing outcomes. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from offices that randomly
assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. All outcomes
are annual averages for the year of filing to fifth year post-filing, with the exceptions of outcomes with a † where
outcomes are averaged over the first full year after filing to the fifth year post-filing to remove the mechanical effect
of the bankruptcy filing. Column 1 reports the post-filing mean and standard deviation for dismissed filers. Columns
2-3 instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office.
All regressions control for office-by-filing-month fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the office level. Column 3
adds controls for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection
balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization, and non-
mortgage inquiries as controls. The financial strain index contains the non-cumulative probabilities of the following
eight components: delinquency, collection, charge-off, bankruptcy, foreclosure, judgment, lien and repossession. For
each year post-filing, each component is standardized using the mean and standard deviation for the dismissed filer
group in the baseline year. We sum across the eight components to create an index, restandardizing using the mean
and standard deviation of the dismissed filer group in the baseline period. The index is then averaged over the five
years post-filing. See the data appendix for details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1
percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          34
                                                                          Table 4
                                                         Chapter 13 Results by Filer Characteristics
                                                         Age at Filing                         Baseline Credit Score           Baseline Homeowner
                                              25 to 39      40 to 59       60 and up             High          Low               Yes           No
                                                 (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)          (5)                (6)          (7)
                Financial Strain              −0.402∗∗∗ −0.302∗∗∗            −0.388            −0.327∗∗∗ −0.344∗∗∗            −0.416∗∗∗ −0.165∗
                                               (0.085)       (0.070)          (0.405)           (0.065)      (0.071)           (0.047)       (0.091)
                                               [0.040]     [−0.041]         [−0.248]          [−0.132]       [0.012]            [0.010]    [−0.184]
                Revolving Balance               0.059       −1.304             1.168           −1.249       −0.011            −0.817        −0.586
                                               (0.700)       (1.130)          (1.985)           (0.996)      (0.774)           (0.747)       (0.918)
                                               [2.171]       [2.961]          [4.282]           [3.161]      [2.226]            [3.061]      [1.676]
                Collection Balance            −1.719∗∗      −1.269∗∗∗        −1.528            −2.210∗∗∗ −0.384               −1.531∗∗      −1.011∗∗
                                               (0.747)       (0.410)          (1.589)           (0.433)      (1.089)           (0.641)       (0.474)
                                               [4.737]       [4.160]          [2.950]           [3.354]      [4.737]            [3.935]      [4.661]
                Mortgage Balance               11.449        18.233∗∗∗        26.818∗∗∗         15.583∗∗∗    14.912∗           20.372∗∗       4.530
                                               (7.240)       (4.750)         (10.474)           (4.614)      (8.725)           (9.536)       (6.037)
                                              [25.937]      [31.594]         [28.102]          [29.721]     [26.420]          [39.126]       [6.404]
                Auto Balance                  −1.570∗∗      −0.743             1.846           −0.698       −0.908∗           −0.889        −0.923
                                               (0.780)       (0.790)          (1.729)           (0.837)      (0.478)           (0.592)       (1.023)




35
                                               [4.797]       [4.188]          [3.129]           [4.508]      [3.920]            [4.224]      [3.810]
                Revolving Utilization        −21.246∗∗∗ −13.434∗∗∗           −7.594          −15.683∗∗∗ −14.441∗∗            −16.708∗∗∗ −14.152∗∗
                                               (6.534)       (3.011)          (9.937)           (5.045)      (5.652)           (2.577)       (6.707)
                                              [49.679]      [48.149]         [45.564]          [41.543]     [52.114]          [46.686]      [47.368]
                Non-Mortgage Inquiries        −0.280        −0.340∗∗∗          0.256           −0.440∗      −0.193            −0.440∗∗      −0.069
                                               (0.210)       (0.078)          (0.621)           (0.227)      (0.389)           (0.189)       (0.156)
                                               [1.843]       [1.552]          [1.221]           [1.422]      [1.714]            [1.595]      [1.548]
                Credit Score                   22.280∗∗∗      9.952∗∗         32.090∗∗∗         18.579∗∗∗    10.864            18.369∗∗∗      7.573
                                               (5.913)       (4.211)         (11.259)           (5.718)      (7.662)           (2.576)       (7.158)
                                             [556.870]    [569.943]        [596.253]         [585.202]     [553.228]         [570.837]    [556.678]
               Controls                          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes                Yes          Yes
               Observations                     54442         81206            19100             84154        82241            111432         58627
     Notes: This table reports first stage and two-stage least squares results by baseline characteristics. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy
     filers originating from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. The
     post-filing mean for dismissed filers is reported in brackets for each subgroup. We instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out mean
     rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the
     office. Subgroup instruments are constructed using the matched estimation sample. All regressions control for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit
     score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage and auto loans, revolving
     utilization, non-mortgage inquiries, office-by-filing-month fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details
     on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                               Table 5
                         Chapter 13 Results by State Wage Garnishment Laws
                                                              Garnishment Allowed
                                                           Yes           No     p-value
                                                            (1)          (2)      (3)
                          Financial Strain               −0.319∗∗∗ −0.132        0.449
                                                          (0.070)      (0.242)
                                                        [−0.058]     [−0.167]
                          Revolving Balance              −1.061         6.606    0.132
                                                          (0.654)      (5.119)
                                                          [2.477]      [3.407]
                          Collection Balance             −1.285∗∗∗ −2.888        0.407
                                                          (0.441)      (1.913)
                                                          [4.190]      [4.482]
                          Mortgage Balance                13.985∗∗∗    29.399    0.606
                                                          (5.190)     (29.864)
                                                         [26.517]     [29.940]
                          Auto Balance                   −1.017∗        5.158    0.245
                                                          (0.532)      (5.366)
                                                          [4.051]      [4.223]
                          Revolving Utilization        −16.619∗∗∗       9.060    0.349
                                                          (3.477)     (27.639)
                                                         [46.375]     [50.211]
                          Non-Mortgage Inquiries         −0.319∗∗∗      1.086    0.084
                                                          (0.120)      (0.818)
                                                          [1.584]      [1.584]
                          Credit Score                    15.243∗∗∗     2.614    0.643
                                                          (3.180)     (27.332)
                                                       [564.281]    [576.741]
                       Controls                            Yes           Yes       –
                       Observations                       154611        20465      –
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for states
that do and do not allow wage garnishment. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from
offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of
filing. The post-filing mean for dismissed filers is reported in brackets for each subgroup. We instrument for Chapter
13 protection using the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned
judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. Subgroup instruments
are constructed using the matched estimation sample. All regressions control for baseline age bins, homeownership,
credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators
for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization, non-mortgage inquiries, office-by-filing-month fixed effects, and
cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details on the data and variable construction.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        36
                                               Table 6
                       Chapter 13 Results by State Homestead Exemption Laws
                                            Homeowners                                      Renters
                                     High          Low                           High            Low
                                  Home Ex. Home Ex. p-value                  Home Ex.       Home Ex. p-value
                                      (1)          (2)      (3)                   (4)            (5)    (6)
    Financial Strain               −0.454∗∗∗ −0.279∗∗      0.116               −0.180∗∗       −0.159   0.912
                                    (0.025)      (0.114)                        (0.090)        (0.182)
                                    [0.032]    [−0.022]                       [−0.141]       [−0.214]
    Revolving Balance              −1.149∗∗       0.452    0.373               −0.880         −0.101   0.592
                                    (0.538)      (1.782)                        (1.066)        (1.105)
                                    [3.333]      [2.677]                        [2.010]        [1.435]
    Collection Balance             −1.670∗∗∗ −0.930        0.692               −1.019∗        −1.135   0.897
                                    (0.602)      (1.898)                        (0.616)        (0.793)
                                    [4.089]      [3.718]                        [4.699]        [4.634]
    Mortgage Balance                26.390∗∗∗ −1.319       0.008                 5.566          7.000  0.853
                                    (7.832)      (7.902)                        (6.412)        (5.018)
                                   [42.984]     [33.692]                        [8.444]        [4.934]
    Auto Balance                   −0.916       −0.594     0.755               −1.548∗∗         0.697  0.046
                                    (0.708)      (0.797)                        (0.736)        (0.993)
                                    [4.327]      [4.080]                        [4.449]        [3.350]
    Revolving Utilization         −17.234∗∗∗ −16.214∗      0.910               −9.741∗      −26.188∗∗∗ 0.100
                                    (1.712)      (9.174)                        (5.558)        (9.145)
                                   [46.774]     [46.561]                       [47.841]       [47.027]
    Non-Mortgage Inquiries         −0.501∗∗     −0.194     0.435               −0.169           0.142  0.215
                                    (0.244)      (0.328)                        (0.108)        (0.267)
                                    [1.637]      [1.537]                        [1.596]        [1.514]
    Credit Score                    18.776∗∗∗    16.311∗∗∗ 0.676                 9.496∗         2.743  0.650
                                    (2.658)      (5.572)                        (5.056)       (15.766)
                                  [572.428]   [568.595]                      [561.523]      [553.179]
 Controls                             Yes          Yes       –                    Yes            Yes     –
 Observations                        61334        50098      –                   25900          32727    –
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for
states with above median and below median homestead exemption amounts, separately by homeownership status.
The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges
between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. The post-filing mean for dismissed filers
is reported in brackets for each subgroup. We instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out mean rate
of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting
bankruptcy protection for the office. Subgroup instruments are constructed using the matched estimation sample.
All regressions control for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance,
collection balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization,
non-mortgage inquiries, office-by-filing-month fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. See the
data appendix for details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         37
                                                           Table 7
                                  Non-Experimental Estimates with Different Comparison Groups
                                              All Credit Users               Ind. FE                        Dismissed Filers
                                              (1)           (2)                 (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)
             Financial Strain                 0.505∗∗∗     0.101∗∗∗            0.039∗∗∗        −0.407∗∗∗      −0.337∗∗∗       −0.098∗∗∗
                                             (0.004)      (0.003)             (0.004)           (0.023)        (0.014)         (0.006)
             Revolving Balance              −3.094∗∗∗ −10.178∗∗∗            −11.555∗∗∗           1.085∗∗∗     −0.771∗∗∗       −7.508∗∗∗
                                             (0.053)      (0.100)             (0.099)           (0.122)        (0.075)         (0.112)
             Collection Balance               0.934∗∗∗ −0.907∗∗∗               0.010           −2.229∗∗∗      −1.576∗∗∗       −1.336∗∗∗
                                             (0.021)      (0.018)             (0.023)           (0.092)        (0.049)         (0.037)
             Mortgage Balance               −8.011∗∗∗ −34.320∗∗∗            −17.744∗∗∗         10.549∗∗∗        7.584∗∗∗        7.410∗∗∗
                                             (0.374)      (0.377)             (0.293)           (0.810)        (0.893)         (0.404)
             Auto Balance                   −0.651∗∗∗ −3.914∗∗∗              −5.530∗∗∗         −0.078         −0.362∗∗∗       −1.829∗∗∗
                                             (0.031)      (0.033)             (0.054)           (0.089)        (0.065)         (0.070)
             Revolving Utilization            6.813∗∗∗ −21.376∗∗∗           −35.834∗∗∗        −11.388∗∗∗      −8.758∗∗∗      −10.166∗∗∗
                                             (0.167)      (0.169)             (0.285)           (0.790)        (0.630)         (0.448)
             Non-Mortgage Inquiries           0.336∗∗∗ −0.332∗∗∗             −1.096∗∗∗         −0.484∗∗∗      −0.322∗∗∗       −0.042∗∗∗
                                             (0.007)      (0.006)             (0.010)           (0.028)        (0.022)         (0.015)
             Credit Score                  −118.878∗∗∗ −21.275∗∗∗            −2.973∗∗∗         44.848∗∗∗      24.414∗∗∗       12.743∗∗∗




38
                                             (0.866)      (0.342)             (0.308)           (1.606)        (0.668)         (0.392)
          Baseline Controls                   No           Yes                  No                No             Yes             No
          Individual Fixed Effects            No            No                 Yes                No             No             Yes
          Observations                      1721287      1721287              253014           175076          175076         563636
     Notes: This table reports non-experimental estimates of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-filing outcomes.
     Columns 1-2 report OLS estimates comparing discharged filers in our estimation sample to all non-filers in the full sample of all credit
     users. Column 3 reports within-individual estimates comparing the pre- and post-filing outcomes of discharged filers using three years
     of baseline data. Columns 4-5 report OLS estimates comparing discharged filers to dismissed filers in our estimation sample. Column 7
     reports within-individual estimates comparing discharged filers to dismissed filers in our estimation sample using three years of baseline
     data. See the text for additional details on each specification, and the data appendix for details on the data and variable construction.
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                          Appendix Table 1
                              Bankruptcy Offices in Chapter 13 IV Sample
                    Court                         Office            Years      Judges     Discharge      σZ
     Northern District of Alabama            Birmingham           2002-2005      3          0.349       0.036
     Southern District of Alabama            Mobile               2002-2005      2          0.464       0.006
     Southern District of California         San Diego            2002-2005      4          0.472       0.011
     Southern District of Florida            Fort Lauderdale      2002-2005      2          0.448       0.006
     Southern District of Florida            Miami                2002-2005      2          0.537       0.007
     Northern District of Georgia            Atlanta              2004-2005      8          0.322       0.035
     Northern District of Georgia            Rome                 2004-2005      2          0.414       0.015
     District of Idaho                       Boise                2002-2005      2          0.548       0.006
     Southern District of Indiana            Indianapolis         2002-2005      3          0.529       0.006
     Eastern District of Kentucky            Lexington            2002-2005      2          0.556       0.034
     District of Massachusetts               Boston               2002-2003      3          0.334       0.036
     Eastern District of Michigan            Detroit              2003-2005      3          0.299       0.001
     Western District of Michigan            Grand Rapids         2002-2005      3          0.507       0.010
     District of Minnesota                   Minneapolis          2002-2005      2          0.530       0.001
     District of Minnesota                   St. Paul             2002-2005      2          0.543       0.044
     Eastern District of Missouri            St. Louis            2003-2005      2          0.422       0.019
     Western District of Missouri            Kansas City          2002-2005      4          0.505       0.011
     Middle District of North Carolina       Durham                 2005         2          0.568       0.017
     District of New Mexico                  Albuquerque          2002-2005      2          0.419       0.022
     District of Nevada                      Las Vegas            2002-2005      3          0.389       0.011
     Southern District of Ohio               Cincinnati           2002-2005      3          0.570       0.025
     Southern District of Ohio               Columbus               2002         3          0.600       0.057
     Southern District of Ohio               Dayton               2002-2005      3          0.609       0.022
     Northern District of Oklahoma           Tulsa                2002-2005      2          0.480       0.011
     District of Oregon                      Eugene               2002-2005      2          0.600       0.016
     District of Oregon                      Portland             2002-2005      3          0.551       0.114
     District of South Carolina              Columbia             2003-2005      2          0.758       0.021
     Eastern District of Tennessee           Chattanooga          2002-2005      2          0.443       0.009
     Middle District of Tennessee            Columbia             2002-2005      3          0.469       0.010
     Middle District of Tennessee            Cookeville           2002-2005      3          0.476       0.014
     Middle District of Tennessee            Nashville            2002-2005      3          0.493       0.015
     Western District of Tennessee           Memphis              2002-2005      3          0.270       0.003
     Western District of Texas               San Antonio          2002-2005      2          0.443       0.002
     District of Utah                        Salt Lake City       2003-2005      3          0.348       0.007
     Eastern District of Virginia            Alexandria           2002-2005      2          0.567       0.001
     Eastern District of Virginia            Newport News         2002-2005      2          0.569       0.038
     Eastern District of Virginia            Norfolk              2002-2005      2          0.597       0.001
     Western District of Washington          Tacoma               2002-2005      2          0.574       0.004
     Eastern District of Wisconsin           Milwaukee            2003-2005      3          0.472       0.010
Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics for the 39 offices in the 29 bankruptcy courts that randomly assign
filings to judges in our instrumental variables sample. σZ is the standard deviation of leave-one-out measure of judge
leniency described in the text.




                                                        39
                                              Appendix Table 2
                              Results for Alternative Financial Strain Measures
                                                        Dismissed
                                                          Mean               2SLS Results
                     Panel A: Ever Experienced             (1)              (2)        (3)
                       Delinquency                        0.942            0.002   −0.007
                                                         (0.233)          (0.027)   (0.026)
                       Collection                         0.920          −0.147∗∗ −0.098
                                                         (0.271)          (0.061)   (0.066)
                       Charge-off†                        0.581          −0.112∗   −0.120∗
                                                         (0.493)          (0.060)   (0.065)
                       New Bankruptcy†                    0.351          −0.271∗∗∗ −0.278∗∗∗
                                                         (0.477)          (0.056)   (0.060)
                       Foreclosure                        0.248          −0.111∗∗∗ −0.062∗∗
                                                         (0.432)          (0.031)   (0.025)
                       Judgment                           0.252          −0.154∗∗∗ −0.127∗∗
                                                         (0.434)          (0.056)   (0.058)
                       Lien                               0.128          −0.116∗∗∗ −0.111∗∗∗
                                                         (0.334)          (0.026)   (0.028)
                       Repossession                       0.084          −0.071∗∗∗ −0.074∗∗
                                                         (0.278)          (0.027)   (0.029)

                     Panel B: Number of Experiences
                       Delinquencies                6.774                  1.247∗        0.719
                                                   (5.434)                (0.650)       (0.688)
                       Collections                  6.847                −2.992∗∗∗     −2.235∗∗∗
                                                   (6.722)                (0.624)       (0.750)
                       Charge-offs†                 1.220                −0.364∗∗∗     −0.395∗∗∗
                                                   (1.562)                (0.110)       (0.130)
                       New Bankruptcies†            0.479                −0.336∗∗∗     −0.339∗∗∗
                                                   (0.772)                (0.103)       (0.110)
                       Foreclosures                 0.369                −0.158∗∗∗     −0.077∗
                                                   (0.767)                (0.047)       (0.045)
                       Judgments                    0.384                −0.304∗∗∗     −0.262∗∗∗
                                                   (0.836)                (0.090)       (0.093)
                       Liens                        0.237                −0.283∗∗∗     −0.275∗∗
                                                   (1.069)                (0.102)       (0.111)
                       Repossessions                0.094                −0.076∗∗      −0.078∗∗
                                                   (0.329)                (0.034)       (0.036)
                     Controls                         –                     No            Yes
                     Observations                   97006                 175076        175076
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for
alternative versions of the financial strain variables. All outcomes are annual averages for the year of filing to fifth
year post-filing, with the exceptions of outcomes with a † where outcomes are averaged over the first full year after
filing to the fifth year post-filing to remove the mechanical effect of the bankruptcy filing. Panel A reports results for
indicator variables equal to one if the listed event occurred at least once in the first five post-filing years. Panel B
reports results for the number of times the listed event occurred in the first five post-filing years. See Table 3 notes
for additional details. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level.




                                                          40
                                                                      Appendix Table 3
                                                         First Stage Results by Filer Characteristics
                                                                Age at Filing                     Baseline Credit Score          Baseline Homeowner
                                                       25 to 39 40 to 59 60 and up                  High        Low                 Yes       No
                                                          (1)       (2)         (3)                  (4)        (5)                 (6)       (7)
                 Discharge                              0.945∗∗∗ 0.854∗∗∗      0.424∗∗∗            0.796∗∗∗    0.815∗∗∗           0.814∗∗∗   0.785∗∗∗
                                                       (0.097)   (0.059)      (0.149)             (0.045)     (0.069)            (0.070)    (0.064)
                 Relative to Overall First Stage        1.165     1.053        0.523               0.982       1.005              1.004      0.968
                Controls                                  Yes       Yes         Yes                  Yes        Yes                 Yes       Yes
                Observations                            54442     81206        19100               84154       82241              111432     58627
     Notes: This table reports first stage and two-stage least squares results by baseline characteristics. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy
     filers originating from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. The
     post-filing mean for dismissed filers is reported in brackets for each subgroup. We instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out mean
     rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the
     office. Subgroup instruments are constructed using the matched estimation sample. All regressions control for age at filing and baseline homeownership,
     credit score, financial strain index, installment balance, revolving balance, collection balance, mortgage balance, and non-mortgage credit access index,
     office-by-filing-month fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details on the data and variable construction.
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




41
                                             Appendix Table 4
                                      Results for Additional Outcomes
                                                             Dismissed
                                                               Mean             2SLS Results
               Panel A: Adverse Financial Events                (1)            (2)        (3)
                 Number of Paid Collections                    0.744        −0.336∗∗∗ −0.224∗∗∗
                                                              (1.266)        (0.057)   (0.051)
                  Number of Unpaid Collections                 4.251        −1.899∗∗∗ −1.296∗∗
                                                              (4.374)        (0.475)   (0.528)
                  Number of Medical Collections                0.513        −0.077    −0.004
                                                              (0.942)        (0.090)   (0.101)
                  Number of Paid Judgments                     0.087        −0.051∗∗ −0.032
                                                              (0.338)        (0.023)   (0.025)
                  Number of Unpaid Judgments                   0.560        −0.339∗∗∗ −0.238∗∗
                                                              (0.977)        (0.107)   (0.102)

               Panel B: Student Debt
                 Any Active Student Debt                       0.167          0.003         0.026
                                                              (0.343)        (0.057)       (0.050)
                  Any Deferred Student Debt                    0.038        −0.015        −0.010
                                                              (0.154)        (0.027)       (0.026)

               Panel C: Home Transitions
                 Living in Same Residence                      0.496          0.270∗∗∗   0.250∗∗∗
                                                              (0.500)        (0.049)    (0.054)
                  Moved to Rental                              0.429        −0.267∗∗∗ −0.250∗∗∗
                                                              (0.495)        (0.065)    (0.059)
                  Move to Home                                 0.075        −0.003     −0.001
                                                              (0.263)        (0.040)    (0.040)

               Panel D: Revolving Trades
                 Number of Open Revolving Trades               0.766          0.576∗∗∗   0.321∗∗
                                                              (1.312)        (0.144)    (0.130)
                  Credit Limit Revolving Trades                6.083          3.362∗∗∗ −0.599
                                                             (12.691)        (1.256)    (0.801)
               Controls                                          –             No         Yes
               Observations                                    97006         175076     175076
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on addi-
tional outcomes available in the credit bureau data. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating
from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year
of filing. All outcomes are measured over the first five post-filing years. Column 1 reports the post-filing mean and
standard deviation for dismissed filers. Columns 2-3 instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out
mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate
of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. All regressions control for office-by-filing-month fixed effects and
cluster standard errors at the office level. Column 3 adds controls for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit score,
financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage
and auto loans, revolving utilization, and non-mortgage inquiries as controls. *** = significant at 1 percent level, **
= significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        42
                                            Appendix Table 5
                                Results by State Judicial Foreclosure Laws
                                             Homeowners                                        Renters
                                  Judicial    Non-Judicial p-value               Judicial     Non-Judicial p-value
                                     (1)            (2)      (3)                    (4)             (5)      (6)
  Financial Strain               −0.041          −0.453∗∗∗ 0.008                 −0.221           −0.172∗   0.825
                                   (0.157)         (0.038)                        (0.209)          (0.099)
                                   [0.029]         [0.005]                      [−0.219]         [−0.179]
  Revolving Balance                 5.673∗       −1.445∗∗∗ 0.020                   2.430          −0.793    0.589
                                   (3.154)         (0.405)                        (6.108)          (0.915)
                                   [3.528]         [2.940]                        [2.534]          [1.564]
  Collection Balance                0.272        −1.704∗∗∗ 0.342                   0.447          −1.082∗∗  0.719
                                   (2.049)         (0.644)                        (4.383)          (0.441)
                                   [4.030]         [3.911]                        [4.214]          [4.720]
  Mortgage Balance                  8.342         21.615∗∗  0.524                 24.751            4.333   0.453
                                 (19.465)          (9.554)                       (27.805)          (5.158)
                                 [41.672]        [38.466]                         [8.848]          [6.085]
  Auto Balance                      2.134        −1.160∗    0.081                  7.269          −1.171    0.213
                                   (1.855)         (0.653)                        (7.013)          (0.847)
                                   [4.083]         [4.261]                        [3.983]          [3.787]
  Revolving Utilization             9.916       −19.424∗∗∗ 0.089               −47.582∗         −13.971∗∗∗ 0.194
                                 (17.633)          (2.657)                       (25.976)          (5.256)
                                 [47.421]        [46.495]                        [48.514]         [47.218]
  Non-Mortgage Inquiries            0.114        −0.494∗∗   0.398                  0.102          −0.084    0.854
                                   (0.717)         (0.203)                        (1.052)          (0.156)
                                   [1.624]         [1.588]                        [1.580]          [1.544]
  Credit Score                    20.397          18.203∗∗∗ 0.900                 19.687            7.228   0.609
                                 (17.776)          (2.044)                       (24.499)          (7.229)
                                [574.746]       [569.824]                      [569.044]        [555.057]
Controls                            Yes            Yes        –                    Yes              Yes       –
Observations                       27706          83726       –                    9860           48767       –
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for states
with judicial foreclosure and those without judicial foreclosure, separately by homeownership status. The sample
consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-
2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. The post-filing mean for dismissed filers is reported in
brackets for each subgroup. We instrument for Chapter 13 protection using the leave-one-out mean rate of granting
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy
protection for the office. Subgroup instruments are constructed using the matched estimation sample. All regressions
control for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance,
mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization, non-mortgage inquiries,
office-by-filing-month fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for details
on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          43
                                                                      Appendix Table 6
                                                                  Robustness of Main Results
                                                             Judge Leniency                                           Judge Fixed Effects
                                             Own-Out Month-Out       90 Days    Split Sample                     2SLS       LIML       Jackknife
                                                (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)                         (5)         (6)           (7)
               Financial Strain               −0.316∗∗∗  −0.305∗∗∗ −0.371∗∗∗       −0.253∗∗∗                   −0.340∗∗∗ −0.341∗∗∗ −0.340∗∗∗
                                              (0.071)     (0.072)     (0.091)        (0.094)                    (0.065)     (0.080)       (0.090)
               Revolving Balance              −0.920     −0.914      −1.018        −0.938                      −0.938      −0.965       −0.938
                                              (0.745)     (0.735)     (0.642)        (1.071)                    (0.616)     (0.706)       (1.002)
               Collection Balance             −1.315∗∗∗  −1.349∗∗∗ −1.071          −1.809∗∗∗                   −1.385∗∗∗ −1.349∗∗∗ −1.385∗∗
                                              (0.432)     (0.400)     (1.157)        (0.576)                    (0.392)     (0.475)       (0.528)
               Mortgage Balance               14.267∗∗∗  13.922∗∗∗    25.538∗∗∗     10.703∗                    12.728∗∗     13.937∗∗     12.730
                                              (4.955)     (4.922)     (8.713)        (6.640)                    (5.503)     (6.245)       (9.714)
               Auto Balance                   −0.904     −0.790      −1.615        −1.172                      −1.015∗     −1.128∗      −1.015
                                              (0.581)     (0.563)     (1.189)        (0.846)                    (0.529)     (0.605)       (0.648)
               Revolving Utilization         −16.148∗∗∗ −15.555∗∗∗ −18.225∗∗∗     −16.119∗∗∗                  −15.023∗∗∗ −16.452∗∗∗ −15.020∗∗∗
                                              (3.282)     (3.080)     (4.290)        (4.454)                    (2.811)     (3.658)       (3.408)
               Non-Mortgage Inquiries         −0.293∗∗   −0.291∗∗    −0.392        −0.217                      −0.351∗∗∗ −0.356∗∗       −0.351∗∗
                                              (0.118)     (0.113)     (0.298)        (0.199)                    (0.115)     (0.140)       (0.163)




44
               Credit Score                   14.981∗∗∗  16.048∗∗∗    16.252∗∗      15.047∗∗                   16.426∗∗∗    15.056∗∗∗    16.430∗∗∗
                                              (3.270)     (3.173)     (6.574)        (7.329)                    (3.407)     (3.975)       (3.785)
              Controls                         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes                          Yes        Yes           Yes
              Observations                    175076     175076       175076       131416                      175076       175076       175076
     Notes: This table reports robustness checks for our main results. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers originating from offices that
     randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data in the year of filing. Column 1 replicates our preferred estimates
     from Table 3 using leave-one-out judge leniency as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Column 2 uses a leave-month-out measure of judge leniency
     where we calculate judge leniency only using cases in all other months as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Column 3 uses a leave-one-out
     measure of judge leniency measured using the case decision after the first 90 post-filing days as an instrument. Column 4 uses a randomly selected
     subset of 25 percent of filers to calculate a leave-month-out measure of judge leniency that is used as an instrument in the mutually exclusive subset of
     filers. Columns 5-7 present results that use judge fixed effects as instruments for bankruptcy protection estimated using two-stage least squares, LIML,
     and jackknife IV. All regressions control for baseline age bins, homeownership, credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance,
     mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization, non-mortgage inquiries, office-by-filing-month fixed effects,
     and cluster standard errors at the office level. See the data appendix for additional details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1
     percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                            Appendix Table 7
                             Results in the Sixth to Eighth Post-Filing Years
                                                     Dismissed
                                                        Mean              2SLS Results
                                                          (1)            (2)        (3)
                        Financial Strain Index          -0.416        −0.216∗∗∗ −0.127∗∗
                                                       (0.777)         (0.055)    (0.054)
                        Revolving Balance                1.014          0.697∗     0.094
                                                       (3.878)         (0.360)    (0.348)
                        Collection Balance              4.666         −2.534∗∗∗ −1.931∗∗∗
                                                       (7.376)         (0.563)    (0.599)
                        Have a Mortgage                 0.184           0.259∗∗∗   0.260∗∗∗
                                                       (0.371)         (0.032)    (0.028)
                        Mortgage Balance               15.861          34.967∗∗∗ 36.780∗∗∗
                                                      (48.046)        (11.495)   (13.654)
                        Have an Auto Loan                0.190          0.127∗∗∗   0.126∗∗∗
                                                       (0.367)         (0.041)    (0.045)
                        Auto Balance                    3.518           0.641      0.486
                                                       (6.972)         (0.655)    (0.700)
                        Revolving Utilization          34.362         −8.942     −8.601
                                                      (53.460)         (8.636)    (9.178)
                        Non-Mortgage Inquiries          0.974         −0.107     −0.037
                                                       (1.375)         (0.184)    (0.196)
                        Credit Score                  576.720          45.603∗∗∗ 28.792∗∗∗
                                                      (57.229)         (7.761)    (6.609)
                     Controls                              –             No         Yes
                     Observations                       83792          151655     151655
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on post-
filing outcomes in the sixth through eighth post-filing years. The sample consists of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers
originating from offices that randomly assigns filers to judges between 2002-2005 that are linked to credit report data
in the year of filing and at least one observation in the sixth through eighth post-filing years. Column 1 reports the
post-filing mean and standard deviation for dismissed filers. Columns 2-3 instrument for Chapter 13 protection using
the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-
out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. All regressions control for office-by-filing-month fixed
effects and cluster standard errors at the office level. Column 3 adds controls for baseline age bins, homeownership,
credit score, financial strain index, revolving balance, collection balance, mortgage balance, auto balance, indicators
for mortgage and auto loans, revolving utilization, and non-mortgage inquiries as controls. See the data appendix
for details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         45
                                                      Appendix Figure 1
                                            Persistence of Judge Leniency Measure




                                   .8
                                   .6
                       Discharge
                                   .4



                                                                             b = 0.902
                                                                                (0.046)
                                   .2
                                   0




                                        0          .2         .4            .6            .8
                                                         Lagged Discharge


Notes: This figure plots current Chapter 13 discharge vs. lagged discharge for each judge-by-office-by-year. The
sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers from 2002-2005 linked to credit report data, for whom we observe
credit data in the year of filing. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office.
Each point in the scatter plot represents a separate judge-by-office-by-year observation. To construct the scatter
plot, we regress current discharge rate on lagged discharge rate. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated on
the underlying micro data estimated using OLS. The coefficient shows the estimated slope of the best-fit line, with
standard errors clustered at the office by judge level reported in parentheses.




                                                             46
                                                           Appendix Figure 2
                                                Judge Leniency and Bankruptcy Protection




                                    .55
                                    .5
                        Discharge
                                    .45

                                                                                       b = 0.889
                                                                                          (0.049)
                                    .4
                                    .35




                                          -.1            -.05           0        .05            .1
                                                                Judge Leniency


Notes: This figure plots Chapter 13 discharge vs. our leave-one-out measure of judge leniency. The sample consists
of all first-time Chapter 13 filers from 2002-2005 linked to credit report data, for whom we observe credit data in
the year of filing. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for
the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. To construct
the binned scatter plot, we first regress an indicator for discharge on office-by-filing-month fixed effects and calculate
residuals. We then take the mean residual in each judge-by-year bin, adding the mean discharge rate to each residual
to aid in the interpretation of the plot. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated on the underlying micro data
estimated using OLS. The coefficients show the estimated slope of the best-fit line including office-by-filing-month
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the office level reported in parentheses.




                                                                   47
                                                                Appendix Figure 3
                       .1
                                                       Judge Leniency by Filer Characteristics




                                                                                                                 .1
                       .05




                                                                                                                 .05
                                                                                         High Credit Score
   Over 40 at Filing




                                                                      b = 0.702                                                                                   b = 1.049
                       0




                                                                                                                 0
                                                                         (0.203)                                                                                     (0.207)
                       -.05




                                                                                                                 -.05
                       -.1




                                                                                                                 -.1
                              -.1   -.05           0            .05            .1                                       -.1   -.05            0             .05            .1
                                           Under 40 at Filing                                                                         Low Credit Score
                       .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                       .05




                                                                                                                 .05
                                                                                         High Financial Strain
   Homeowner




                                                                      b = 0.808                                                                                   b = 0.777
                       0




                                                                                                                 0


                                                                         (0.152)                                                                                     (0.054)
                       -.05




                                                                                                                 -.05
                       -.1




                                                                                                                 -.1




                              -.1   -.05           0            .05            .1                                       -.1   -.05            0             .05            .1
                                           Not Homeowner                                                                             Low Financial Strain


Notes: These figures show the correlation between judge leniency for different groups of filers. Age is determined at
the time of filing, and credit score and homeownership are determined in the full year prior to filing. The sample
consists of all first-time filers between June 2002 and 2005 in the 39 offices that randomly assign filings to judges.
Judge leniency is defined as the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge
minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office. We take the average leniency
for each group over all available years of data. Subgroup instruments are constructed using the matched estimation
sample. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated using OLS relating each judge leniency measure.




                                                                                    48
                                                                        Appendix Figure 4
                                                                      Trends by Filing Status

                                      Delinquency                                                                         Collections
                 1




                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                                    .5
                 .8
   Delinquency




                                                                                       Collection
                                                                                                    .4
                 .6




                                                                                                    .3
                 .4




                                                                                                    .2
                 .2




                                                                                                    .1
                       -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                           -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                       Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                    Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                       Discharged                                                                         Discharged


                                       Charge-off                                                                        Bankruptcy
                 .6




                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    .8
                 .4




                                                                                       Bankruptcy
   Charge-off




                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                                    .4
                 .2




                                                                                                    .2
                 0




                                                                                                    0




                       -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                           -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                       Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                    Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                       Discharged                                                                         Discharged


                                       Foreclosure                                                                         Judgment
                 .15




                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                    .08
                 .1
   Foreclosure




                                                                                       Judgment
                                                                                                    .06
                                                                                                    .04
                 .05




                                                                                                    .02
                 0




                                                                                                    0




                       -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                           -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                 Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                       Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                    Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                       Discharged                                                                         Discharged



Notes: These figures show the coefficients on year relative to filing dummies interacted with filer status: non-filer,
dismissed filer, and discharged filer. Raw data figures include no controls.




                                                                                  49
                                                                              Appendix Figure 4
                                                                            Trends by Filing Status

                                                    Lien                                                                               Repossession
                       .04




                                                                                                                  .04
                       .03




                                                                                                                  .03
                                                                                             Repossession
   Lien
                       .02




                                                                                                                  .02
                       .01




                                                                                                                  .01
                       0




                                                                                                                  0
                             -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                                   -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                       Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                         Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                             Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                            Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                             Discharged                                                                                 Discharged


                                        Revolving Balance                                                                         Collections Balance



                                                                                                                  5
                       15




                                                                                                                  4
   Revolving Balance




                                                                                             Collection Balance
                       10




                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                  2
                       5




                                                                                                                  1
                       0




                                                                                                                  0




                             -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                                   -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                       Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                         Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                             Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                            Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                             Discharged                                                                                 Discharged


                                            Open Mortgage                                                                          Mortgage Balance
                                                                                                                  60
                       .6




                                                                                                                  50
                       .5




                                                                                             Mortgage Balance
   Open Mortgage




                                                                                                                  40
                       .4




                                                                                                                  30
                       .3




                                                                                                                  20
                       .2




                             -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3    4                                   -4   -3   -2      -1         0    1        2      3   4
                                       Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                         Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                             Non-Filer             Dismissed                                                            Non-Filer             Dismissed
                                             Discharged                                                                                 Discharged



Notes: These figures show the coefficients on year relative to filing dummies interacted with filer status: non-filer,
dismissed filer, and discharged filer. Raw data figures include no controls.




                                                                                        50
                                                                                  Appendix Figure 4
                                                                                Trends by Filing Status

                                                Open Auto Loan                                                                                   Auto Balance




                                                                                                                          10
                           .5




                                                                                                                          8
   Open Auto Loan
                           .4




                                                                                                 Auto Balance
                                                                                                                          6
                           .3




                                                                                                                          4
                           .2
                           .1




                                                                                                                          2
                                 -4   -3   -2       -1         0   1        2      3    4                                       -4   -3    -2       -1         0   1        2      3   4
                                           Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                              Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed                                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed
                                                  Discharged                                                                                      Discharged


                                                  Utilization                                                                             Non-Mortgage Inquiries



                                                                                                                          2.5
                           70




                                                                                                 Non-Mortgage Inquiries
                           60
   Revolving Utilization




                                                                                                                          2
                           50




                                                                                                                          1.5
                           40




                                                                                                                          1
                           30
                           20




                                                                                                                          .5




                                 -4   -3   -2       -1         0   1        2      3    4                                       -4   -3    -2       -1         0   1        2      3   4
                                           Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                              Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed                                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed
                                                  Discharged                                                                                      Discharged


                                                 Credit Score                                                                                   Financial Strain
                           750




                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                                                 Financial Strain Index
                           700




                                                                                                                          0
   Credit Score
                           650




                                                                                                                          -.5
                           600




                                                                                                                          -1
                           550




                                 -4   -3   -2       -1         0   1        2      3    4                                       -4   -3    -2       -1         0   1        2      3   4
                                           Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing                                                              Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed                                                                  Non-Filer            Dismissed
                                                  Discharged                                                                                      Discharged



Notes: These figures show the coefficients on year relative to filing dummies interacted with filer status: non-filer,
dismissed filer, and discharged filer. Raw data figures include no controls.




                                                                                            51
                                VII. Data Dictionary

                                    A. Judge Leniency
Judge Leniency - We calculate judge leniency as the leave-one-out mean rate of granting
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate
of granting bankruptcy protection for the office.

                                     B. Characteristics
Homeowner - Homeownership is based on a home flag calculated by TransUnion. The home
flag is set to “Y” if there is any home equity or mortgage trade on file. This measure may over-
estimate actual homeownership because it does not require a non-zero balance on home equity
or mortgage trades. Alternatively, this measure may underestimate actual homeownership if
TransUnion does not observe the original mortgage or equity trade.

                               C. Adverse Financial Events
Delinquency - We measure post-filing delinquencies based on the number of trades currently
30+ days past due within the past 12 months, provided by TransUnion. Delinquency prob-
abilities are non-cumulative, measured as the probability of at least one delinquency in the
prior 12 months, averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Collection - We measure post-filing collections based on the number of collection trades in
the past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. Collection account records consist of credit
accounts and records of unpaid bills that have been transferred to a collection agency or in the
process of collection. Generally, accounts sent to collection are listed on a debtor’s credit report
for seven years. Collection trades are trades either with KOB (Kind of Business) = Collection,
MOP (Manner of Payment) = 9B (Collection), or remark/dispute flags such as “Collection
account cancelled by creditor,” “Placed for collection,” and “Collection account.” Collection
probabilities are non-cumulative, measured as the probability of at least one collection in the
prior 12 months, averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Charge-off - We measure post-filing charge-offs based on the number of charge-offs within the
past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. A charge-off occurs when a creditor declares a debt
unlikely to be paid. An account is usually charged off after 180 days of non-payment, but the
creditor can continue to attempt to collect on the debt. The charge-off record generally appears
on a credit report for up to seven years. Charge-off information is obtained from trades with
remark/dispute codes such as “Bad Debt: Collection Suit,” “Claim/PMT Against Guarantor,”
“Early Termination w/Deficiency,” “Skip out of Account,” or MOP = 09 (Charged off to bad
debt), or MOP = 9P (Paying or paid account with MOP 09). Charge-off probabilities are
non-cumulative, and can be thought of as the probability of at least one charge-off in the prior
12 months, averaged over the second to fifth post-filing years.

Bankruptcy - We measure post-filing bankruptcies based on the number of bankruptcies within
the past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. Bankruptcies can occur under Chapter 7,
Chapter 11, Chapter 12, or Chapter 13. Bankruptcy probabilities are non-cumulative, mea-
sured as the probability of at least one bankruptcy in the prior 12 months, averaged over the
second to fifth post-filing years.



                                             52
Foreclosure - We measure post-filing foreclosures based on the number of foreclosures within
the past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. A foreclosure is a process in which a bank
or mortgage company takes possession of a mortgaged property because the mortgagor has
failed to keep up with mortgage payments. Foreclosure information is obtained from public
records, and trades with remark/dispute codes that signal foreclosure. In the TransUnion data,
foreclosure is defined more expansively than an actual sale or deed transfer. Foreclosure ranges
from an actual sale or transfer of the home, to merely a notice that foreclosure was commenced.
For instance, the foreclosure flag is turned on for any of the following reasons: foreclosure
initiated, foreclosure started, foreclosure discontinued, and foreclosure redeemed. Post-filing
foreclosure probabilities are non-cumulative, and can be thought of as the probability of at
least one foreclosure in the prior 12 months, averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Judgment - We measure post-filing judgments based on the number of civil judgment suits
within the past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. Judgment probabilities are non-
cumulative, measured as the probability of at least one judgment in the prior 12 months,
averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Lien - We measure post-filing liens based on the number of lien public records within the past
12 months, calculated by TransUnion. A lien is an official claim against property or funds for
payment of a debt owed. Public record liens include federal and state tax liens, hospital liens,
and judicial liens. Lien probabilities are non-cumulative, measured as the probability of at
least one lien in the prior 12 months, averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Repossession - We measure post-filing repossessions based on the number of repossessions
within the past 12 months, calculated by TransUnion. A repossession occurs when a lender
takes back an asset, such as an automobile. Repossessions can be voluntary or involuntary.
Late payments leading up to repossession are damaging to a debtor’s credit score, and the
mark of a repossession appears on credit reports. In the TransUnion data, repossession in-
formation is obtained from trades with remark/dispute codes such as “Paid Respossession,”
“Reposession,” “Repossession, redeemed,” “Paid by dealer,” “Paid from collateral,” or MOP
(Manner of Payment) = 08 (Repossession). As with foreclosure, TransUnion defines reposses-
sions expansively, including redeemed repossessions where the debtor makes full payment on
the loan and takes back the asset. Post-filing repossession probabilities are non-cumulative,
and can be thought of as the probability of at least one repossession in the prior 12 months,
averaged over the first five post-filing years.

Financial Strain Index - The index contains the non-cumulative probabilities of the following
eight components: delinquency, collection, charge-off, bankruptcy, foreclosure, judgment, lien
and repossession, as defined above. Following Fryer and Katz (2013), for each post-filing year,
each component is standardized using the mean and standard deviation for the dismissed filer
group in the baseline year. We sum across the eight components to create a yearly index,
restandardizing using the mean and standard deviation of the dismissed filer group in the
baseline year. The index in the year of filing includes six components, excluding charge-offs
and bankruptcies. We then average the yearly index across the first five post-filing years.
Because each of the financial strains represent adverse events that negatively impact access
to credit, a higher index represents worse outcomes.




                                           53
                      D. Unsecured Debt and Collections Activity
Revolving Balance - Total balance of revolving trades with current balance greater than zero
verified within 6 months calculated by TransUnion. Revolving trades include bank card ac-
counts, retail accounts, and check credit accounts. Retail trade accounts include clothing,
department stores, grocery, home furnishings, jewelry, computer, camera, and sporting goods
stores. According to Avery et al. (2003), revolving trade balances (dollar-weighted) represent
11 percent of all open account balances.

Collection Balance - Aggregate current balance of all collections on file calculated by Tran-
sUnion. There are two important shortcomings of the collections data. First, there is incom-
plete coverage of unpaid bills, with larger entities, such as hospitals and utility companies,
more likely to send debts to collection agencies. Second, collection records will not include
debts that parties collect themselves and debts sent to collection agencies that do not report
to credit bureaus.

                              E. Retaining Secured Assets
Have a Mortgage - We measure the probability of having an open mortgage based on the
number of open mortgage trades verified in the past 12 months calculated by TransUnion.
Mortgage trades are loans such as conventional real estate mortgages, FHA loans, real estate
loans, second mortgages, and VA loans.

Mortgage Balance - Total balance of all mortgage trades verified in the past 12 months calcu-
lated by TransUnion. According to Avery et al. (2003), mortgage balances (dollar-weighted)
represent 67 percent of all open account balances.

Have an Auto Loan - We measure the probability of having an open auto loan based on the
number of open auto loans verified in the past six months calculated by TransUnion. Auto
loans typically involve fixed monthly payments that fully amortize the total amount borrowed
over the term of the loan, often secured (Avery et al. 2003).

Auto Balance - Total balance of open auto trades verified in the past 12 months calculated
by TransUnion.

                                     F. Credit Access
Revolving Utilization - Total outstanding revolving trade balance divided by revolving trade
credit limit verified in the past 12 months calculated by TransUnion, expressed in percentages.
Because total credit limit is likely understates actual credit limits (Avery et al. 2003), the
credit utilization rate likely overstates actual credit utilization.

Non-Mortgage Inquiries - Number of non-mortgage inquiries within the past 6 months calcu-
lated by TransUnion. Inquiries are made to ensure that an applicant for credit, apartment
rental, insurance, or employment meets minimum standards. When a creditor or lender checks
a debtor’s credit in connection with an application, a “hard inquiry” is tagged on a credit re-
port. A hard inquiry remains on a credit report for up to two years and may lower a debtor’s
credit score. When a creditor reviews the credit report of an existing customer, or when a
debtor checks his own credit, a “soft inquiry” typically shows up on your credit report. Soft
inquiries generally do not lower credit scores or appear to businesses checking a debtor’s credit.


                                            54
                                    G. Credit Score
Credit score - This measure is an ordinal credit score calculated by TransUnion to measure
credit risk. This measure is similar to the FICO score commonly referenced in the consumer
finance literature.

                                H. Data Characteristics
Matched to Credit Report - Indicator for whether the 253,863 bankruptcy filings sent to Tran-
sUnion were matched to credit report data from the baseline filing year.

Missing Age - Indicator for whether age at filing is missing.

Missing Baseline Outcomes - Indicator for whether baseline credit report outcomes are missing.

                                 I. Housing Transitions
Living in Same Residence - This measure is calculated based on the number of months at
the current address calculated by TransUnion. We define a consumer as being in the same
residence five years after filing if the difference between the number of months at the current
address in year 5 and year 0 is at least 48 months.

Moved to Rental - We define this measure as individuals who have zero mortgage trades in
year 5, coupled with a move between years 0 and 5 (such that they are no longer in the same
residence by year 5).

Moved to Home - We define this measure as individuals who have non-zero mortgage trades
in year 5, coupled with a move between years 0 and 5 (such that they are no longer in the
same residence by year 5).




                                           55
