NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX CUTS FOR WHOM? HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS OF INCOME TAX CHANGES ON
GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT
Owen M. Zidar
Working Paper 21035
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21035

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015
Revised February 2017

I am grateful to Alan Auerbach, Dominick Bartelme, Alex Bartik, Marianne Bertrand, David
Card, Gabe Chodorow-Reich, Austan Goolsbee, Ben Keys, Pat Kline, Attila Lindner, Zachary
Liscow, Neale Mahoney, Atif Mian, John Mondragon, Enrico Moretti, Matt Notowidigdo,
Christina Romer, David Romer, Jesse Rothstein, Emmanuel Saez, Jim Sallee, Andrew Samwick,
Amir Sufi, Laura Tyson, Johannes Wieland, Dan Wilson, Danny Yagan, and Eric Zwick for
helpful comments and Dan Feenberg for generous help with TAXSIM. I am especially thankful
to Amir Sufi as well as Marianne Bertrand and Adair Morse for generously sharing data with me.
This project grew out of an undergraduate research project that I worked on with Daniel Cohen,
and I am grateful to him and Jim Feyrer for input on the paper at its inception. Stephanie
Kestelman, Stephen Lamb, Francesco Ruggieri, Karthik Srinivasan, and John Wieselthier
provided excellent research assistance. This work is supported by the Kathryn and Grant Swick
Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The latest version
of this paper can always be found at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/owen.zidar/. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Owen M. Zidar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Tax Cuts For Whom? Heterogeneous Effects of Income Tax Changes on Growth and Employment
Owen M. Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 21035
March 2015, Revised February 2017
JEL No. E32,E62,H2,H20,H31,N12
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how tax changes for different income groups affect aggregate economic
activity. I construct a measure of who received (or paid for) tax changes in the postwar period
using tax return data from NBER's TAXSIM. I aggregate each tax change by income group and
state. Variation in the income distribution across U.S. states and federal tax changes generate
variation in regional tax shocks that I exploit to test for heterogeneous effects. I find that the
positive relationship between tax cuts and employment growth is largely driven by tax cuts for
lower-income groups, and that the effect of tax cuts for the top 10% on employment growth is
small.

Owen M. Zidar
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
owen.zidar@chicagobooth.edu

There are two ideas of government. There are those who believe that if you just legislate to
make the well-to-do prosperous, that their prosperity will leak through on those below. The
Democratic idea has been that if you legislate to make the masses prosperous their prosperity
will find its way up and through every class that rests upon it.
—William Jennings Bryan (July, 1896)

The consequences of changing tax policy for different groups are fiercely debated. Some policy
makers maintain that tax changes for high-income earners “trickle down” and are the most
effective way to affect prosperity. They argue that higher marginal tax rates for top-income
taxpayers lead to large distortions in labor supply, investment, and hiring, so tax cuts for
top-income taxpayers most effectively increase aggregate economic activity. Others, however,
contend the opposite. They argue that lower-income groups have higher marginal propensities
to consume and disincentives to work from means-tested benefits, so tax cuts for lower-income
groups generate sizable consumption and labor supply responses, and thereby, more overall
activity. Do tax changes for high-income earners “trickle down?” Would these effects be larger
if the tax changes were less targeted at the top?
Variation in income tax policy in the U.S. can help us answer these questions and inform
the debate on “trickle down” versus “bottom up” economics. In the early 1980s and 2000s, the
largest tax cuts as a share of income went to top-income taxpayers. In the early 1990s, topincome earners faced tax increases while taxpayers with low to moderate incomes received tax
cuts. This paper investigates how the composition of tax changes affects subsequent economic
activity. The possibility that the impact of tax changes depends not only on how large the
changes are, but also on how they are distributed has important implications for understanding
macroeconomic activity, designing countercyclical policy, and assessing the consequences of
many redistributive policies.
The main contribution of this paper is to use new data and a novel source of variation
to quantify the importance of the distribution of tax changes for their overall impact on economic activity. I find that tax cuts that go to high-income taxpayers generate less growth than
similarly-sized tax cuts for low and moderate income taxpayers. In fact, the positive relationship
between tax cuts and employment growth is largely driven by tax cuts for lower-income groups
and the effect of tax cuts for the top 10% on employment growth is small.
Establishing this result requires overcoming three empirical difficulties. First, many tax
changes happen in response to current or expected economic conditions. Second, tax changes
for low- and high-income taxpayers often occur at the same time, so separately identifying the
1

effects of low- and high-income tax cuts is difficult. Third, the number of data points and tax
changes in the postwar period is limited.
This paper uses variation in the regional impact of national tax shocks to overcome these
empirical difficulties. Variation in the income distribution across U.S. states lead to heterogeneous regional impacts of federal income tax changes. For instance, Connecticut, whose share
of top-income taxpayers is nearly twice that of the typical state, faced relatively larger shocks
to high-income earners after the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which raised topincome tax rates. I focus on a subset of federal tax changes that are not related to the current
state of the economy according to the classification approach of Romer and Romer (2010).1
The interaction of (1) regional heterogeneity and (2) exogenous federal tax changes produces
plausibly exogenous regional tax shocks, differently-sized shocks for different income groups,
and more data on the economic consequences of tax changes.
I use individual tax return data from NBER’s TAXSIM to quantify these tax shocks. For
each tax change, I construct a measure of who received (or paid for) the tax change. The
measure of the tax change is based on three things for every individual return: income and
deductions in the year prior to an exogenous tax change, the old tax schedule, and the new
tax schedule. For example, consider a taxpayer in 1992 whose income was $180,000. Based
on her 1992 income and deductions, she would have paid $50,500 in taxes according to the old
1992 tax rate schedule and $54,000 according to the new 1993 tax rate schedule. My measure
assigns her a $3,500 tax increase for 1993. I use the prior year’s tax data to avoid conflating
behavioral responses and measured changes in tax liabilities. I then aggregate these mechanical
tax changes for each taxpayer in a state by income group, such as the bottom 90% and top 10%
of national AGI respectively.
With these year-state-income group level tax shock measures, I investigate how responsive
employment growth and economic activity are to tax shocks for different income groups. I
estimate the dynamic effects of tax changes for different groups using event studies, distributed
lag models, and more parsimonious two-year changes. Since federal tax changes differ in their
progressivity, the tax shock from a given federal tax change differs regionally based on each
1

They use the historical record (such as congressional records, economic reports and presidential speeches)
to identify tax changes that were taken for more exogenous reasons such as pursuing long run growth or deficit
reduction. Doing so reinforces my ability to overcome endogeneity concerns. Appendix Table A1 lists each tax
change and how it is classified.

2

location’s income distribution. These regional differences in tax shocks enable me to identify
the effects of tax shocks for both low- and high-income groups. For example, I identify the
impact of high-income tax changes by comparing the responsiveness of employment growth
in states like Connecticut to responsiveness in states with less exposure to high-income shocks.
The empirical analysis has three components: (1) evidence of heterogeneous effects, (2) research
design validation, (3) mechanisms and discussion.
First, I find that state employment growth and economic activity are substantially more
responsive to tax shocks for lower-income groups than to equally-sized tax shocks for top earners.
In particular, a 1% of state GDP tax cut for the bottom 90% results in roughly 3.4 percentage
points of employment growth over a two-year period. The corresponding estimate for the top
10% is 0.2 percentage points and is statistically insignificant. Other measures of state economic
activity, such as state GDP, payrolls, and net earnings, respond similarly, in that they are very
responsive to tax changes for the bottom 90% and unresponsive to tax changes for the top 10%.
Second, I provide several pieces of evidence to support the validity of these estimates. I build
and use new state-level microsimulation models of social insurance programs (AFDC, TANF,
SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid) to show that the impacts of tax changes for lower-income groups
do not reflect policy changes in social insurance programs. Event study evidence shows that
tax shocks are not disproportionately favoring states that are doing poorly relative to how fast
they normally grow. Similarly, differential state cyclicality as well as contemporaneous oil price
shocks, interest rate shocks, or regional trends are not driving the results.
Third, in terms of mechanisms, I show how tax changes for different groups impact labor
market outcomes and consumption. Tax changes for the bottom 90% have much greater impact
on both the extensive margin and intensive margin of labor supply than tax changes for the
top 10%. Specifically, a 1% of state GDP tax increase for the bottom 90% lowers labor force
participation rates by 3.5 percentage points and hours by roughly 2%. Tax changes of the same
size for the top 10% have no detectable impact on these margins. State-level consumption also
shows larger impacts for bottom 90% tax changes. These estimates on labor market outcomes
and consumption are reduced-form effects on equilibrium outcomes that reflect changes in both
changes in supply and demand. I find that real wages increase after tax changes for lowerincome groups. While the estimates are imprecise, they suggest that labor supply responses are
an important mechanism for the results.

3

The empirical literature on these mechanisms – consumption and labor supply – is consistent
with the possibility of heterogeneous aggregate effects of tax changes. One strand of evidence
relates to heterogeneous consumption responses.2 Many studies provide evidence that lowerincome households tend to have higher marginal propensities to consume (McCarthy, 1995;
Parker, 1999; Dynan et al., 2004; Johnson et al., 2006; Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2010; Parker et
al., 2013).3 A second strand of evidence relates to tax policy and labor supply responses of
different income groups. On the extensive margin for lower-income groups, Eissa and Liebman
(1996) and Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) show that the Earned Income Tax Credit has strongly
increased labor force participation.4 For high-income earners, there is some evidence that the
costs of raising taxes on top-income taxpayers in terms of labor supply and other margins may be
limited (Saez et al., 2012; Romer and Romer, 2014) and largely reflect shifting in the timing or
form of income (Goolsbee, 2000; Auerbach and Siegel, 2000). By focusing on the overall impacts
of tax changes for different groups, this paper not only incorporates the effects of heterogeneous
consumption responses, but also provides evidence on the heterogeneous effects of supply side
policies that often do not assess the efficacy of tax changes for low- versus high-income groups.
The estimates in this paper build on the regional multiplier literature, which was recently
surveyed by Ramey (2011). In particular, the empirical approach in this paper resembles that
of Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), but for taxes (with heterogeneity) rather than government
spending.5 This regional approach complements the approach of Mertens and Ravn (2013) who
2

Many macro papers, which often have consumption responses as a key channel, also support the notion
that heterogeneity matters in the context of fiscal policy. Monacelli and Perotti (2011) use an incomplete
markets model with borrowing constraints to show that lump sum redistribution from savers to borrowers is
expansionary when nominal prices are sticky. The main intuition is that while both borrowers and savers
optimize inter-temporally, redistribution to borrowers also relaxes their borrowing constraint and results in a
level of consumption that exceeds the amount that savers reduced their consumption. This higher level of
aggregate consumption raises output and employment. Similarly, Heathcote (2005) finds that temporary tax
cuts can have large real effects in simulated models with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. Galı́ et
al. (2007) show that macro models with some cash-on-hand agents and sticky prices do a better job explaining
observed aggregate consumption patterns than representative-agent models.
3
Note that not all papers, e.g., Shapiro and Slemrod (1995), find significant differences in spending responses
as a function of income. More broadly, Chetty et al. (2014) estimate that approximately 85% of individuals are
rule-of-thumb spenders. Saez and Zucman (2016) also show total savings among the bottom 90% is roughly zero
and has been flat since the 1980s.
4
While evidence based on bunching (Heckman, 1983; Saez, 2010) suggests that intensive margin responses
are small, other work, such as Kline and Tartari (2016), provides evidence that tax policy changes can lead to
nontrivial intensive margin responses among low-income groups. Kosar and Moffitt (2016) provide evidence on
the cumulative marginal tax rates of low-income households.
5
See Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) for a paper estimating how high- and low-skilled workers respond
to different types of government spending shocks. Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012) and Hausman (2016) use similar
methods to analyze two important fiscal policy episodes – Medicaid payments to states in the Great Recession

4

investigate differences for personal income and corporate taxes as well as Mertens (2013) for
top-income groups using a time series approach with national data on tax rates. Constructing
a new measure of changes in tax liabilities based on micro tax return data also contributes to
this literature because measurement error can partly explain large differences in the estimated
effects of fiscal policy (Mertens and Ravn, 2014). In addition, the regional approach provides
more power and variation in tax shocks for different groups, which enables me to separate and
identify their effects on economic activity.

1
1.1

Data on Tax Changes and Economic Activity
Tax Data

This section describes how I construct a national time-series of tax changes by income group
from 1950-2011. The following section then shows how this national series is distributed across
U.S. states.
1.1.1

National Tax Changes by Income Group

I use tax measures from NBER when possible and rely on the Statistics of Income (SOI) tables
to calculate changes before 1960.6 To calculate tax changes occurring after 1960, I use NBER’s
Tax Simulator TAXSIM, which is a program that calculates individual tax liabilities for every
annual tax schedule since 1960 and stores a large sample of actual tax returns. I construct my
measure of tax changes by comparing each individual’s income and payroll tax liabilities in the
year preceding a tax change to what their tax liabilities would have been if the new tax schedule
had been applied. For instance, consider the 1993 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act. For
every taxpayer, my measure subtracts how much she paid in 1992 from how much she would
have paid in 1992 if the 1993 tax schedule had been in place.7 When calculating tax liabilities,
TAXSIM takes into account every individuals’ deductions and credits and their treatment under
both the 1992 and 1993 tax schedules, resulting in a highly detailed measure of the mechanical,
and payments to veterans in 1936, respectively. Important contributions also include Clemens and Miran (2012);
Shoag (2010); Wilson (2012).
6
See appendix A.1.1 for a description of how I calculate the four pre-NBER tax changes, which affected tax
liabilities in 1948, 1950, 1954, and 1960. This approach is similar to that of Barro and Redlick (2011), who focus
on marginal rate changes rather than tax liability changes.
7
See appendix A.1.2 for a more detail on the 1993 example tax change calculation.

5

policy-induced change in tax liability at the individual tax return level.8 After calculating a
change in tax liability for each taxpayer, I collapse the data by averaging it for every income
percentile of AGI.
Figure 1 shows the results for four recent, prominent tax changes. Based on this measure
of tax changes, 1993 taxpayers below median AGI received a modest tax cut of less than one
percent of AGI and only the highest-income taxpayers faced higher taxes. A similar pattern
emerges in 1991 under George H.W. Bush. In contrast, high-income taxpayers received the
largest cuts in 1982 and 2003 under Reagan and Bush, respectively.
To compute total changes in income and payroll taxes in a given year, I multiply the average
change in liability for each percentile by the number of returns in that percentile and then sum
up each percentile’s aggregate tax changes to obtain total tax changes for the bottom 90% and
top 10% groups. I define tax shocks as a share of GDP, i.e., Ttg ≡

Tax Liability Changegt
,
GDPt

where

Tax Liability Changegt is the sum of mechanical changes in tax liability for those in income
group g ∈ {Bottom 90, Top 10} in year t. As a robustness check, I compare my measure, i.e.,
the sum of tax changes for the bottom 90% and top 10%, to the Romer and Romer (2010) total
tax change measure. They are quite similar.9 Differences between my aggregate measure and
their measure are partially due to tax changes that did not affect income or payroll taxes, such
P
as corporate income tax changes, and are defined accordingly: TN ON IN C ≡ TROM ER − g Ttg .
Exogenous tax changes occurred in thirty-one years of the postwar period.10 In exogenous
years, the average income and payroll tax change was -0.16% of GDP, or roughly $25 billion in
2011 dollars. It was -0.075% overall in the entire sample. On average, in exogenous years in
which the top 10% taxpayers did not see a tax increase, the size of the tax cut for the bottom
90% and the top 10% was roughly the same size. In exogenous years in which the top 10% did
see tax increases, the size of the tax increase as a share of output was an order of magnitude
8

Note that this method avoids bracket creep issues in the period before the Great Moderation since the
hypothetical tax schedule applies to the old tax form data. Since inflation has been low during the Great
Moderation, measurement error induced by this approach (due to inflation indexing) is quite small in magnitude.
Also, it is not obviously correct to weight old tax data by CPI since median income growth has stagnated. As
such, adjusting for the mild inflation of the Great Moderation may exacerbate measurement error rather than
reduce it.
9
Appendix Figure A7 plots both series by year. The Romer tax change measure is at a quarterly frequency,
so I sum their measure to construct an annualized version.
10
Exogenous is defined as a year in which Romer and Romer (2010) show a nonzero tax change where more
than half the revenue was from an exogenous change. Stricter definitions of exogenous, i.e., ways to categorize
years in which there were both exogenous and endogenous changes occurring in that year, produced very similar
results. For non-exogenous years, the tax change measure is set to zero. Appendix Table A1 lists exogenous tax
changes used in this paper.

6

larger for the top 10% than for the bottom 90%. On average, tax changes have been negative
for both groups, meaning that tax cuts as a share of output tend to be larger than tax increases
as a share of output.
Panel A of Figure 2 shows how income and payroll taxes have changed by AGI quintile since
1960. There are a few notable features. First, tax changes for different income groups often
happen simultaneously.11 Second, the magnitudes of tax changes for the top 10% are larger
in share of output terms since their income share is large and has been increasing. Third, tax
increases have been rare since the 1980s, especially on the bottom four quintiles. Fourth, the
earlier tax increases on the bottom 90% mostly came through payroll tax increases before 1980.
1.1.2

State Tax Changes by Income Group

National tax changes have disparate impacts across regions of the United States due to substantial variation in the income distribution across states. Panel B of Figure 2 shows the average
share of taxpayers who have incomes in the top 10% nationally from 1980-2007. Based on this
measure, a taxpayer in Connecticut is roughly three times more likely to be in the top 10% than
a taxpayer in Maine.
Similar to the national changes, I define state tax shocks as a share of state GDP, i.e.,
g
Ts,t
≡

Tax Liability Changegs,t
,
GDPs,t

where Tax Liability Change is the sum of mechanical changes in tax

liability for all the residents in state s and group g in year t. Note that the income groups are
defined on a national basis, so top 10% means a taxpayer’s adjusted gross income is in the top
10% of national taxpayers (as opposed to a measure relative to others in their state). I am
able to aggregate by state since TAXSIM has a variable indicating the state of residence for
nearly all tax returns. However, taxpayers with AGI above $200,000 in nominal dollars have
the state identifier removed in the IRS data.12 This data limitation causes the first measure of
tax changes to be approximated within TAXSIM for very high incomes at the state level.13
11

Based on Frisch and Waugh (1933) logic, a tax change that provides atypical changes to a given income
group will influence estimates more strongly than proportionate tax changes. Appendix Figure A9 shows this
point explicitly – years like 2003 provided disproportionately larger tax cuts to the top 10% given the size of the
tax change for the bottom 90%.
12
In 1975, the first year with state data available, the price level was roughly 25% of the 2010 level, so this
cutoff amounts to roughly $800,000 of AGI. Put another way, $200,000 was between the 99.9% and 99.99%
income cutoff in the 1975 AGI distribution. In 2010, an AGI of $200,000 is still well above the 95th income
percentile (the cutoff is roughly $150,000).
13
Due to the $200,000 censoring, I have to extrapolate part of the state shares for the top-income group. I
determine the total number of income earners whose incomes exceed the $200,000 cutoff every year and allocate

7

1.2
1.2.1

Non-Tax Data
Non-Tax Data at the State Level

The main measures of economic activity are employment and income. I use two measures of
employment – the employment-to-population ratio and the number of people employed.14 I also
use two measures of state income: state GDP and net earnings. Net earnings (which is state
personal income less personal government transfers and dividends, interest, and rents) provides
a measure of income that nets out components that are less related to regional tax shocks.
A limitation of the income measures, however, is that they are in nominal terms and converting them into real terms is difficult because state-level price indexes are imperfect. My preferred
ACCRA
state price index is Ps,t
, which is the average price index from the American Chamber of

Commerce Researchers Association on cost of living in a state-year. It has been used in the
local labor markets literature, e.g., Moretti (2013), to construct regional price indexes and is
M oretti
,
available for the full panel of states since 1980. I supplement this price index with Ps,t

which follows the approach from Moretti (2013) to create a local price index based on state
house prices and national CPI.15
To better understand mechanisms, I also analyze several labor market outcomes from the
Current Population Survey (CPS) at the state level: labor force participation, hours, wages,
and real wages.16 I focus on labor force participation to analyze extensive margin responses,
and on hours among full-time employed residents aged 25 to 60 to isolate intensive margin
responses. Wages are wage income divided by hours among full-time workers. Finally, to
remove the influence of compositional changes of labor market participants on average wages,
I also construct composition-constant wages.17 Appendix A.2 provides additional detail on
them according to extrapolated state shares for that year. I assume that each state’s share of the total number
of U.S. income earners just below the cutoff (from $150,000 to $200,000) is the same as its share of national
income earners whose incomes exceed $200,000. Very little extrapolation is required in the early years, in which
more than 99% of incomes fall below the censoring cutoff. In 2010, more than 95% of income earners still earned
less than $200,000.
14
I use the Current Population Survey (CPS) to construct employment-to-population ratios, the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) for employment, and Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) for GDP at the state level.
15
Moretti (2013) uses a local price index based on rental payments and national CPI, but rental payments are
only available in 1980, 1990, and the 2000s, so I use state house prices from FHFA in place of rental payments.
ACCRA
Since house prices are asset prices that are forward-looking, I prefer the Ps,t
measure, but show results
M oretti
BLS
using Ps,t
as well as Ps,t , which is a price index based on BLS city price indexes but is only available for
roughly twenty cities. See data appendix A.2 for details.
16
I also provide supplemental evidence on payrolls, which are from the County Business Patterns, as well as
employment rates. The employment rate is the share of people in the labor force who are employed.
17
I follow the approach of Busso et al. (2013) and Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) to construct composition-

8

variable sources and definitions. Real wages and real composition-constant wages are these
ACCRA
nominal series divided by a price index, which is Ps,t
unless otherwise specified.

There are two main sets of controls. First, I include controls on oil prices and real interest rates from Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). Second, I use controls for contemporaneous
policy and spending changes. I construct microsimulation models to measure social insurance
policy changes in an analogous way to my tax shocks.18 Specifically, I develop a state-specific,
formula-driven mechanical change in spending for Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and Medicaid. I then divide
each mechanical spending change by state GDP. To supplement these controls, I also control
directly for several other policy parameters that are enumerated in data appendix A.3.
1.2.2

Non-Tax Data at the National Level

Aggregate macroeconomic outcome variables come from the BEA. In particular, real GDP,
consumption, investment, and government data are the chain-type quantity indexes from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis’ National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.1.3; the nominal
GDP data come from the National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.1.5.

2

Econometric Methods

This section describes how I estimate the relationship between changes in taxes for different
groups and subsequent economic activity. First, I fit distributed lag models and direct projections to look at the dynamic relationship between (i) tax changes by income group and (ii)
subsequent changes in economic activity at the state level. I then consider a more parsimonious
specification that estimates the relationship between (i) two-year changes in taxes by income
group and (ii) two-year changes in economic activity. Second, I study these relationships at the
national level using a specification that is similar to that of Romer and Romer (2010), but has
tax changes that are decomposed by income group. The national approach, while inherently
noisy and suggestive due to limited data, supplements the state results by quantifying aggregate
effects.
constant wages.
18
Appendix C provides more detail on these microsimulation models.

9

2.1
2.1.1

State-level Effects of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups

In a given state s and year t, changes in the outcome ys,t between year t−1 and t are decomposed
into a state component µs , a time component δt , the effects of current and lagged tax shocks
g
Ts,t
for income group g, an index of time-varying state-characteristics X0s,t Λ, and a residual

component εs,t :

ys,t − ys,t−1 =

X

m
X

g

m=m

!
β

g,m

g
Ts,t−m

+ X0s,t Λ + µs + δt + εs,t ,

(1)

where g ∈ {Bottom 90, Top 10} indexes the income groups and the time index m for the lags of
B90
tax changes range from m = 0 and m = 2 in the baseline specification.19 Ts,t
is an exogenous

tax shock as a share of state GDP for taxpayers who are in the bottom 90% of AGI nationally
T 10
is defined analogously. Tax shocks are expressed as a share of state GDP to facilitate
and Ts,t

comparisons over time.
For OLS to identify the parameters of interest, tax shocks need to be exogenous conditional
B90
T 10
on fixed effects and controls, i.e., E(εs,t |Ts,t
, Ts,t
, Xs,t , µs , δt ) = 0. Intuitively, this identifying

assumption is that national tax shocks, which Romer and Romer (2010) define as exogenous, are
not disproportionately favoring states that are doing poorly relative to how fast they normally
grow. The validity of comparing outcomes of states with different income distributions relies on
three key assumptions: (1) state tax shocks are exogenous, (2) targeted tax shocks are unrelated
to targeted spending shocks, and (3) outcomes from less exposed states provide a reasonable
counterfactual in the absence of the tax shock.
Since I control for state and year fixed effects in equation 1, the first assumption maintains
that federal policymakers are not systematically setting tax policy to respond to idiosyncratic
state shocks. Relying on variation from federal tax changes that Romer and Romer (2010)
classify as exogenous makes it less likely policymakers are responding to idiosyncratic state
shocks since the Romer and Romer (2010) changes are due to concerns about long-run aggregate
growth and inherited budget deficits.20
19

Similar results with different lead and lag structures are also presented in the appendix.
To support the exogeneity assumption by income group, I show that these federal tax shocks for each income
group pass the Favero and Giavazzi (2012) orthogonality test, which amounts to showing that the raw series of
tax shocks by group are similar to these series after partialling out macro aggregates.
20

10

Even if state tax shocks are exogenous, they may occur at the same time as other progressive
policy changes. If progressive tax and spending policy systematically occur at the same time
and both increase growth, then β B90 would reflect both the true effect of tax changes for the
bottom 90% and the effects of spending policies, resulting in upwardly-biased estimates. To
address this concern, I directly control for government transfer payments as well as specific
policy parameters. I first control for a comprehensive measure of total government spending
on transfer programs, but this amount of spending responds to economic conditions. To isolate
changes in policy parameters from changes in economic conditions, my preferred approach is to
control for mechanical policy-induced changes in social insurance program spending. I include
the mechanical policy-induced spending changes of several key transfer programs in the vector of
controls Xs,t in the baseline specification, and then present estimates that control for additional
policy parameters in robustness specifications.
I provide several pieces of evidence to support the third assumption that outcomes from
less exposed states provide a reasonable counterfactual in the absence of the tax shock. I
consider the possibility that states that disproportionately benefit from a given tax change
may be generally more cyclical. I do so by replacing year fixed effects δt in equation 1 with
δq(s),t where δq(s),t is each state’s cyclicality-quintile-specific year fixed effect. The function
q(s) : {AL, AK, ..., W Y } → {1, ..., 5} gives the quintile of the state’s sensitivity to national
changes in economic conditions. I present a few ways to measure how cyclically-sensitive each
state is, but the baseline approach follows the β-differencing approach of Blanchard and Katz
(1992), which regresses changes in state economic activity on national changes in economic
activity to estimate the state’s average responsiveness to national shocks.21 The resulting groupby-year fixed effect δq(s),t measures common year shocks in the 10 states with similar levels
of cyclicality. Additionally, I consider regional trends as well as other controls used in the
regional multiplier literature (e.g., state-specific trends and state-specific interest rate and oil
price sensitivity). I provide further support for the third assumption by examining the path of
economic activity preceding tax shocks for bottom- and top-income groups.
21

See appendix B.1 for details. I also show results using deciles instead of quintiles and using quintiles of
each state’s standard deviation in real GDP per capita σs,1963−1979 in the years preceding the sample period
1980-2007.

11

2.1.2

Direct Projections of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups

To examine how the path of economic activity evolves before and after tax shocks for bottomand top-income groups, I run a series of direct projection regressions for different horizons
h ∈ {−4, −3, ..., 5}:
B90
T 10
ys,t+h − ys,t−1 = αhB90 (Ts,t
) + αhT 10 (Ts,t
) + X0s,t Λh + µs,h + δt,h + εs,t,h ,

(2)

where s and t index state and year, ys,t+h − ys,t−1 is a measure of growth in economic activity
at horizon h, and µs,h and δt,h are horizon-specific state and year fixed effects.22 The path
of economic activity around the tax shocks for bottom and top-income groups is described by
T 10 h=5
the sequences of coefficients {αhB90 }h=5
h=−4 and {αh }h=−4 , which quantify the impacts of these

shocks on economic activity over different horizons. As noted by Jorda (2005); Stock and
Watson (2007); Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), using direct projections of tax shocks
on outcomes is attractive because it does not impose dynamic restrictions on the estimates at
different horizons. I use these specifications to estimate average outcomes before tax shocks to
determine if tax shocks for different groups occur soon after unusually good or bad economic
times. The direct projection approach also shows how the effects of tax changes vary over time
and can potentially reveal anticipatory effects, which may vary by income group.
2.1.3

Two-Year Effects of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups

While the direct projection specifications are useful for examining how economic activity evolves
around a tax change, I fit more parsimonious models that use two-year changes to show the
cumulative effects of tax changes on employment and income for different income groups.23 The
two-year specification follows a similar specification to Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), but for
tax shocks (by income group) rather than for government spending shocks:
22

In the baseline specification, I use cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects described in the prior section, i.e.,
δq(s),t formed using the β-differencing approach of Blanchard and Katz (1992), which are indexed by the horizon,
i.e., δq(s),t,h . I also include the mechanical policy-induced spending changes of several key transfer programs in
the vector of controls Xs,t in the baseline specification as well. Specifically, the 5 distinct policy controls are the
mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP.
23
Note that each of the elements of the tax shock are normalized by the initial level of state GDP (i.e., Ys,t−2 ).
There is nothing special about two-year changes per se other than that this duration is somewhat standard in
this literature (e.g., Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)).

12

Ys,t − Ys,t−2
= bB90
Ys,t−2

2
X

!
B90
Ts,t−m

+ bT 10

m=0

2
X

!
T 10
Ts,t−m

+ X0s,t Λ + as + dt + es,t .

(3)

m=0

In this case, the year fixed effects dt absorb common aggregate macroeconomic shocks and the
state-fixed effects effectively control for different state trends in the outcome. An advantage of
this specification is that the average effects of tax changes are captured by one parameter for
each income group (rather than a parameter for each lag of each income group). I use dq(s),t
instead of dt in the baseline specification (where dq(s),t is each state’s cyclicality-quintile-specific
year fixed effect) and also control for mechanical policy-induced spending changes.

2.2

National Effects of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups

I also fit specifications similar to equation 1 at the national level:

yt − yt−1 =

m
X


B90
T 10
γ B90,m Tt−m
+ γ T 10,m Tt−m
+ X0t−m Γm + νt ,

(4)

m=m

where γ B90,m and γ T 10,m are the effects of changes in taxes as a share of GDP at lag m and
the time index m for the lags of tax changes range from m = 0 and m = 2 in the baseline
specification. TtB90 is an exogenous tax shock as a share of national GDP for taxpayers who
are in the bottom 90% of AGI nationally and TtT 10 is defined analogously. Xt = [TN ON IN C,t ]
includes non-income and non-payroll tax changes that Romer and Romer (2010) classify as
exogenous (e.g., corporate tax changes). One way to interpret equation 4 is that it decomposes
the Romer and Romer (2010) exogenous tax change measure into three mutually exclusive and
collectively exhaustive components: TtB90 , TtT 10 , and the non-income and non-payroll portion,
i.e., TN ON IN C,t .

3

Effect of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups

This section provides results on the effects of tax changes for different income groups on economic
activity. Section 3.1 provides evidence on the effects of tax changes for different groups on
employment and income growth. Section 3.2 provides results for mechanisms and highlights
supplemental national results. Section 3.3 discusses the estimates and relates them to existing

13

evidence. Finally, section 3.4 briefly describes additional support for the validity of the estimates
and robustness tests.

3.1

Impacts on State Economic Activity

Figure 3 shows the evolution of the state employment-to-population ratio and state employment
relative to the year before a tax change for different income groups. Panel A shows that the
employment-to-population ratio exhibits little trend prior to tax changes and then gradually
falls in the years following a tax change for the bottom 90%. Specifically, the estimates for
the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 from equation 2, and those
for the top 10%, α̂hT 10 , are shown in blue and red respectively. The employment-to-population
ratio is roughly 4 percentage points lower three years after a 1% of state GDP tax change for
the bottom 90% relative to the employment-to-population ratio the year before the tax change
(i.e., α̂3B90 ≈ 4). After four years, on average, the ratio improves slightly to be roughly 3
percentage points below the level prior to the tax change. Panel B shows similar patterns for
state employment. State employment tends to be 2% lower in the year after the tax change
for the bottom 90%, falls to 4% two years after the change, and then recovers somewhat to be
roughly 2% lower four years after the tax change. Tax changes for the top 10%, in contrast,
have no detectable impact on the state employment-to-population ratio and state employment
in the eight-year window around tax changes.
Figure 4 shows the evolution of the state income and prices. Panel A shows that nominal
state GDP sharply declines following tax changes for the bottom 90% and is roughly 8 percent
lower than the year before the tax change. These declines are very large.24 However, panel B
shows prices also fall by roughly 6 percent. This price decline estimate is noisy, but indicates
that the GDP declines are smaller in real terms. Panels C and D show results for real GDP
ACCRA
HP I
using the ACCRA price index Ps,t
and a home-price-based index Ps,t
. The real series

show smaller impacts, especially three and four years after the tax changes for the bottom 90%.
In terms of estimates from tax changes for the top 10%, estimates for both measures of income in
nominal and real terms provide no evidence that tax changes for high-income earners materially
impact economic activity over a business cycle frequency.25
24

I discuss the magnitudes and relate them to existing literature in section 3.3.
While it is possible that the effects show up further into the future, detecting such effects is inherently
difficult. See Romer and Romer (2014) for some historical evidence on longer-term effects.
25

14

Table 1 presents the main regression estimates of state employment and income. Panel
A shows estimates of the distributed lag specification using equation 1 as well as the sum of
P2
g,m
effects
of tax changes for each group g ∈ {Bottom 90, Top 10}. Panel B shows
m=0 β
estimates from the more parsimonious two-year change specification using 3. For each panel,
the baseline specification is a rich set of controls: mechanical policy changes in spending as a
share of state GDP on social insurance programs (AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid) as
well as state and cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects. Employment declines roughly 3.5% in
both specifications following a tax change of 1% of state GDP for the bottom 90%, and top tax
changes have no impact in either specification. Panel B also reports the p-value for the test that
bB90 = bB90 , i.e., that the impacts on two-year employment growth from tax changes for both
groups are equal. This test is rejected with 94% confidence in column 1. The employment-topopulation ratio also shows similar patterns but is less precise over a two-year window relative
to three and four years after the tax change as shown in Figure 3. The next three columns
show estimates for nominal and real state GDP. The impacts are very large for the bottom
90% and not for the top 10%. Although the point estimates for state GDP are less stable and
range from 5.3% to 9.2%, the qualitative pattern of nearly all responsiveness from lower-income
groups and small impacts from top groups is very robust.26 Each specification rejects the null
hypothesis of equal impacts from tax changes for the bottom 90% and top 10% with more than
99% confidence.

3.2

Mechanisms

The results in section 3.1 show large employment and income declines after tax changes affecting
lower-income taxpayers. These employment and income results are reduced-form estimates that
reflect changes in both the supply and demand for labor following a tax change. This section
discusses impacts on labor market outcomes and on consumption, the relative importance of
supply and demand changes at the state level, and effects on aggregate investment.
Figure 5 shows the impacts of tax changes for different groups on extensive and intensive
labor market responses, real wages, and consumption. On the extensive margin, Panel A shows
that labor force participation rates decline roughly 3 percentage points three and four years
26

Appendix Tables A8 and A9 show robustness tests for nominal state GDP. Appendix Tables A10 and A11
show robustness tests for real state GDP.

15

after a tax change for the bottom 90%. On the intensive margin, hours of workers who work
at least 48 weeks decline by roughly 2 percent soon after the tax change but return to the
levels before the tax change.27 Panel C shows that real wages increase following tax changes for
the bottom 90%.28 These real wage results, though imprecise, reveal the relative importance
of supply and demand changes in the labor market. The increase in real wages suggests that
supply-side responses are important and may exceed demand-side responses to tax changes for
the bottom 90%.
In terms of aggregate mechanisms, Table 4 shows national results for real GDP and its
components. Real GDP decreases 3.8% following tax changes for the bottom 90% and decreases
1.1% following tax changes for the top 10%. These point estimates are noisy – the standard error
for the top 10% estimate is 4.6% at the national level – but could be consistent with impacts
of tax changes from the top 10% that spillover to other states. That said, the impacts on the
top 10% are statistically indistinguishable from zero and 2.7 percentage points lower than the
aggregate estimate for the bottom 90%. The components of GDP are also noisy.29 Other than
the impacts on investment, which are much more responsive to tax changes for the bottom 90%
and are weakly significant statistically, there is not enough variation in the time series to pin
down heterogeneous effects on macro aggregates.30 The investment responses and the overall
real GDP point estimates, however, suggest that the effects of additional economic growth from
tax changes for the bottom 90% tend to exceed the effects from income changes among those
who are more likely to save.
27

Results are similar for hours of workers who work on average at least 35 hours per week and at least 48
weeks per year.
28
Nominal wages tend to be roughly flat but then increase following tax changes for the bottom 90%. Panel
ACCRA
C uses the ACCRA price index Ps,t
as a deflator and adjusts wages holding constant the composition of
workers, which indicates that the real wage increases are reflecting actual increases rather than compositional
shifts in labor supply. Results using other deflators and raw average wages are similar and presented in appendix
Figure A14.
29
Given the limited number of tax changes events in the postwar period, the possibility of coincidental trends
in income inequality, for example, suggests caution when interpreting the national results and provides another
reason why evidence from the state-level analysis, especially when the analysis accounts for regional trends, may
be more informative.
30
The consumption results are somewhat mixed. Although durable good consumption is much more responsive
to bottom 90% tax changes, the non-durable consumption estimates work in the opposite direction, leading to
similar overall consumption impacts. The similarity in consumption impacts is inconsistent with the literature
on MPCs and the state-level results in Figure 4 which show much larger responses from the bottom 90% on
consumption.

16

3.3

Discussion of Results

Quantitatively, the main reduced-form results in this paper are large, but within a range that is
consistent with existing cross-sectional evidence. In particular, the 3.4% estimate for the increase
in state employment from a 1% of GDP tax cut for the bottom 90% translates to roughly $31,500
per job.31 These cost-per-job estimates are consistent with those reported in Ramey (2011):
$25,000 in Wilson (2012), roughly $28, 600 in Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012), $30,000 in Suárez
Serrato and Wingender (2011), and $35,000 in Shoag (2010).32 My estimates for the impact
of tax cuts for the top 10% on employment are statistically and economically indistinguishable
from zero, so the corresponding cost-per-job estimate is much higher. Therefore, given my
estimates by income group, the overall impact of a tax cut of 1% of GDP that goes half to the
bottom 90% and half to the top 10% will have roughly a $63,000 cost-per-job.
The estimates for impacts on real income, however, are larger than most papers in this
literature.33 First, the variation that I am exploiting could potentially yield stronger effects than
prior studies. Second, the confidence intervals are large, so one cannot rule out smaller effects.
Third, in terms of point estimates, the average output multiplier in a recent survey by ChodorowReich (2017) is 2.1, though some studies estimate sizable cumulative output multipliers (e.g.,
Leduc and Wilson (2015) estimate a cumulative multiplier of 6.6). The estimated impact on real
income from the bottom 90% depends on the specification, but is roughly 7.34 The impact from
the top 10% is roughly zero, so the overall multiplier on real income, computed as the average of
the group-specific multipliers, is roughly 3.5. It is important to emphasize that these estimates
are regional multipliers, which can differ from national multipliers to the extent that time fixed
effects absorb general equilibrium forces (e.g., countercyclical monetary policy).35 Since state
31

Using 2011 numbers, the cost of a 1% of GDP tax cut is roughly $150 billion and a 3.4% increase in
employment on a base of 140 million is 4.76 million. Therefore, the cost-per-job is $150,000M
= $31, 513.
4.76M
32
Note that Wilson (2012) and Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012) focus on effects during a recession, which likely
results in lower cost-per-job estimates. There are also estimates of smaller multipliers (e.g., Clemens and Miran
(2012)). See Chodorow-Reich (2017) for a recent survey.
33
Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), for example, find output multipliers from government spending of 1.32 to
4.79 in their Table 3 and roughly similar estimates for output multipliers in real terms.
34
See, for example, Figure 4 panels C and D or the real income estimates in Table 1 or appendix Tables A6
and A7. Other measures of income, e.g., total personal income from CPS, increase by roughly 5% as shown in
appendix Figure A21, but these estimates are noisy.
35
Although regional multipliers are generally believed to be larger than national multipliers, the relative size
of regional and national multipliers is an active area of research (Chodorow-Reich, 2017). It is also worth noting
that common national shocks like countercyclical monetary policy are not likely to be fully absorbed by time fixed
effects given regional heterogeneity and the possibility of heterogeneous impacts of monetary policy changes.

17

GDP, particularly in real terms, is measured with error,36 my preferred interpretation of these
results is that the point estimates for real income are more variable and thus less reliable than the
employment estimates, but impacts on both outcomes provide robust evidence that economic
activity is substantially more responsive to tax changes for the bottom 90% than to those for
the top 10%. Okun’s law suggests that employment and GDP are closely related, so putting
emphasis on the better measured of the two seems advantageous.
In terms of mechanisms and the relative importance of consumption and labor supply responses, rationalizing the large responses in economic activity through consumption responses
alone is not persuasive. First, the traditional multiplier of

MP C
1−M P C

would require marginal

propensities to consume that are larger than most MPCs estimated in the literature, e.g., Johnson et al. (2006) and Parker et al. (2013). Second, in terms of heterogeneous MPCs by income
group, the initial impact on consumption could be sizable,37 but the subsequent rounds do not
feed back exclusively to lower-income groups, so the MPCs in subsequent rounds are not the
MPCs of lower-income consumers, but economy-wide average MPCs. Third, to the extent some
of the initial spending is on durable goods, which are often traded, the impacts from increased
consumption may not be especially concentrated in the states where tax change recipients live
(other than through spillovers to the consumption of complementary non-tradables). Substantial labor supply responses, therefore, are likely an important mechanism, which is consistent
with the evidence presented on labor force participation, hours, and real wages.
One may find these results surprising from the perspective of the theoretical literature.
Although the employment estimates are comparable to those in the empirical literature on
regional multipliers, it may be somewhat surprising from the perspective of the theoretical
literature that tax cuts for lower-income earners are more effective than government spending.38
Farhi and Werning (2016), however, show that externally-financed regional multipliers with
36

BEA relies on measures from a range of sources when computing state GDP, many of which are from the
economic census. The economic census is compiled every five years and in non-benchmark years, state GDP
estimates involve “interpolation and extrapolation techniques using indicator series that mirror the movement in
the GDP by state component being estimated.” See https://www.bea.gov/regional/pdf/gsp/GDPState.pdf.
37
Aaronson et al. (2012) show that household spending increases by roughly $700 per quarter following a
$250 per quarter income increase due to minimum wage increases. This 700
250 ≈ 3X impact on spending among
low-income earners comes from a small number of households that make large durable purchases following the
income shock. Similar spending behavior following tax shocks for lower-income earners could generate sizable
impacts on economic activity.
38
MPC estimates are typically smaller than 1 and the traditional government spending multiplier is 1−M1 P C ,
so the traditional tax multiplier is smaller than the traditional government spending multiplier, i.e., M P C < 1
MP C
1
implies that 1−M
P C < 1−M P C .

18

redistribution and non-Ricardian agents can be larger than traditional multipliers. Additionally,
other channels, such as extensive margin labor supply responses with heterogeneous agents, are
often not incorporated and can impact conclusions about multipliers.
The results may also be surprising in terms of Ricardian equivalence. Ricardian agents
will increase expenditures based on the annuity value of the tax change, which may be zero
if they expect to finance the tax change in the future.39 However, there are a few reasons
why Ricardian equivalence may fail, especially when considering tax changes for lower-income
groups in a spatial setting. First, agents may consider tax changes a transfer if the tax change
is (i) financed contemporaneously by other agents (from other locations or from other income
groups) or (ii) if they expect others to pay for it in the future. Second, agents may be liquidity
constrained. Third, agents may be myopic. These considerations may also help explain why
there are different impacts for different income groups.

3.4

Threats to Validity and Robustness

There are three key threats to the validity of the estimates: endogenous tax changes, prior
economic conditions and differential trends, and concomitant progressive government spending
changes. First, I assess the concern that the composition of tax shocks may be endogenous by
appealing to an orthogonality test used by Favero and Giavazzi (2012). This test compares the
federal tax change series before and after partialling out macro aggregates. Appendix Figure A8
shows that the raw tax shock series and the orthogonalized tax shock series are very similar for
each income group, supporting the compositional exogeneity assumption.40
Tables 2 and 3 present distributed lag estimates for a wide range of robustness tests to
address the second and third concerns, respectively. Table 2 shows impacts of tax changes on
state employment growth.41 The first five columns present different ways to account for statespecific cyclicality; (1) presents the baseline specification with cyclicality-quintile by year fixed
effects, (2) presents year effects, (3) presents cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects where the
39

This discussion of Ricardian equivalence draws from the discussion of Ricardian equivalence and regional
multipliers in Chodorow-Reich (2017).
40
More generally, tax changes could be endogenous by income group, year, and state. I address concerns with
respect to the timing and location of tax changes by using only tax changes Romer and Romer (2010) classify
as exogenous and by exploiting regional variation in the income distribution.
41
Appendix Tables A8 and A9 show results for nominal state GDP. Appendix Tables A10 and A11 show
results for real state GDP.

19

quintiles are defined based on the standard deviation in state GDP per capita, (4) cyclicalitydecile by year fixed effects, and (5) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects that group states
only using the years before the sample (i.e., before 1980). The next five columns show controls
for state-specific sensitivity to other shocks and trends; (6) controls for oil price interacted with
state dummies, (7) controls for real interest rate interacted with state dummies, (8) and (9)
add region fixed effects to (6) and (7), and (10) includes state-specific trends. The specific
point estimates for the impact on employment growth from tax changes for the bottom 90%
depend on the specification, are almost always significant statistically, and tend to be within a
one percentage point range of the baseline estimates. Similar patterns emerge in Table 3, which
shows results for a wide range of policy parameters and controls for government spending. Panel
B of both tables show the same controls using the two-year change specification for additional
measures of economic activity and show similar patterns. For example, Table 3 shows that
two-year employment growth following a tax change for the bottom 90% ranges between 3.2
percent to 3.6 percent across 11 different policy controls. Overall, the general patterns are quite
robust. Almost all the impact on economic activity from tax changes comes from tax changes
from the bottom 90%.

4

Conclusion

This paper quantifies the importance of the distribution of tax changes for their overall impact
on economic activity. I construct a new data series of tax changes by income group from tax
return data. I use this series and variation from the income distribution across states and
federal tax shocks to estimate the effects of tax changes for different groups. I find that the
stimulative effects of income tax cuts are largely driven by tax cuts for the bottom 90% and
that the empirical link between employment growth and tax changes for the top 10% is weak
to negligible over a business cycle frequency. These effects are not confounded by changes in
progressive spending, state trends, or prior economic conditions. The effects seem to come from
labor supply responses as well as increased consumption and investment.
These results are important for characterizing central equity-efficiency tradeoffs in tax policy.
If policy makers aim to increase economic activity in the short to medium run, this paper
strongly suggests that tax cuts for top-income earners will be less effective than tax cuts for

20

lower-income earners. While it is possible that tax cuts for top-income earners have sizable
long-run impacts through different channels such as human capital investment, firm creation,
or innovation,42 much more compelling evidence on these channels is needed to support topincome tax cuts on efficiency grounds, especially given the magnitude of resources devoted to
these tax policy changes. Overall, the results not only suggest some skepticism for “trickle
down” economics, but they also provide evidence that supply-side tax policies should do more
to consider the relative efficacy of tax cuts targeted lower in the income distribution. Finally, as
a note of caution, the estimates in this paper come from modest changes in tax rates that have
been executed in the post-war period; using these estimates to evaluate the likely impacts of
large tax changes on high-income earners requires extrapolation beyond the observed variation
in the data.

42

Extending the analysis to study medium- and longer-term effects of tax changes, such as new firm creation
or patent activity, is a good topic for future research.

21

References
Aaronson, Daniel, Sumit Agarwal, and Eric French, “The Spending and Debt Response
to Minimum Wage Hikes,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3111–3139.
Auerbach, Alan and Jonathan Siegel, “Capital-Gains Realizations of the Rich and Sophisticated,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (2), 276–282.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,”
American Economic Review, May 2013, 103 (3), 141–46.
Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith, “The Contribution of the
Minimum Wage to US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2016, 8 (1), 58–99.
Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick, “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 51–102.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1992, 1992 (1), 1–75.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency
of a Prominent Place Based Policy,” American Economic Review, September 2013, 103 (2),
897–947.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Sren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and
Tore Olsen, “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts:
Evidence from Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1141–1219.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Multipliers: What Have We
Learned?,” Harvard University Working Paper, 2017.
, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston, “Does State Fiscal
Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (3), 118–145.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Stephen Miran, “Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government Spending,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (2), 46–68.
Dynan, Karen, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes, “Do the Rich Save More?,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (2), 397–444.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 605–637.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivàn Werning, “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
Unions,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, forthcoming, 2016, 2, 2417–2492.
Favero, Carlo and Francesco Giavazzi, “Measuring Tax Multipliers: The Narrative Method
in Fiscal VARs,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (2), 69–94.

22

Frisch, Ragnar and Frederick V. Waugh, “Partial Time Regressions as Compared with
Individual Trends,” Econometrica, 1933, 1 (4), 387–401.
Galı́, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the Effects of
Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
2007, 5 (1), 227–270.
Goolsbee, Austan, “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (2), 352–378.
Hausman, Joshua K., “Fiscal Policy and Economic Recovery: The Case of the 1936 Veterans’
Bonus,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 1100–1143.
Heathcote, Jonathan, “Fiscal Policy with Heterogenous Agents and Incomplete Markets,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72 (1), 161–188.
Heckman, James J., “Comment,” in “Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis,” University of Chicago Press, 1983, pp. 70–82.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2010, 2, 479–506.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5),
1589–1610.
Jorda, Oscar, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 161–182.
Kline, Patrick and Melissa Tartari, “Bounding the Labor Supply Responses to a Randomized Welfare Experiment: A Revealed Preference Approach,” American Economic Review,
2016, 106 (4), 972–1014.
Kosar, Gizem and Robert A. Moffitt, “Trends in Cumulative Marginal Tax Rates Facing Low-Income Families, 1997-2007,” Working Paper 22782, National Bureau of Economic
Research 2016.
Leduc, Sylvain and Daniel Wilson, “Are State Governments Roadblocks to Federal Stimulus? Evidence from Highway Grants in the 2009 Recovery Act,” Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco Working Paper, 2015.
McCarthy, Jonathan, “Imperfect Insurance and Differing Propensities to Consume Across
Households,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1995, 36 (2), 301–327.
Mertens, Karel, “Marginal Tax Rates and Income: New Time Series Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 19171, 2013.
and Morten O. Ravn, “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax
Changes in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1212–1247.
and , “A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates of Tax Multipliers,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2014, 68, S1–S19.
23

Meyer, Bruce and Dan T. Rosenbaum, “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (3),
1063–1114.
Monacelli, Tommaso and Roberto Perotti, “Tax Cuts, Redistribution, and Borrowing
Constraints,” Technical Report, Bocconi University May 2011.
Moretti, Enrico, “Real Wage Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2013, 5 (1), 65–103.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
US Regions,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (3), 753–792.
Parker, Jonathan, “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social
Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 959–973.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American
Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2530–2553.
Ramey, Valerie A., “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2011, 49 (3), 673–685.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100
(3), 763–801.
and , “The Incentive Effects of Marginal Tax Rates: Evidence from the Interwar Era,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (3), 242–281.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew
Sobek, “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [dataset],” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 2010.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (3), 180–212.
and Gabriel Zucman, “Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
Capitalized Income Tax Data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (2), 519–578.
, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz, “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to
Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2012, 50 (1), 3–50.
Serrato, Juan Carlos Suárez and Owen Zidar, “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax
Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic
Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2582–2624.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod, “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income:
Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding,” American Economic Review, March 1995, 85
(1), 274–283.

24

Shoag, Daniel, “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier
from State Pension Plan Returns,” Working Paper, Harvard University 2010.
Stock, James and Mark Watson, “Why has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forcast?,”
Journal of Money, Banking and Credit, 2007, 39, 3–33.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Philippe Wingender, “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,” Working Paper, U.C. Berkeley 2011.
Wilson, Daniel J., “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4
(3), 251–282.
Yagan, Danny, “Is the Great Recession Really Over? Longitudinal Evidence of Enduring
Employment Impacts,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.

25

1991

1993

2003

0

2

−2

0

2

1982

−2

Average Change in Tax Liability as Share of AGI

Figure 1: Selected Historical Tax Changes for Each AGI Percentile

0

50

100 0

50

100

AGI Percentile
Graphs by Year

Notes: This figure displays the average mechanical change in income and payroll tax liability for each tax return in TAXSIM from tax schedule changes as
a share of adjusted gross income (AGI) by AGI percentile for 1993 and for three other prominent years. For display purposes, it does not show results for
the smallest AGI percentile (since the smallest income group result is amplified by a small denominator).

Figure 2: Federal Tax Changes by Income Group and Heterogeneous High-Income Shares

-.6

-.4

Percent of GDP
-.2
0
.2

.4

.6

A. Federal Income and Payroll Tax Changes by AGI Quintile

1950

1960

1970

1980
Year

Tax Change: Bottom 20%
Tax Change: 41-60%
Tax Change: Top 20%

1990

2000

2010

Tax Change: 21-40%
Tax Change: 61-80%
Exogenous Changes

B. Share of High-Income Taxpayers

11.47 − 15.48
9.92 − 11.47
8.66 − 9.92
7.57 − 8.66
6.84 − 7.57
3.90 − 6.84

Notes: This figure shows that there is both time-series and cross-sectional variation in tax changes by income
group. Panel A displays changes in individual income and payroll tax liabilities by income quintile as a share of
GDP from 1950 to 2007. Tax returns from TAXSIM are used to construct a tax change measure. The period
from 2008-2011 has no exogenous tax changes so those years are coded as zero exogenous change for each AGI
quintile throughout the paper. Both exogenous and endogenous tax changes are shown in the figure (Appendix
Table A1 shows how each tax change is classified). Panel B shows that there is substantial geographic variation
in the location of households in the top-income decile. For instance, 12.4% of households filing from Virginia
are in the top 10% of AGI nationally on average from 1980-2007. The data plotted are the average shares of
households filing from a given state for the years 1980-2007 who are in the top 10% nationally in that year.

Figure 3: Cumulative Growth in State Employment-to-Population Ratio and Employment

-.05

Percent

0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

B. Employment

.05

A. Employment-to-Population Ratio

-.1

-.1

28
-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment-to-population ratio and employment for those with AGI in
the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline
specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes
controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed
effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period
is 1980-2007.

Figure 4: Cumulative Growth in State Economic Activity

-.15

-.15

-.1

-.1

Percent
-.05
0

Percent
-.05
0

.05

.05

.1

B. ACCRA Price Index

.1

A. Nominal GDP

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

4

3

4

.1
.05
Percent
-.05
0

.1
Percent
0

-.15

-.1

-.1
-.2

29

3

D. Real GDP (Moretti HPI)

.2

C. Real GDP (ACCRA)

-1

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with
ACCRA
AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. These outcomes are (a) nominal state GDP, (b) the ACCRA state price index Ps,t
, (c) real state GDP using
ACCRA
M oretti
Ps,t
, and (d) real state GDP using Ps,t
. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact
of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC,
TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard
errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure 5: Cumulative Growth in State Labor Market Outcomes and Consumption

-.1

-.04

-.02

Percent
0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.02

.04

B. Hours

.05

A. Labor Force Participation Rate

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1

3

4

3

4

.05

.1

D. Consumption

Percent
-.05
0

.1
Percent
0

-.15

-.1

-.1
-.2

30

.2

C. Composition-Constant Real Wages (ACCRA)

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with
AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. These outcomes are (a) labor force participation rate (in percentage points), (b) mean hours worked among those
ACCRA
that have worked at least 48 weeks in the past year, (c) real composition-constant average wages using Ps,t
, and (d) state consumption. Specifically,
the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top
10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of
state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence
intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007 for (a)-(c). However, state consumption is only available since 1997, so the sample
period for (d) is 1997-2007.

Table 1: State-level Effects of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
Panel A: Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
Employment Emp/Pop Nominal GDP Real GDP (ACCRA) Real GDP (Moretti)
0.33
0.97
-2.05
-0.29
0.86
B90
(1.22)
(1.59)
(2.18)
(2.83)
(2.79)
B90 1-Year Lag
-1.87**
-1.23
-7.39***
-8.40***
-5.96***
(0.89)
(1.34)
(1.34)
(2.85)
(1.87)
B90 2-Year Lag
-1.98
-2.48*
0.25
2.11
-0.17
(1.25)
(1.35)
(1.44)
(2.11)
(2.05)
T10
0.52
0.47
1.05*
0.91
1.00
(0.45)
(0.40)
(0.58)
(0.99)
(1.08)
T10 1-Year Lag
-0.24
-0.66
0.10
0.88
-0.11
(0.60)
(0.41)
(0.70)
(0.61)
(1.25)
T10 2-Year Lag
-0.61
-0.80
-0.12
-0.12
-0.41
-3.52
-2.74
-9.19***
-6.59
-5.27
B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
(2.28)
(1.68)
(3.40)
(4.97)
(4.44)
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
-0.33
-0.99
1.03
1.67
0.48
(1.57)
(0.65)
(1.56)
(1.33)
(3.41)
Bottom - Top:
-3.19
-1.74
-10.22**
-8.26
-5.75
(3.14)
(1.87)
(3.96)
(5.10)
(4.57)
Panel B: Two-Year Changes
Employment Emp/Pop Nominal GDP Real GDP (ACCRA) Real GDP (Moretti)
-3.42**
-1.53
-11.98***
-9.70***
-7.00**
Bottom 90
(1.54)
(0.96)
(2.21)
(3.46)
(2.88)
Top 10
0.22
-0.24
0.75
1.44*
0.56
(0.90)
(0.33)
(0.96)
(0.85)
(2.17)
0.06
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.03
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)

Notes: Panel A presents estimates of the effects of tax changes for different income groups g ∈
{Bottom
90, Top 10} at different lags m from the following specification: ys,t − ys,t−1 = αs + δq(s),t +
P P2
g,m g
Ts,t−m +X0s,t Λ+εs,t , where ys,t is the log outcome (for all outcomes other than the employmentg
m=0 β
to-population ratio, which is measured in percentage terms), αs is a state-fixed effect, δq(s),t is each state’s
cyclicality-quintile-specific year fixed effect where q(s) : {AL, AK, ..., W Y } → {1, ..., 5} to be the quintile of
the state’s sensitivity to national changes in economic conditions (see section 2.1.1 or appendix B.1 for deB90
tails), Ts,t
is an exogenous tax shock as a share of state GDP for taxpayers who are in the bottom 90%
T 10
of AGI nationally, Ts,t
is defined analogously, and Xs,t includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC,
TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP with the same lag structure as the
tax changes (i.e., current values, one year lags, and two year lags). Similarly, Panel B presents estimates of
T 10
the effects of tax changes for the
bottom 90%,bB90 , and
P
Pthe top 10%,
 b , from the following specification:
Ys,t −Ys,t−2
2
2
B90
B90
T 10
T 10
0
= as + dq(s),t + b
m=0 Ts,t−m + b
m=0 Ts,t−m + Xs,t Λ + es,t , where Ys,t is the level
Ys,t−2
of the outcome,

Ys,t −Ys,t−2
Ys,t−2

is two-year growth in the outcome, as is a state-fixed effect, dq(s),t is each state’s
P

2
g
cyclicality-quintile-specific year fixed effect,
T
is the change in taxes over the last two years, and
s,t−m
m=0
Xs,t includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a share
of state GDP defined analogously as the tax shocks. For the Employment-to-Population ratio, the outcome is
the simple difference, i.e., Ys,t − Ys,t−2 . P-values for the null hypothesis that the effects of tax changes for the
bottom 90% and top 10% are the same, i.e., bB90 = bT 10 , are presented in the last row of Panel B. Standard
errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Data are at the state-year level from 1980-2007.
See appendix A.2 for data definitions and sources.

31

Table 2: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Employment: Cyclical Robustness
(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

(2)

(3)

(4)

32

Panel A: Distributed Lag Model of Tax
0.33
1.01
0.40
0.36
(1.22)
(0.87)
(0.72)
(1.26)
-1.87** -2.07** -1.71** -1.91**
(0.89)
(0.78)
(0.67)
(0.78)
-1.98
-1.17
-0.86
-2.24*
(1.25)
(1.10)
(0.87)
(1.19)
0.52
0.33
0.22
0.32
(0.45)
(0.32)
(0.32)
(0.36)
-0.24
-0.43
-0.19
-0.56
(0.60)
(0.44)
(0.46)
(0.50)
-0.61
-0.66
-0.59
-0.92
(0.67)
(0.46)
(0.56)
(0.56)
-3.52
-2.23
-2.17
-3.80**
(2.28)
(2.07)
(1.81)
(1.87)
-0.33
-0.76
-0.56
-1.17
(1.57)
(1.07)
(1.17)
(1.21)
-3.19
-1.47
-1.61
-2.63
(3.14)
(2.13)
(2.43)
(2.36)

Bottom 90
Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Baseline Cyclicality
2) Year
3) σGDP P C Cyclicality
4) Alternate β-diff Control #1
5) Alternate β-diff Control #2
6) Oil Price x State
7) Real Interest Rate x State
8) Oil Price x State + Region
9) Real Interest Rate x State + Region
10) State Trends

-3.42**
(1.54)
0.22
(0.90)
0.06

-2.58*
(1.31)
-0.00
(0.65)
0.04

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

(5)

(6)

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

(8)

(9)

(10)

Changes for Different Income Groups
1.22
0.89
0.40
1.10
0.44
-0.17
(0.93) (0.90)
(0.78)
(1.10)
(1.03)
(1.23)
-1.41* -2.14** -2.27*** -1.98** -2.37*** -2.22**
(0.76) (0.81)
(0.76)
(0.82)
(0.65)
(1.00)
-0.85
-1.32
-1.84*
-1.19
-1.86*
-2.80*
(1.22) (1.18)
(1.03)
(1.33)
(0.93)
(1.43)
0.32
0.29
0.32
0.33
0.29
0.56
(0.28) (0.32)
(0.32)
(0.36)
(0.36)
(0.46)
-0.30
-0.49
-0.55
-0.38
-0.55
-0.28
(0.36) (0.46)
(0.46)
(0.39)
(0.43)
(0.65)
-0.62
-0.74
-0.83*
-0.58
-0.82*
-0.74
(0.42) (0.47)
(0.49)
(0.36)
(0.42)
(0.72)
-1.04
-2.57
-3.71**
-2.06
-3.79** -5.20**
(2.11) (2.22)
(1.71)
(2.60)
(1.66)
(2.52)
-0.60
-0.94
-1.06
-0.62
-1.08
-0.46
(0.85) (1.08)
(1.10)
(0.81)
(0.96)
(1.67)
-0.44
-1.63
-2.64
-1.43
-2.71
-4.74
(2.06) (2.26)
(2.17)
(2.73)
(2.02)
(3.48)

Panel B: Two-Year Changes
-2.58* -3.58*** -1.55 -2.68*
(1.33)
(1.28)
(1.35) (1.38)
-0.05
-0.24
-0.01
-0.02
(0.61)
(0.66)
(0.49) (0.63)
0.12
0.02
0.22
0.04

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

(7)

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

(11)

(12)

-0.33
(1.42)
-2.41***
(0.70)
-2.84*
(1.42)
0.55
(0.44)
-0.26
(0.55)
-0.69
(0.62)
-5.58**
(2.05)
-0.40
(1.34)
-5.18*
(2.78)

-0.50
(1.29)
-2.49**
(1.00)
-2.58*
(1.35)
0.48
(0.48)
-0.29
(0.63)
-0.67
(0.69)
-5.57**
(2.73)
-0.48
(1.65)
-5.10
(3.63)

-3.45***
(1.16)
-0.11
(0.59)
0.01

-2.45
(1.77)
0.10
(0.54)
0.20

-3.37**
(1.35)
-0.14
(0.57)
0.06

-4.25**
(1.71)
0.31
(0.88)
0.03

-4.44**
(1.57)
0.24
(0.72)
0.04

-4.69**
(1.80)
0.15
(0.93)
0.03

N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

Notes: Each specification is the same as column 1 in Table 1 other than the controls. The first five columns present different ways to account for state-specific
cyclicality (see section 2.1.1 or appendix B.1 for details); (1) baseline specification with cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects, (2) year fixed effects, (3)
cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects where the quintiles are defined based on the standard deviation in state GDP per capita, (4) cyclicality-decile by
year fixed effects, and (5) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects that group states only using the years before the sample (i.e., before 1980). The next
five columns show controls for state-specific sensitivity to other shocks and trends; (6) controls for oil price interacted with state dummies, (7) controls for
real interest rate interacted with state dummies, (8) and (9) add region fixed effects to (6) and (7), and (10) includes state-specific trends. Standard errors
are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1) in all specifications other than (8) and (9), which are clustered by region. The sample period is
1980-2007. See appendix A.2 for data definitions and sources.

Table 3: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Employment: Policy Robustness
(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

(2)

(3)

33

Panel A: Distributed Lag
0.26
0.26
(1.13)
(1.19)
-2.01** -1.86**
(0.83)
(0.88)
-1.92
-1.99
(1.16)
(1.25)
0.43
0.52
(0.46)
(0.45)
-0.21
-0.25
(0.56)
(0.60)
-0.52
-0.62
(0.61)
(0.67)
-3.67*
-3.59
(2.09)
(2.25)
-0.30
-0.35
(1.47)
(1.58)
-3.37
-3.23
(2.93)
(3.14)

Bottom 90
Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Government Transfers Per Capita
2) Federal IG Spending Per Capita
3) Minimum Wage
4) OASDI
5) Supplemental Security Income
6) Max SNAP Benefits
7) Medicaid Benefits
8) AFDC + TANF Benefits
9) Mechanical Change in AFDC & TANF
10) Mechanical Change in SNAP & SSI
11) Mechanical Change in Medicaid

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
0.32
-0.11
0.21
0.18
0.18
0.50
0.36
(1.22)
(1.19)
(1.14)
(1.16)
(1.14)
(1.16)
(1.22)
-1.83** -1.58
-1.67* -1.86** -1.90** -1.69* -1.85**
(0.91)
(0.96)
(0.92)
(0.87)
(0.87)
(0.86)
(0.90)
-1.93
-1.39
-1.96
-1.87
-2.07
-1.86
-2.00
(1.29)
(1.31)
(1.34)
(1.16)
(1.27)
(1.32)
(1.25)
0.53
0.47
0.54
0.67*
0.51
0.49
0.53
(0.44)
(0.45)
(0.48)
(0.38)
(0.47)
(0.41)
(0.45)
-0.24
-0.25
-0.19
-0.13
-0.27
-0.22
-0.23
(0.60)
(0.58)
(0.58)
(0.50)
(0.62)
(0.55)
(0.60)
-0.62
-0.63
-0.54
-0.59
-0.64
-0.57
-0.60
(0.68)
(0.66)
(0.64)
(0.56)
(0.68)
(0.63)
(0.67)
-3.44
-3.08
-3.42
-3.54
-3.79*
-3.05
-3.49
(2.32)
(2.40)
(2.38)
(2.17)
(2.21)
(2.23)
(2.30)
-0.33
-0.41
-0.20
-0.05
-0.41
-0.31
-0.31
(1.57)
(1.55)
(1.57)
(1.27)
(1.63)
(1.44)
(1.57)
-3.11
-2.67
-3.22
-3.49
-3.38
-2.74
-3.18
(3.17)
(3.19)
(3.23)
(2.81)
(3.16)
(2.96)
(3.16)

-3.18**
(1.52)
0.28
(0.82)
0.07

-3.35**
(1.51)
0.23
(0.88)
0.06

Panel B:
-3.42**
(1.54)
0.23
(0.90)
0.06

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Two-Year Changes
-3.42** -3.62** -3.42**
(1.53)
(1.53)
(1.53)
0.18
0.25
0.22
(0.88)
(0.87)
(0.90)
0.06
0.04
0.06

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.09
0.36
(1.15)
(1.22)
-2.46** -1.85**
(0.94)
(0.89)
-2.29** -1.95
(1.07)
(1.24)
0.48
0.54
(0.39)
(0.44)
-0.21
-0.25
(0.50)
(0.60)
-0.69
-0.63
(0.56)
(0.67)
-4.66** -3.45
(2.12)
(2.29)
-0.42
-0.33
(1.29)
(1.57)
-4.24
-3.12
(2.89)
(3.13)

-0.32
(1.03)
-1.86**
(0.84)
-1.67
(1.12)
0.44
(0.36)
-0.14
(0.40)
-0.55
(0.45)
-3.86*
(1.98)
-0.25
(1.05)
-3.60
(2.58)

-3.48**
(1.48)
0.21
(0.90)
0.05

-3.37**
(1.53)
0.17
(0.83)
0.06

-3.43**
(1.53)
0.21
(0.89)
0.06

-3.47**
(1.52)
0.19
(0.87)
0.06

-3.42**
(1.54)
0.22
(0.90)
0.06

-3.64**
(1.45)
0.19
(0.81)
0.04

N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Each specification is the same as column 1 in Table 1 with additional controls that have the same lag structure as the tax changes. Columns 1
and 2 control for total state transfers per capita and total federal transfers to a state per capita, respectively. Column 3 controls for the minimum wage.
Columns 4-11 control for the following as a share of state GDP: OASDI payments, Supplemental Security Income payments, SNAP benefits (assuming
max allotment per recipient), Medicaid vendor payments, AFDC and TANF payments, mechanical changes in AFDC and TANF spending, mechanical
changes in SNAP and SSI spending, mechanical changes in Medicaid spending. See sections A.2, A.3, and C for more details on these controls and on
the microsimulation-model based mechanical changes. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is
1980-2007.

Table 4: National Effects of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
GDP
I
Res I
C
Dur C Non-Dur C
B90
0.66
-1.16
-15.01 -0.53
-2.62
-0.20
(1.61) (7.68) (11.33) (1.41) (5.55)
(1.41)
B90 1-Year Lag
-3.24 -15.00* -16.54 -1.87
-8.64
-0.86
(2.17) (8.54) (14.49) (1.69) (5.83)
(1.41)
B90 2-Year Lag
-1.21 -11.15
1.50
-0.41
-4.92
-0.52
(1.99) (8.41) (13.51) (1.82) (6.75)
(1.42)
T10
1.78
6.89
2.47
-0.24
-0.41
-1.25
(2.61) (8.10) (12.27) (1.95) (6.40)
(1.69)
T10 1-Year Lag
-2.13
-7.77
-4.53
-2.28
-6.31
-2.45
(2.54) (11.39) (12.84) (2.23) (8.73)
(2.06)
T10 2-Year Lag
-0.76
1.24
11.83
-0.66
3.76
-1.40
(1.26) (5.34) (10.08) (1.25) (5.41)
(1.41)
B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2 -3.78 -27.30* -30.04 -2.80 -16.19
-1.58
(3.33) (15.55) (19.40) (2.74) (10.98)
(2.72)
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2 -1.12
0.36
9.76
-3.18
-2.96
-5.11
(4.64) (18.84) (24.93) (4.12) (15.45)
(4.23)
Bottom - Top:
-2.67 -27.66 -39.80
0.38
-13.23
3.53
(6.64) (29.24) (33.39) (5.77) (22.45)
(6.18)
Notes:
This table presents estimates of the effects of tax changes for different groups g ∈
{Bottom 90, Top 10} at different lags m at the national-level from the following specification: yt − yt−1 =

Pm
T 10
B90,m B90
+ X0t−m Γm + νt , where yt is the log outcome, TtB90 is an exogenous tax
Tt−m + γ T 10,m Tt−m
m=m γ
shock as a share of national GDP for taxpayers in the bottom 90% of AGI nationally, and TtB90 is defined analogously. Xt = [TN ON IN C,t ] includes non-income and non-payroll tax changes that Romer and Romer (2010)
classify as exogenous. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
The sample period is 1950-2007. See section A.2 for data sources.

34

Appendices for Online Publication
This appendix contains several sections. Section A.1 discusses how I measure tax changes
in the years before NBER’s TAXSIM is available. It also enumerates all of the tax changes
and how they are classified. Section A.2 defines all economic variables used in the paper and
documents sources. Similarly, section A.3 defines and provides sources for all of the policy and
social insurance variables. Section B describes how I construct adjustments for state-specific
cyclicality, namely, how I construct β-differencing cyclicality groups. Section C describes the
social insurance microsimulation models and how they are used to estimate annual state-specific
policy-induced changes in social insurance spending.

A
A.1

Data
Tax Data

35

36

Table A1: Post-War Tax Changes
Year Motivation
Legislation
1948 Long run
Revenue Act of 1948
Social Security Amendments of 1947
1950
Deficit
Internal Revenue Code of 1954
1954 Long run
Social Security Amendments of 1958
1960
Deficit
Social Security Amendments of 1961
1963
Deficit
Revenue Act of 1964
1964 Long run
Social Security Amendment of 1967
1971
Deficit
Revenue Act of 1971
1972 Long run
Tax Reform Act of 1976
1976 Long run
Tax Reduction and Simplification Act 1977
1977 Long run
1972 Changes to Social Security
1978
Deficit
Revenue Act of 1978
1979 Long run
Social Security Amendment of 1977
1981 Long run
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
1982 Long run
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
1983 Long run
Social Security Amendments of 1983
1984
Deficit
Social Security Amendments of 1983
1985
Deficit
Tax Reform Act of 1986
1986 Long run
Tax Reform Act of 1986
1987 Long run
Social Security Amendments of 1983
1988
Deficit
Social Security Amendments of 1983
1990
Deficit
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990
1991
Deficit
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993
1993
Deficit
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993
1994
Deficit
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 2002 Long run
Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
2003 Long run
Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
2004 Long run
Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
2005 Long run

Endogeneity
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Endogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Endogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Exogenous
Endogenous
Exogenous

Size (% GDP)
-1.86
0.26
-0.37
0.36
0.86
-1.27
-0.02
-0.73
0.13
-0.38
0.13
-0.39
0.40
-1.33
-0.87
-0.41
0.21
0.60
-0.57
0.37
0.18
0.00
0.42
0.19
-0.77
-1.13
0.00
0.54

Notes: This table lists the Romer and Romer (2010) tax changes in the post-war period that are included in the study. The first column provides the
legislation for each change. The second provides the year in which the tax change altered tax liabilities. The third column provides the policy motivation
from Romer and Romer (2010). The fourth column lists whether the tax change is classified as exogenous. Exogenous is defined as a year in which Romer
and Romer (2010) show a nonzero tax change where more than half the revenue was from an exogenous change. Endogenous tax changes are set to zero.
The final column reports the size of the tax change as a share of GDP as measured by Romer and Romer (2010).

A.1.1

Pre-NBER Tax Changes

Only four exogenous changes, affecting tax liabilities in 1948, 1950, 1954, and 1960, took place in
a time preceding the coverage of TAXSIM. For each of these changes, I manually calculated tax
changes by income group using the SOI data.43 The SOI reports provide data on the number
of taxable returns and the amount of taxable income for groups created by size of adjusted
gross income. With many AGI brackets, one can form a rough idea of how taxes changed
across the income distribution. For each income bracket, I created a representative taxpayer
by dividing the amount of taxable income by the number of taxable returns. I then calculated
this representative person’s change in payroll or federal income tax liability using her income
in the year prior to the tax change, the old schedule and the new schedule. Data from the tax
schedule were from (2) and (3) for the income tax changes and from (5) for the payroll rate and
base changes. For instance, in 1960, any representative taxpayer whose earnings were below the
payroll tax base of $4,800 had to pay 1% of their income extra since rates increased from 5%
to 6%. Note that Barrow and Sahasakul (1983) used a somewhat similar approach to calculate
average marginal rates.
In general, the following sources were helpful for constructing these tax change measures: (1)
the Brooking Institution’s “Individual Income Tax Brackets, 1945-2010,” (2) the Tax Foundation’s “U.S. Federal Individual Income Tax Rates History, 1913-2010,” (3) the Internal Revenue
Service’s annual individual income tax return reports, and (4) the Tax Policy Center’s Historical
Payroll Tax Rates report.44
A.1.2

Tax Change Calculation for Each Tax Return: 1993 Example

This section provides an example of the tax liability change calculation described in 1.1.1 for
1993. Recall the 1993 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, which raised rates on high-income
taxpayers by adding new brackets in 1993 according to the schedule in Table A2. For every
taxpayer, my measure subtracts how much she paid in 1992 from how much she would have paid
in 1992 if the 1993 tax schedule had been in place. Figure A6 plots the results for 1993.45 Many
individuals with adjusted gross income above $100,000, and especially those with adjusted gross
income exceeding $150,000, faced a roughly thousand-dollar tax increase based on this measure.

43

The 1948 change was from the Revenue Act of 1948, the 1950 change was from the 1947 Social Security
Amendment, the 1954 change was from the 1950 Social Security Amendment and the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, and the 1960 change was from the 1958 Social Security Amendment (Romer & Romer (2009)).
44
Note that the Tax Policy Center data on the payroll base and rates come from the following two Social
Security Administration sites: http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/COLA/cbb.html and http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/
ProgData/taxRates.html.
45
Note that the 1993 results are based on the sample of 1992 tax returns and the 1992 and 1993 tax schedules.

37

Table A2: Example of Tax Schedule Change in 1993

Tax Rate
15%
28%
31%

1992 Schedule
Bracket Min Bracket Max
$0
$35,800
$35,800
$86,500
$86,500
-

1993 Schedule
Marginal Tax Rate Bracket Min
15%
$0
28%
$36,900
31%
$89,150
36%
$140,000
39.6%
$250,000

Bracket Max
$36,900
$89,150
$140,000
$250,000
-

Notes: This table shows the tax schedule in 1992 and 1993 for married taxpayers filing jointly. Extra top brackets
were added in 1993. These new brackets mechanically increased tax liabilities for higher-income taxpayers as
shown in Figure A6. Tax schedule data are from the Tax Foundation.

A.2

Data on Economic Activity

ACCRA
1. ACCRA Price Index Ps,t
is the average state price index. Source: The Council for
Community and Economic Research; ACCRA Cost of Living Index, 1990-2014. American
Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association Index Report, 1980-1989.

2. BLS Price Index. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS); Dataset: Consumer Price
Index; Variable: Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers; Note: Not available for
all states. I used population data to allocate city price indexes in cases when a state
contained multiple cities with CPI data (e.g., LA and San Francisco for CA’s price index).
3. Consumption. Source for state data: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis; Category: Personal Consumption Expenditures by State, 1997-2014. Source for
national data: NIPA Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes [Index
numbers, 2009=100].
4. Dividends, Interest, and Rent. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: State Personal Income
Accounts, Annual state personal income and employment, Table SA4.
5. Dividends Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from stocks and
mutual funds for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles et al. (2010).
Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incdivid.
6. Disability Benefits Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from disability income for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles et al. (2010).
Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incdisab.

7. Durable Consumption. Source: NIPA Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes [Index numbers, 2009=100].
8. Employment: This variable indicates the number of people employed in a given state-year.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics.
9. Employment Rate. This variable is the share of people, ages 16 or over, in the labor force
who report employment status 10 “At work” or 12 “Has job, not at work last week” in the
CPS; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population
Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).
10. Employment-to-Population Ratio. This variable is the share of people, ages 16 or over,
who report employment status 10 “At work” or 12 “Has job, not at work last week” in the
CPS; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population
Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).
11. FHFA HPI Index. This is a broad measure of the movement of single-family house prices.
It measures the average price changes in repeat sales or refinancing on the same properties.
Source: Federal Housing Finance Agency House Price Index Datasets, Purchase-Only
Indexes (Estimated using Sales Price Data).
12. GDP. Source: NIPA Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes [Index
numbers, 2009=100].
13. Hours. This variable is the mean hours worked by employed residents in a given state-year
given that they worked at least 48 weeks that year and are at least 16 years of age. This
variable is constructed using data drawn from the U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current
Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); see Ruggles et al.
(2010). I follow Moretti (2013) by restricting the sample to workers aged between 25
and 60 and by using uhrsworkly, wkswork1, and wkswork2 to create a proxy for the
number of weeks worked by taking the mean value of wkswork2 in cases where wkswork1
is missing, and call this proxy wkswork. Hours is the product of wkswork and uhrsworkly.
I additionally restrict the sample to those who work at least 48 weeks (as determined by
the proxy wkswork, described above).
14. Interest Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from interest on savings
accounts, certificates of deposit, money market funds, bonds, treasury notes, IRAs, and/or
other investments which paid interest for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see
Ruggles et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey,
Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incint.
15. Investment. Source: NIPA Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes
[Index numbers, 2009=100].
39

16. Labor Force Participation Rate. This variable is the share of persons, ages 16 or over,
participating in the labor force; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau;
Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).
This variable is constructed simply from the given indicator “labforce,” which is an indicator for whether that person is in the labor force. Those coded “yes” were either: at
work; held a job but were temporarily absent due to factors like vacation or illness; seeking
work; or were temporarily laid off during the reference period.
CP I
. This variable is a state-specific price index that is con17. Moretti CPI Price Index Ps,t
structed following Moretti (2013):

(a) I draw gross monthly rental cost of housing (rentgrs) from the Current Population
Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).
(b) Housing consumption weights wt are provided by Moretti (2013)& Yagan (2016).
These weights estimate the portion of non-housing costs that vary systematically
with housing costs. For reference, this weight is approximately .35 in 2000.
(c) Define ps,t as average gross monthly rental cost of housing by state-year.
(d) Define rs,1980 the average gross monthly rental cost of housing by state in 1980.
(e) Define cpit as national CPI from FRED, anchored to 1 in 1980.
ps,t
. Let cpirt be the annual mean of cpirs,t .
(f) Define rental CPI cpirs,t =
rs,1980
cpit
wt
(g) Then define cpiadj
=
−
cpir .
t
(1 − wt ) (1 − wt ) t
CP I
r
(h) Finally, let Ps,t
= (1 − wt )(cpiadj
t ) + w(cpis,t ).

As noted in Moretti (2013), this measure includes local variation in housing and nonhousing costs, but is limited in that non-housing costs come from national cpi and so that
portion of the price index does not vary by state.
M oretti
18. Moretti HPI Price Index Ps,t
. This variable is a state-specific price index that is
constructed following Moretti (2013). The construction of this variable follows the same
steps as “Moretti CPI” above, except I utilize a Housing Price Index (FHFA HPI Index)
in place of rentgrs. HPI is drawn from Federal Housing Finance Agency House Price
Index Datasets, Purchase-Only Indexes (Estimated using Sales Price Data). See FHFA
HPI Index above for a short description of this variable.

19. Net Earnings. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: State Personal Income Accounts, Annual
state personal income and employment, Table SA4.
20. Nominal GDP. Source: NIPA Table 1.1.5.
40

21. Oil Price. This variable is the average spot price of West Texas Intermediate. Source: St.
Louis Federal Reserve FRED database.
22. Part-time Employment Rate. This variable is the share of persons, ages 16 or over,
participating in the labor force who report employment status 10 “At work” or 12 “Has
job, not at work last week” in the CPS, and also worked fewer than 48 weeks in the past
year. I use wkswork1 and wkswork2 to create a proxy for the number of weeks worked
by taking the mean value of wkswork2 in cases where wkswork1 is missing. Each of these
variable is drawn from the CPS; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau;
Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).
23. Payroll. This variable is the total state payroll in a given year. Source: Quarterly Census
of Employment and Wages (QCEW) - Statewide.
24. Personal Income. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: State Personal Income Accounts,
Annual state personal income and employment, Table SA4.
25. Personal Transfer Receipts. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: State Personal Income Accounts, Annual state personal income and employment, Table SA4.
26. Real Interest Rate. This variable is generated through the Federal Funds Rate less national
CPI inflation. Source: St. Louis Federal Reserve FRED database.
27. Rent Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from rent (after expenses) for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source:
U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incrent.
28. Residential Investment. Source: NIPA Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes [Index numbers, 2009=100].
29. State GDP. This variable indicates the Gross Domestic Product by state-year. Source:
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State; Series: SIC
All GDP Components & NAICS All GDP Components.
30. State Population. This variable indicates the number of residents in a state-year. Source:
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED; Series: Resident Population in state s.
31. State GDP/Capita. This variable is state GDP divided by State Population; sources
above.
41

32. Total Income. This variable is the mean total pre-tax personal income or losses from all
sources for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source:
U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC); Variable: inctot.
33. Unemployment Benefit Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from
state or federal unemployment compensation, Supplemental Unemployment Benefits (SUB),
or union unemployment or strike benefits for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incunemp.
34. Wage. This variable is the mean wage of full-time workers in a given state-year. This
is built utilizing variables from the U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population
Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); see Ruggles et al. (2010). I
follow Moretti (2013) in terms of sample restrictions. Specifically, I take wage to be
incwage/hours, where incwage comes directly from the CPS and hours is constructed as
noted in the item above. In cases in which workers work fewer than 48 weeks per year,
as estimated by the wkswork proxy also noted above, I set the wage value to missing so
that the state-year measure reflects the average wages of full-time workers as in Moretti
(2013). Finally, I restrict the sample to workers aged between 25 and 60.
35. Welfare Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from various public
assistant programs (welfare) for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles
et al. (2010). Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual
Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incwelfr.
36. Worker’s Compensation Income. This variable is the mean pre-tax income received from
worker’s compensation payments or other payments as a result of job-related injury or
illness for those ages 16 or over in a given state-year; see Ruggles et al. (2010). Source:
U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC); Variable: incwkcom.
37. Composition-Constant Wage. I use Ruggles et al. (2010) data on age, sex, education, state,
and wages (defined above) from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS)
spanning 1975-2007. I follow the approach of Busso et al. (2013) and Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016) to construct composition-constant wages in two steps. First, I restrict
the sample to full-time workers (i.e., those working at least 48 weeks) who are aged
between 25 and 60 and then de-mean wages and worker characteristics (i.e., age, sex,
years of education) relative to the whole sample of these workers from 1975-2007 to create
a constant reference group across states and years. Second, weighting each observation
42

by the supplement weight provided by the CPS, I then estimate the coefficients of the
following linear regression model of hourly wages:
ẇi,s,t = β1 Ȧgei,s,t + β2 Ėduci,s,t + β3 Ṁ alei,s,t + µs,t + ui,s,t ,

(5)

where i, s, and t index individuals, states, and years respectively; ẋ denotes the demeaned
value of the variable x; Age is age in years; Educ is approximate46 years of education; M ale
is an indicator for being male; and µs,t is a state by year fixed effect. The compositionconstant wage state is the sum of the average wage in the entire sample and the estimated
state-year specific average wage, i.e., w̄i,s,t + µ̂s,t .
A.2.1

Real Series

Real outcomes are the nominal outcomes divided by a specified pricing index. I use the following
indices throughout the paper:
1. ACCRA
2. BLS Price Index
3. Moretti CPI
4. Moretti HPI
The construction and sources of these indices are described in section A.2.
A.2.2

Demographic Groups

In the appendix of this paper, I present estimates of the effects of tax changes on certain demographic groups.47 I only determine outcomes by demographic group if the data originate from
the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement
(ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS); see section A.2. I define these groups as
follows:
1. Skilled. Indicates working age people that have at least some college; i.e., educ takes value
80, 81, 90, 91, 92, 100, 110, 111, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, or 125.
2. Unskilled. Indicates working-age people with no college, or with education unreported.
3. Aged 25-45. Indicates working-age people aged 25 to 45, exclusive.
46

Specifically, Educ is defined as follows: 0 if educ is 2, 2.5 if educ is 10, 1 if educ is 11, 2 if educ is 12, 3 if
educ is 13, 4 if educ is 14, 5.5 if educ is 20, 5 if educ is 21, 6 if educ is 22, 7.5 if educ is 30, 7 if educ is 31, 8 if
educ is 32, 9 if educ is 40, 10 if educ is 50, 11 if educ is 60, 12 if inlist(educ, 70, 71, 72, 73), 13 if inlist(educ, 80,
81), 14 if inlist(educ, 90, 91, 92), 15 if educ is 100, 16 if inlist(educ, 110, 111), 17 if inlist(educ, 120, 121), 18 if
inlist(educ, 122, 123, 124), 20 if educ is 125, . if inlist(educ, 1, 999).
47
See appendix Figures A15, A16, A17, A18, A19, A20, and Table A4.

43

4. Aged 45-60. Indicates working-age people aged 45 to 60, inclusive.
5. Men. Indicates working-age men. Determined by sex.
6. Women. Indicates working-age women. Determined by sex.
7. White. Indicates working-age people who report their race as white (i.e., race takes value
100).
8. Non-White. Indicates working-age people who do not report their race as white.
Note that “working age people” are ages 16 or over, as that is the full sample of reported
individuals in the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS).

A.3
A.3.1

Data on Social Insurance
Controls

This subsection lists and describes the social insurance variables directly controlled for in regressions.
1. Government Transfers Per Capita. This variable is the total state transfers per capita by
state-year. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; Category: Regional Economic Accounts; Dataset: State Personal Income Accounts, Annual
State Personal Income and Employment, all tables and areas; Series: SA4 1929 2015 ALL.
2. Federal IG Spending Per Capita. This variable is the total federal transfers to a state
per capita by state-year. Source: U.S. Census Bureau’s Historical Database on Individual
Government Finances.
3. Minimum Wage. This variable is the minimum wage by state-year. Data are from replication files provided by Autor et al. (2016).
4. OASDI. This variable is the ratio of total Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
(OASDI) payments in a state to that state’s GDP. Source: Annual Statistical Supplement
to the Social Security Bulletin 1980-2015.
5. Supplemental Security Income. This variable is the ratio of total Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) payments in a state to that state’s GDP. The total SSI payment in a state
is constructed by taking the average federal SSI payment and multiplying that by the
number of recipients in a state. Data on federal SSI payments and state recipients are
drawn from the Social Security Administration (SSA) - Annual Statistical Supplement to
the Social Security Bulletin 1980-2015.
44

6. COLA. This variable is the annual cost of living adjustment (COLA) interacted with state
dummies. Data on COLA are drawn from the Social Security Administration Database.
See: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/SSIamts.html.
7. SNAP Benefits x State. This variable is the ratio of total Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Benefits to National GDP. This amount is then interacted
with state dummies. Data on SNAP benefits is drawn from the United States Department of Agriculture. See: http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutritionassistance-program-snap.
8. Max SNAP Benefits. This variable is the maximum Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) allotment for families of size 4 multiplied by the number of recipients in
that state three years prior and then divided by that state’s GDP. Data on SNAP benefits
are drawn from the United States Department of Agriculture. See: http://www.fns.
usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap.
9. SNAP Benefits Per Household. This variable is the ratio of total Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits in a state to that state’s GDP. Data on SNAP
benefits are drawn from the United States Department of Agriculture. See: http://www.
fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap.
10. FPL x State. This variable is the federal poverty level for a family of size 4 interacted
with state dummies. Source: Social Security Administration, 2015 Annual Statistical
Supplement, Data on Social Welfare and the Economy Table 3.E8.
11. FMAP. This variable is the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) for each state.
Source: Federal Medical Assistance Percentages, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
12. Medicaid Benefits. This variable is the ratio of total Medicaid vendor payments in a state
to that state’s GDP. Data on state-level recipients and vendor payments is drawn from
HFCA-2082 Medicaid State Reports for 1975-1998 and MSIS-2082 Medicaid State Reports
for 1999-2012. See: https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
Computer-Data-and-Systems/MedicaidDataSourcesGenInfo/MSIS-Tables.html.
13. AFDC + TANF Benefits. This variable is the ratio of total AFDC payments in a state
to that state’s GDP in years prior to 1997. In 1997 and later, this variable takes the
ratio of total TANF payments in a state to that state’s GDP. Data on AFDC and TANF
payments come from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Family Assistance. See: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/resource/afdc-caseload-data1960-1995 and http://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/programs/tanf/data-reports.

45

14. Max AFDC + TANF Benefits. This variable is the maximum AFDC payment for families
with two children multiplied by the number of recipients in that state three years prior
and then divided by that state’s GDP in years prior to 1997. In 1997 and later, this
variable takes the maximum AFDC payment for families of size 3, multiplies this by
lagged recipients in a state, and then divides it by that state’s GDP. Data on AFDC and
TANF payments come from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office
of Family Assistance. See: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/resource/afdc-caseloaddata-1960-1995 and http://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/programs/tanf/data-reports.
A.3.2

Policy Parameters for Spending Simulations

This subsection lists the policy parameters used to simulate social insurance spending.
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
1. Need Standard, for all family sizes from 1 to 12. This variable comes from the Transfer
Income Model (TRIM3) project website. See: http://trim3.urban.org.
2. Payment Standard, for family sizes from 1 to 12. This variable comes from the Transfer
Income Model (TRIM3) project website. See: http://trim3.urban.org.
3. Maximum Benefit, for family sizes from 1 to 12. This variable comes from the Transfer
Income Model (TRIM3) project website. See: http://trim3.urban.org.
4. Earnings Disregard. This formula is drawn from welfare legislation, namely, the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, and the Family
Support Act of 1988.
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
1. A number of state-specific need standards, payment standards, and maximum benefits,
for all family sizes from 1 to 12. These income standards include the Allowable Payment, the Assistance Standard, the Benefit Amount, the Budgetary Adjustment, the
Budgetary Standards, the Cash Assistance Monthly Standard, the Consolidated Need
Standard, the Family Allowance, the Family Maximum, the Family Size Allowance, the
Family Wage Level, the Flat Grant Amount, the Grant Standard, the Maximum Aid
Payment, the Maximum Benefit, the Maximum Benefit Payment Schedule, the Maximum Financial Assistance Payment, the Maximum Grant, the Maximum Payment, the
Maximum Payment Level, the Maximum Payment Amount, the Need Standard, the Net
Income Standard, the Payment Allowance, the Payment Benefit, the Payment Level, the
Payment Maximum, the Payment Standard, the Standard of Assistance, the Standard of
Need, the TEEM Standard of Need, the Transitional Standard, and the Work Incentive
46

Payment. These variables come from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. See:
http://wrd.urban.org/wrd/Query/query.cfm.
2. A number of state-specific variables used as a threshold for the gross income test, for
all family sizes from 1 to 12. These include the Adjusted Standard Needs Budget, the
Assistance Standard, the Budgetary Needs Standard, the Budgetary Standards, the Consolidated Need Standard, the Countable Income Limit, the Gross Income Test, the Maximum Benefit Payment Schedule, the Minimum Basic Standard of Adequate Care, the Need
Standard, the Net Monthly Income Standard, the Standard of Assistance, the Standard of
Need, and the TEEM Standard of Need. These variables come from the Urban Institute’s
Welfare Rules Database. See: http://wrd.urban.org/wrd/Query/query.cfm.
3. A number of state-specific variables used as a threshold for the net income test, for all
family sizes from 1 to 12. These include the Adjusted Income Standard, the Adjusted
Standard Needs Budget, the Allocation Allowance Standard, the Allowable Payment, the
Benefit Standard, the Budgetary Needs Standard, the Budgetary Standards, the Family
Size Allowance, the Flat Grant Amount, the Income Eligibility Standard, the Maximum
Benefit, the Minimum Basic Standard of Adequate Care, the Need Standard, the Net
Monthly Income Standard, the Payment Level, the Payment Standard, the Recognizable
Needs, the Standard of Assistance, the Standard of Need, and the Transitional Standard.
These variables come from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. See: http:
//wrd.urban.org/wrd/Query/query.cfm.
4. Maximum Gross Earned Income Limit, which is used as a threshold for the gross earnings
test. This variable is available for all family sizes from 1 to 12 and comes from the
Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. See: http://wrd.urban.org/wrd/Query/
query.cfm.
5. Payment Standard and Standard of Assistance, which are used as a threshold for the
unearned income test. These variables are available for all family sizes from 1 to 12 and
come from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. See: http://wrd.urban.org/
wrd/Query/query.cfm.
6. Earnings Disregard for the net income test and benefit computation. These formulae are
drawn from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. See: http://wrd.urban.org/
wrd/Query/query.cfm.
7. Federal Poverty Level (FPL), as defined by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Source: Social Security Administration, 2015 Annual Statistical Supplement,
Data on Social Welfare and the Economy Table 3.E8.

47

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
1. Net Income Limit and Gross Income Limit. These variables are multiples (100% and
130%, respectively) of the Federal Poverty Level, as defined by the Department of Health
and Human Services. Source: Social Security Administration, 2015 Annual Statistical
Supplement, Data on Social Welfare and the Economy Table 3.E8.
2. Maximum Coupon Allotment. This parameter is set by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. See: https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/fact-sheet-resources-income-andbenefits.
3. Standard Deduction. This parameter is set by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. See:
https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/fact-sheet-resources-income-and-benefits.
4. Excess Shelter Deduction. This parameter is set by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. See: https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/fact-sheet-resources-income-andbenefits.
5. Earnings Disregard. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture. See: https://www.fns.
usda.gov/snap/fact-sheet-resources-income-and-benefits.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
1. Monthly Federal Standard for Individuals and Couples. These parameters are set by the
Social Security Administration. See: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/SSIamts.html.
2. Earnings and Gross Income Disregards. Source: Social Security Administration. See:
https://www.ssa.gov/pubs/EN-05-11015.pdf.
Medicaid
1. Federal Poverty Level (FPL), as defined by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Source: Social Security Administration, 2015 Annual Statistical Supplement,
Data on Social Welfare and the Economy Table 3.E8.
2. Earnings Disregard, which is used to compute countable income for Medicaid from 1997
onwards. This formula comes from the Transfer Income Model (TRIM3) project website.
See: http://trim3.urban.org.
3. Income Limit for Children, Elderly, and (section 1931) Parents, as a percentage of the
Federal Poverty Level. These parameters are drawn from the Transfer Income Model
(TRIM3) project website. See: http://trim3.urban.org.

48

4. Age Limit for Children. This parameter is drawn from the Transfer Income Model
(TRIM3) project website. See: http://trim3.urban.org.
5. All AFDC parameters, which are used to assess eligibility for low-income families until
1996.
6. All SSI parameters, which are used to assess eligibility for the elderly.

B

Empirical Appendix

B.1

β-Differences as Cyclicality Controls

I use β-differencing for cyclical controls primarily following Blanchard and Katz (1992). I run
the following regression for each state s:
∆GDP P Cs,t = µs + βs ∆GDP P Ct + εs,t ,
where GDP P Cs,t is the logarithm of GDP per capita in state s at time t and GDP P Ct is the
logarithm of the aggregate national GDP per capita at time t. I run this regression on both 19632015.48 This produces cyclicality coefficients β̂s for each state that measure how responsive the
state’s economic activity is to changes in national conditions. I then group states into categories
based on these coefficients. Specifically, the function q(s) : {AL, AK, ..., W Y } → {1, ..., 5} gives
the quintile of the state’s sensitivity to national changes in economic conditions. I use these
quintiles in the baseline specification but also show results using deciles instead of quintiles in
Table 2. Finally, I also show results in Table 2 using quintiles of each state’s standard deviation
in real GDP per capita σs,1963−1979 in the years preceding the sample period 1980-2007.

C

Social Insurance Microsimulation Models

C.1

Overview

This section describes the social insurance microsimulation models49 and how I use them to estimate annual policy-induced changes in social insurance spending for each state. First, I draw
individual- and household-level data from IPUMS-CPS and simulate each person’s entitlement
(if any) to a number of programs, namely, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC),
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and Medicaid. Second, I aggregate individual
benefits at the state level and estimate each program’s annual spending. Subsequently, for
48
49

I also present rules only using 1963-1979, i.e., the years the precede the state analysis sample.
Francesco Ruggieri provided extraordinary research assistance on the microsimulation models.

49

each year and program I perform the same simulation using lagged inputs and current policy
parameters, i.e., I estimate each state’s spending per program holding constant financial and
demographic characteristics, and letting only policy parameters vary. Finally, I construct the
one-year, mechanical change in social insurance spending by comparing each program’s expenditure in the year preceding a policy rule change to what the state-level spending would have
been if the new policy parameters had been in place.
C.1.1

Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)

Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) was the main cash assistance program for lowincome, one-parent families with dependent children. It was replaced by Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) in 1996, following the enactment of the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA). My simulation exploits most policy parameters used to determine eligibility, namely, each state’s need standard, payment standard, and
maximum benefit. For each household, I test whether gross income, i.e., earned and unearned
income, and net income are below the threshold for eligibility. Then, I compute the earnings
disregard assuming that each family is newly potentially eligible and that child care expense
disregards are fully utilized.
C.1.2

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) is the cash assistance program for low-income
families with dependent children. Following President Clinton’s welfare reform in 1996, states
currently have broader flexibility – within federal limits – in setting policy parameters and
rules, including various income and asset tests for eligibility. My simulation tests whether each
household passes a gross income test (if any), a net income test (if any), a gross earnings test
(if any), and an unearned income test (if any). Then, I estimate earnings disregards (if any)
for the net income test, for TANF benefit computation, or both, assuming that each family has
not received TANF benefits before.50
C.1.3

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as the Food Stamps
program, provides coupons to eligible low-income households to help them buy a nutritionally
adequate low-cost diet. SNAP policy parameters are set by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
so program rules have little between-state variation. My simulation tests whether gross income,
i.e., unearned and earned income, is below the threshold for eligibility. Then, I estimate net
(“countable”) income by subtracting earnings disregards, a standard deduction, and an excess
50

Because earnings disregards are usually decreasing in the number of months a family has already received
cash assistance, this assumption is likely to overstate the true earnings disregard and, subsequently, the TANF
monthly benefit.

50

shelter deduction. In doing so, I assume that households living in non-owned properties pay
30% of their monthly earnings in rentals. Finally, I compare countable income to the threshold
for net income eligibility and determine whether each household is entitled to a positive benefit.
C.1.4

Supplemental Security Income (SSI)

Supplemental Security Income (SSI) provides cash benefits to aged, blind, or disabled persons
with limited income and assets. The main policy parameters are set by the Social Security
Administration (SSA), but states can provide supplemental payments and impose additional
requirements for benefits other than federal SSI. My simulation follows the definition of “household” as provided by SSI policy rules. Income tests and benefit computation rules are defined
for one-person or two-person households (individuals and couples), so my simulation excludes
household income not directly accruing to potential SSI recipients. I estimate net (“countable”)
income by subtracting an earnings disregard from gross income. I test whether this is below the
threshold for eligibility and then compute SSI monthly benefit.
C.1.5

Medicaid

Medicaid provides health insurance for low-income families, children, parents, disabled individuals, and the elderly. Because observations in this paper range from 1980 to 2007, the expansion
of Medicaid eligibility to a large number of non-disabled adults provided for by the Affordable
Care Act is not taken into account. For each state and year, I estimate the number of individuals
eligible for Medicaid through one (or more) of the following channels:
• Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC): until 1996, eligibility for AFDC automatically implied that all family members were entitled to health care coverage under
Medicaid. President Clinton’s welfare reform delinked Medicaid from eligibility for welfare
cash assistance;
• Supplemental Security Income (SSI): elderly and disabled persons eligible for SSI are
automatically entitled to Medicaid;
• eligibility for children whose family income is below a state-specific multiple of the federal
poverty level;
• eligibility for parents whose family income is below a state-specific multiple of the federal
poverty level.
Subsequently, I estimate the state-year level of spending for Medicaid by multiplying the number
of eligible adults, elderly, and children by a state- and category-specific average cost provided
by the Transfer Income Model (TRIM) from the Urban Institute.

51

For all of the social insurance programs described above, I do not test whether countable assets
are below the threshold for eligibility because this variable is not available in IPUMS-CPS.

C.2

Policy Parameters and Spending Formulae

C.2.1

Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)

Although the key features of the program did not change between 1980 and 1996, some policy
rules were modified following the implementation of three acts: the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, and the Family Support Act of 1988. The
list of policy rules below applied to AFDC programs in every state in July 1996, when AFDC
was replaced by TANF.
Policy Parameters
• Dependent Children (DC): AFDC was not available for needy families without dependent children.
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a family’s earned and unearned income, after
applicable disregards, such as $50 a month for child support and optional earned income
disregards for certain students.
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s Gross Monthly Income minus the following
deductions:
– the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC);
– $90 per month for work expenses for individuals employed full- or part-time;
– for an individual who received AFDC in at least one of the prior four months:
∗ all monthly earned income of a child who is a full-time student or who is a
part-time student and not employed full-time;
∗ $30 and 1/3 of such person’s remaining income for the first four consecutive
months, and $30 for each of the eight subsequent months;
– for full-time workers:
∗ actual expenses for dependent care up to $175 per month for each dependent
child who is at least age 2 or each incapacitated adult;
∗ up to $200 per month for each dependent child who is under age 2;
– for part-time workers: a lesser amount could be applicable at state option.

52

• Countable Assets (CA): all of a family’s assets, excluding the home, one automobile
(provided the family member’s ownership interest did not exceed a limit chosen by the Secretary of Health and Human Services), burial plots and (up to $1,500) funeral agreements
for each member of the assistance unit.
• Asset Limit (AL): the state-specific threshold for countable assets.
• Need Standard (NS): the income level each State considered essential for basic consumption items. It was increasing in household size.
• Payment Standard (PS): the income level each State used as a threshold for AFDC
payments. It was increasing in household size.
• Maximum Monthly Benefit (MMB): the maximum monthly payment, which several
states set below the payment standard. It was increasing in household size.
• Household Size (HS).
Spending Estimate
As of July 1996, AFDC spending per household in a given month in a given state could be
expressed as:
AF DChsm =I[DChsm ≥ 1]·
I[GM Ihsm ≤ 1.85 · N Ssm (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ N Ssm (HS)]·

(6)

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·
min{P Ssm (HS) − N M Ihsm ; M M B(HS)},
where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m denotes
month, and y denotes year. Thus, AFDC spending in month m in state s can be computed as
follows:
Hs
X
AF DCsm =
AF DChsm ,
(7)
h=1

where Hs is the number of households residing in state s. It follows that AFDC spending in
state s in year y can be expressed as:
AF DCsy =

12
X

AF DCsm =

m=1

C.2.2

12 X
Hs
X

AF DChsm .

(8)

m=1 h=1

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)

The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996
gave states broader flexibility in designing their cash assistance programs for families with de53

pendent children. Matching funds were replaced by a block grant, and states were required to
establish a number of job programs in order to smooth the transition between welfare and work.
Policy Parameters
• Dependent Children (DC): TANF is not available for needy families without dependent
children.
• Months of Assistance (MA): federal law prohibits states from providing TANF-funded
assistance to individuals in families with an adult who has received assistance for 60
months; states can set lower limits.
• Countable Assets (CA): all of a family’s liquid financial assets and other forms of
property, excluding the home value. Most states fully or partially disregard the value of
vehicles.
• Asset Limit (AL): each state sets a limit on countable assets in order to determine
eligibility for TANF.
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a household’s earned and unearned income.
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s gross monthly income minus a number of
deductions and/or disregards specified by each State.
• Income Standard (IS), which – depending upon States – is called Need Standard (NS),
Payment Standard (PS), Benefit Standard (BS), Income Standard (IS), Transitional Standard (TS), Allowable Payment (AP), Countable Income Limit (CIL), Adjusted Income
Standard (AIS), Family Size Allowance (FSA), Standard of Assistance (SA), or Grant
Standard (GS). These income thresholds are generally increasing in household size and
are set by States in order to:
– determine eligibility based on gross income and/or net income;
– compute benefit amount.
• Federal Poverty Level (FPL), a measure of income issued every year by the Department
of Health and Human Services.
• Multiplier for Gross Income Eligibility (MGIE ): the multiplier of each income
threshold used to determine gross income eligibility.
• Multiplier for Net Income Eligibility (MNIE ): the multiplier of each income threshold used to determine gross income eligibility.

54

• Multiplier for Benefit Computation (MBC ): the multiplier of each income threshold
used to compute benefit amount.
• Maximum Monthly Benefit (MMB): the maximum monthly payment, which is adopted
by a few states only. It is increasing in household size.
• Flat Benefit (FB): some states provide flat cash assistance benefits, irrespective of
household size.
Spending Estimate
Given the large degree of state flexibility in designing the cash assistance program, TANF
spending per household in a given month in a given state can be summarized using three different
formulas:
1. Income Standard minus Net Income:
T AN Fhsm =I[DChsm ≥ 1]·
I[M Ah ≤ 60]·
I[GM Ihsm ≤ MGIE · ISsm (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ MN IE · ISsm (HS)]·

(9)

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·
(MBC · ISsm (HS) − N M Ihsm )
2. Income Standard minus Net Income, within Maximum Monthly Benefit:
T AN Fhsm =I[DChsm ≥ 1]·
I[M Ah ≤ 60]·
I[GM Ihsm ≤ MGIE · ISsm (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ MN IE · ISsm (HS)]·

(10)

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·
min{MBC · ISsm (HS) − N M Ihsm ; M M B(HS)}
3. Flat Benefit:
T AN Fhsm =I[DChsm ≥ 1]·
I[M Ah ≤ 60]·
I[GM Ihsm ≤ MGIE · ISsm (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ MN IE · ISsm (HS)]·
I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·
FB
55

(11)

where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m denotes
month, and y denotes year. Thus, TANF spending in month m in state s can be computed as
follows:
Hs
X
T AN Fsm =
T AN Fhsm ,
(12)
h=1

where Hs is the number of households residing in state s. It follows that TANF spending in
state s in year y can be expressed as:
T AN Fsy =

12
X

T AN Fsm =

m=1

C.2.3

12 X
Hs
X

T AN Fhsm .

(13)

m=1 h=1

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

SNAP policy rules and parameters were almost left unchanged between 1980 and 2007. A gross
income test was required for eligibility starting in 1983 and the dependent care deduction was
capped starting in 1986. Policy parameters as of July 2007 are described below.
Policy Parameters
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a household’s cash income except a number of
disregards.
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s Gross Monthly Income minus the following
deductions:
– Standard Deduction: a “standard” monthly deduction which varies by household size
and is indexed for inflation;
– Earned Income Deduction: 20% of any earned income, in recognition of taxes and
work expenses;
– Child Support Deduction: any amounts paid out as legally obligated child support;
– Dependent Care Deduction: out-of-pocket dependent care expenses, when related to
work or training;
– Excess Shelter Deduction: shelter expenses (including utility costs) that exceed 50%
of net income after all other deductions, typically expenses that exceed about onethird of gross monthly income. The excess shelter deduction does not vary upon
household size.
• Countable Assets (CA): a household’s assets, including cash on hand, checking and
savings accounts, savings certificates, stocks and bonds, a portion of the value of vehicles.
• Asset Limit (AL): the threshold for countable assets.
56

• Maximum Monthly Allotment (MMA): this is increasing in household size and is
based upon the level of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s lowest-cost food plan.
• Federal Poverty Level (FPL): a measure of income issued every year by the Department
of Health and Human Services. This is higher in Alaska and Hawaii.
• Household Size (HS).
Spending Estimate
As of 2007, SNAP spending per household in a given month in a given state can be expressed
as:
SN APhsm =I[GM Ihsm ≤ 1.3 · F P Lsy (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ F P Lsy (HS)]·
I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·

(14)

(M M Asy (HS) − 0.3 · N M Ihsm ),
where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m denotes
month, and y denotes year. Thus, SNAP spending in month m in state s can be computed as
follows:
Hs
X
SN APhsm ,
(15)
SN APsm =
h=1

where Hs is the number of households residing in state s. It follows that SNAP spending in
state s in year y can be expressed as:
SN APsy =

12
X

SN APsm =

m=1

C.2.4

12 X
Hs
X

SN APhsm .

(16)

m=1 h=1

Supplemental Security Income (SSI)

SSI policy rules and parameters underwent no change in the time period considered in this paper.
Policy Parameters
• Household Size (HS): this can take value 1 or 2, because SSI benefits are available for
individuals or couples.
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a household’s cash income, consisting of both
earnings and unearned income (such as other social insurance payments).
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s Gross Monthly Income minus the following
deductions:
57

– the first $20 of non-needs-based monthly income from virtually any source;
– the first $32.5 in monthly earnings;
– 50% of the remaining monthly earnings: this income disregard is provided as an
incentive to undertake work activities.
• Countable Assets (CA): a household’s assets, excluding an individual’s home, the
entire value of an automobile used for essential transportation, any property essential to
income-producing activity, and household goods and personal effects totaling $2,000 or
less.
• Asset Limit (AL): the threshold for countable assets; this is higher for couples than for
individuals.
• Maximum Net Monthly Income (MNMI): this is increasing in household size and
is based upon the Federal Poverty Level, issued every year by the Department of Health
and Human Services. Because some states provide supplemental payments to SSI, the
effective maximum net monthly income varies across states.
Spending Estimate
SSI spending per household in a given month in a given state can be expressed as:
SSIhsm =I[N M Ihsm ≤ M N M Isy (HS)]·
I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ]·

(17)

(M N M Isy (HS) − N M Ihsm ),
where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m denotes
month, and y denotes year. Thus, SSI spending in month m in state s can be computed as
follows:
Hs
X
SSIhsm ,
(18)
SSIsm =
h=1

where Hs is the number of households residing in state s. It follows that SSI spending in state
s in year y can be expressed as:
SSIsy =

12
X

SSIsm =

m=1

C.2.5

12 X
Hs
X

SSIhsm .

(19)

m=1 h=1

Medicaid

Because Medicaid does not provide recipients with cash benefits, the policy parameters described below are used to determine one’s eligibility for Medicaid through each of the paths set
by federal and state law.

58

Policy Parameters
1. Eligibility through Aid to Families with Dependent Children (until 1996):
• Dependent Children (DC): AFDC was not available for needy families without
dependent children.
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a family’s earned and unearned income,
after applicable disregards, such as $50 a month for child support and optional earned
income disregards for certain students.
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s Gross Monthly Income minus the
following deductions:
– the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC);
– $90 per month for work expenses for individuals employed full- or part-time;
– for an individual who received AFDC in at least one of the prior four months:
∗ all monthly earned income of a child who is a full-time student or who is a
part-time student and not employed full-time;
∗ $30 and 1/3 of such person’s remaining income for the first four consecutive
months, and $30 for each of the eight subsequent months;
– for full-time workers:
∗ actual expenses for dependent care up to $175 per month for each dependent
child who is at least age 2 or each incapacitated adult;
∗ up to $200 per month for each dependent child who is under age 2;
– for part-time workers: a lesser amount could be applicable at state option.
• Countable Assets (CA): all of a family’s assets, excluding the home, one automobile (provided the family member’s ownership interest did not exceed a limit chosen
by the Secretary of Health and Human Services), burial plots and (up to $1,500)
funeral agreements for each member of the assistance unit.
• Asset Limit (AL): the state-specific threshold for countable assets.
• Need Standard (NS): the income level each State considered essential for basic
consumption items. It was increasing in household size.
• Household Size (HS).
2. Eligibility through Supplemental Security Income:
• Household Size (HS): this can take value 1 or 2, because SSI benefits are available
for individuals or couples.
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a household’s cash income, consisting of
both earnings and unearned income (such as other social insurance payments).
59

• Net Monthly Income (NMI): a household’s Gross Monthly Income minus the
following deductions:
– the first $20 of non-needs-based monthly income from virtually any source;
– the first $32.5 in monthly earnings;
– 50% of the remaining monthly earnings: this income disregard is provided as an
incentive to undertake work activities.
• Countable Assets (CA): a household’s assets, excluding an individual’s home,
the entire value of an automobile used for essential transportation, any property
essential to income-producing activity, and household goods and personal effects
totaling $2,000 or less.
• Asset Limit (AL): the threshold for countable assets; this is higher for couples
than for individuals.
• Maximum Net Monthly Income (MNMI): this is increasing in household size
and is based upon the Federal Poverty Level, issued every year by the Department
of Health and Human Services. Because some states provide supplemental payments
to SSI, the effective maximum net monthly income varies across states.
3. Eligibility for Children and Parents:
• Gross Monthly Income (GMI): all of a household’s earnings and unearned income.
• Net Monthly Income (NMI): until 1996, Net Monthly Income for Medicaid used
to be determined according to AFDC rules. Following the Personal Responsibility
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA), which delinked AFDC eligibility from Medicaid, Net Monthly Income calculation rules involved a state-specific
earnings disregard as well as a deduction in recognition of child care expenses and a
child support deduction.
• Countable Assets (CA): all of a household’s countable resources, as defined by
federal and state law.
• Asset Limit (AL): the state-specific threshold for countable assets.
• Federal Poverty Level (FPL): a measure of income issued every year by the
Department of Health and Human Services. This is higher in Alaska and Hawaii.
• Children’s Income Limit Multiplier (MCH ): the Federal Poverty Level multiplier used to determine income eligibility for children.
• Parents’ Income Limit Multiplier (MPA ): the Federal Poverty Level multiplier
used to determine income eligibility for parents.
• Household Size (HS).
60

Spending Estimate
Medicaid is a dummy variable which takes value 1 if all conditions for eligibility are met.
1. Eligibility through Aid to Families with Dependent Children (until 1996). As
of July 1996, Medicaid eligibility through AFDC can be expressed as:
AF DC
M EDhsm
=I[DChsm ≥ 1]·

I[GM Ihsm ≤ 1.85 · N Ssm (HS)]·
I[N M Ihsm ≤ N Ssm (HS)]·

(20)

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ],
where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m
denotes month, and y denotes year.
2. Eligibility through Supplemental Security Income. Medicaid eligibility through
SSI can be expressed as:
SSI
M EDhsm
=I[N M Ihsm ≤ M N M Isy (HS)]·

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ],

(21)

where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m
denotes month, and y denotes year.
3. Eligibility for Children
CH
M EDhsm
=I[N M Ihsm ≤ MCH · F P Lsy (HS)]·

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ],

(22)

where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m
denotes month, and y denotes year.
4. Eligibility for Parents
PA
M EDhsm
=I[N M Ihsm ≤ MP A · F P Lsy (HS)]·

I[CAhsm ≤ ALsm ],

(23)

where I[·] is the indicator function, h denotes household, s denotes state of residence, m
denotes month, and y denotes year.
Medicaid spending in month m in state s can be estimated by multiplying the number of
eligible individuals by the average health care expense per Medicaid recipient (labeled as AVG):
M EDsm = AV Gsm ·

Hs
X
h=1

61

M EDhsm ,

(24)

where Hs is the number of households residing in state s. It follows that Medicaid spending in
state s in year y can be expressed as:
M EDsy =

12
X
m=1

C.3

M EDsm =

12
X
m=1

AV Gsm ·

Hs
X

M EDhsm .

(25)

h=1

Actual and Simulated Spending for Social Insurance Programs

This section shows how simulated social insurance spending at the state level compares to actual
data. All states and the District of Columbia are included, and observations range from 1980
to 2007.

62

8
6
4

Slope= 0.81 (.01)

2

Log Simulated AFDC Spending

10

Figure A1: Actual vs. Simulated Spending for AFDC

2

4

6

Log Actual AFDC Spending

8

10

Notes: This figure shows the log of actual AFDC spending against the log of simulated AFDC spending. The
data are at the state-year level from 1980 to 1996. See appendix C for more details on the construction of these
spending estimates.

8
6
4
2

Log Simulated TANF Spending

10

Figure A2: Actual vs. Simulated Spending for TANF

Slope= 0.81 (.02)
0

2

4

6

Log Actual TANF Spending

8

Notes: This figure shows the log of actual TANF spending against the log of simulated TANF spending. The
data are at the state-year level from 1997 to 2007. See appendix C for more details on the construction of these
spending estimates.

63

6
4
2

Slope= .7 (.02)

0

Log Simulated SSI Spending

8

Figure A3: Actual vs. Simulated Spending for SSI

0

2

4

Log Actual SSI Spending

6

8

Notes: This figure shows the log of actual SSI spending against the log of simulated SSI spending. The data are
at the state-year level from 1980 to 2007. See appendix C for more details on the construction of these spending
estimates.

8
6
4

Slope= .91 (.01)

2

Log Simulated SNAP Spending

10

Figure A4: Actual vs. Simulated Spending for SNAP

2

4

6

Log Actual SNAP Spending

8

Notes: This figure shows the log of actual SNAP spending against the log of simulated SNAP spending. The
data are at the state-year level from 1980 to 2007. See appendix C for more details on the construction of these
spending estimates.

64

8
6
4

Slope= .78 (.01)

2

Log Simulated Medicaid Spending

10

Figure A5: Actual vs. Simulated Spending for Medicaid

2

4

6

8

Log Actual Medicaid Spending

10

Notes: This figure shows the log of actual Medicaid spending against the log of simulated Medicaid spending.
The data are at the state-year level from 1980 to 2007. See appendix C for more details on the construction of
these spending estimates.

65

−1000

Change in Tax Liability
0
1000

2000

Figure A6: Tax Change Calculation for Each Tax Return: 1993 Example

0

50000

100000
150000
Adjusted Gross Income

200000

250000

Notes: This figure displays the mechanical change in income and payroll tax liability for each tax return in
TAXSIM from tax schedule changes in 1993 by AGI. For display purposes, it shows results for tax changes for
0 < AGI < 250K and |∆T ax| < 2, 000.

−1.5

Tax Change as a Share of GDP
−1
−.5
0
.5

1

Figure A7: Comparison of Aggregate Tax Changes with Romer & Romer Changes

1940

1960

1980
Year

Romer Tax Measure

2000

2020

Income and Payroll Tax Changes

Notes: This figure shows two postwar time series of tax changes: (1) the sum of all income and payroll tax
changes that Romer and Romer (2010) classify as exogenous and (2) the exogenous tax change measures of
Romer and Romer (2010). Both series are as a share of GDP. Some of the Romer and Romer (2010) tax changes
affect corporate taxes and other revenue sources, but the two series track each other fairly closely.

67

Figure A8: Favero and Giavazzi Orthogonality Test for Both Tax Change Series

−.6

Tax Change as a Share of GDP
−.4
−.2
0
.2

.4

A. Tax Changes for Top 10%

1940

1960

1980
Year

Top 10% Tax Shock

2000

2020

Orthogonalized Top 10% Tax Shock

−.4

Tax Change as a Share of GDP
−.2
0
.2

.4

B. Tax Changes for Bottom 90%

1940

1960

1980
Year

Bot. 90% Tax Shock

2000

2020

Orthogonalized Bot. 90% Tax Shock

Notes: This figure plots the raw time series of federal income and payroll tax changes as a share of GDP as well
as an orthogonalized time series of the residual of the tax change measure after partialling out lagged macro
aggregates, which are annual log changes in employment, inflation, government transfers as a share of GDP, and
federal debt as a share of GDP. The graphs show that the orthogonalized version is quite similar to the raw time
series, suggesting that these federal tax shock series for the top 10% and bottom 90% both pass the Favero and
Giavazzi (2012) orthogonality test. See data section for sources and section 3.4 for additional discussion.

68

Change in Tax Liability for Top 10% as % of GDP
−.6
−.4
−.2
0
.2
.4

Figure A9: Frisch Waugh Regression: Tax Changes for Top versus Bottom

1993
1987
1991

1981

1980
1994

2000
1976

1990
1986 2007
1962
1953
1952
1951
1959
1958
1957
1956
1955
1961
1970
1969
1968
1967
1966
1975
1974
1973
1977
1989
1992
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
2001
2004
2011
2010
2009
2008
1972 2006
2005
1985
1984
2002

1979

1950
1960
1978

1963

1971

1965

1983

1964
1982

1988
1954

2003

−.4

−.2
0
.2
Change in Tax Liability for Bottom 90% as % of GDP

.4

Notes: This figure plots exogenous tax changes for those with AGI in top 10% by those for the bottom 90%.
Both tax changes are as a share of output. The figure also plots the predicted value of exogenous tax changes
for those in the top 10% from a simple bivariate regression on exogenous tax changes for those with AGI in the
bottom 90%. Years that fall below the best fit line had tax changes that went disproportionately to the top 10%
(given the magnitude of tax changes for the bottom 90% as a share of output).

69

Figure A10: Cumulative Growth in Emp-to-Pop Ratio and Employment: Lagged Tax Changes as Controls
B. Employment

-.1

-.1

70

-.05

Percent

0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

.05

A. Employment/Population

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment-to-population ratio and employment for those with AGI in
the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline
specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes
controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed
effects. See section 2 for details. One and two year lags of tax changes and spending controls are also included. Standard errors are robust and clustered
by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A11: Cumulative Growth in Prices, GDP, and Earnings: Lagged Tax Changes as Controls
D. Real GDP (Moretti HPI)

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

3

4

Percent
-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Percent
-.05
0

Percent
-.1

Percent
-.05

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-.1
-.2

-.15
-3

-.15

-.1

-.1
-.15

71

Percent
-.05
0

0

.05

.1

-2

H. Real Net Earnings (Moretti HPI)

.05

0

-3

G. Real Net Earnings (ACCRA)
.1

F. Consumption

.05

E. Net Earnings

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

.1

-3

-.2

-.2

-.1

-.15

-.1

-.1

-.1

0

Percent
0

Percent

Percent
-.05

0

.1

0

.1

.05

.2

C. Real GDP (ACCRA)
.2

B. ACCRA Index
.1

A. Nominal GDP

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those
ACCRA
with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. The outcomes are (a) nominal state GDP, (b) the ACCRA state price index Ps,t
, (c) real state GDP using
ACCRA
M oretti
ACCRA
Ps,t
, (d) real state GDP using Ps,t
, (e) nominal net earnings, (f) consumption, (g) real net earnings using Ps,t
, and (h) real net earnings
M oretti
using Ps,t
. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the
bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid
spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. One and two year lags of tax changes and
spending controls are also included. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample
period is 1980-2007 for (a)-(e) and (g)-(h). However, state consumption is only available since 1997, so the sample period for (f) is 1997-2007.

Figure A12: Cumulative Growth in State-level Labor Market Outcomes: Lagged Tax Changes as Controls
C. Hours
.3
.2

.02

0

Percent
.1

Percent
-.02
0
-.06

-.1

-.15

-.1

-.1

-.04

Percent
-.05
0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

.1

D. Real Wage (ACCRA)

.04

B. Labor Force Participation Rate
.05

A. Payroll

3

4

-3

-2

3

4

3

4

3

4

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

.3
.2

.1
-.05
-.1
-3

-3

H. Real Comp-Constant Wage (ACCRA)

Percent
0
.05

Percentage points
-.02
0
.02
-.04
-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

G. Wage

.04

.15
.1
Percent
0
.05
-.05

-2

-2

F. Employment Rate

-.1

72

-3

-3

.15

E. Real Payroll (ACCRA)

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Percent
0
.1

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-.1

-2

-.2

-3

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those
with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. These outcomes are (a) nominal state payroll, (b) labor force participation rate, (c) mean hours worked among
ACCRA
ACCRA
those who worked at least 48 weeks in the past year, (d) mean real wages using Ps,t
, (e) real state payroll using Ps,t
, (f) employment rate, (g)
ACCRA
mean wages, and (h) real composition-constant average wages using Ps,t
. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification
of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for
mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See
section 2 for details. One and two year lags of tax changes and spending controls are also included. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95%
confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A13: Cumulative Growth in Prices
B. Moretti HPI Index

-.2

-.1

-.1

-.05

Percent

Percent

0

0

.1

.05

A. BLS Price Index

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

M oretti
for those with AGI in the
Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the BLS price index and Moretti HPI index Ps,t
bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline
specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes
controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed
effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period
is 1980-2007.

Figure A14: Cumulative Growth in State-level Real Wages
B. Real Wage (Moretti HPI)

-.2

-.1

-.1

0

Percent
.1

Percent
0

.1

.2

.2

.3

A. Real Wage (BLS)

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

M oretti
Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on real wages using the BLS price index and Moretti HPI price index Ps,t
, for those
with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from
the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification
includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile
year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The
sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A15: Cumulative Growth in Employment-to-Population Ratio by Demographic Split

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-2

3

4

.1
Percentage points
-.05
0
.05
-3

-2

F. Women

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

3

4

.05

H. Non-White

Percentage points
-.05
0

Percentage points
-.05
0
-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-.2

-.15
-3

-.1

-.1

-.1

75

Percentage points
-.05
0

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

G. White

.05

.05

E. Men

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-.15

-.1

Percentage points
0
.05
-3

.05

-2

Percentage points
-.1
-.05
0

-3

D. Aged 45-60

-.05

-.1

-.1

Percentage points
-.05
0

Percentage points
-.05
0
.05

.1

C. Aged 25-45
.1

B. Unskilled

.05

A. Skilled

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment-to-population ratio by demographic splits for those with AGI
in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline
specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes
controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed
effects. See section 2 for details. See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence
intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A16: Cumulative Growth in Employment Rate by Demographic Split
B. Unskilled

C. Aged 25-45

3

4

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

4

Percent
0
-.05
3

4

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

3

4

.2

.02
Percent
0
-.02
-2

-2

H. Non-White

-.04
-3

-3

.1

.04
Percent
-.02
0
-.04
-.06
3

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

G. White

.02

.05
Percent
0

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-2

F. Women

-.05

76

-2

-3

.04

E. Men

-3

.05

.04
.02
-.04
-.06
-3

Percent
0

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-.1

-2

-.2

-3

D. Aged 45-60

Percent
-.02
0

.05
-.05
-.1

-.04

-.02

Percent
0

Percent
0

.02

.1

.04

A. Skilled

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment rate by demographic splits for those with AGI in the bottom
90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification
of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for
mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See
section 2 for details. See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals
are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A17: Cumulative Growth in Labor Force Participation Rate by Demographic Split
C. Aged 25-45

3

4

.1
-.1

-.02
-2

3

4

-3

-2

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

3

4

H. Non-White

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-.3

-.1

-.2

Percentage points
-.05
0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

G. White

-.1

-.1

77

Percentage points
-.05
0

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

.05

F. Women

.05

E. Men

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-.15

-.04
-3

.1

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Percentage points
-.1
0

-2

Percentage points
-.05
0
.05

Percentage points
0
.02
.04

.1
Percentage points
-.05
0
.05
-.1

Percentage points
-.05
0
-.1
-3

D. Aged 45-60

.06

B. Unskilled

.05

A. Skilled

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state labor force participation rate by demographic splits for those with AGI in
the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline
specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes
controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed
effects. See section 2 for details. See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence
intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A18: Cumulative Growth in Hours by Demographic Split

Percent

Percent
0
-.02
-.04

-.04
-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-.1

-.06

-.02
-.04
-3

-.05

0

Percent
.02

Percent
-.02
0

0

.02

.02

.06
.04

D. Aged 45-60
.05

C. Aged 25-45
.04

B. Unskilled
.04

A. Skilled

-3

-2

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

3

4

H. Non-White

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

Percent
0
-.05
-.1

-.04

-.04
-3

.05

.02
Percent
0
-.02

-.02

Percent
-.02
0
-.04
-.06

78

Percent
0
.02

.02

.04

.1

.04

G. White

.06

F. Women

.04

E. Men

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on hours worked (if at least 48 weeks were worked in the past year) by demographic
splits for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the
estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The
baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well
as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and
clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A19: Cumulative Growth in Wage by Demographic Split
C. Aged 25-45

D. Aged 45-60

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

3

4

.1
-.2
-3

-2

F. Women

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

3

4

.4

.1

H. Non-White

.05

0

.2

Percent
-.05
0

Percent
-.1
-.05

.1

0
-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

-.2

-.2

-.15

-.1

-.15

-.1
-.2

79

Percent
0

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

G. White

.05

E. Men

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

.2

-2

Percent

-3

-.15

-.2

-.15

-.1

-.1

-.1

-.1

Percent
0

Percent
-.05
0

Percent
0

Percent
-.05
0

.1

.05

.05

.1

.2

.1

B. Unskilled

.2

A. Skilled

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on wages by demographic splits for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in
blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the
impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in
AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details.
See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted
lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A20: Cumulative Growth in Real Wage by Demographic Split

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-2

3

4

.2
-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

.2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

Bottom 90

3

4

3

4

.4
0
-.2

-.1
-.2
-3

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Percent
.2

Percent
0

.1

.1
Percent
0
-.1
-.2
-2

-2

H. Non-White

.2
Percent
0
.1
-.1
-.2

80

-3

-3

G. White

.2

F. Women

.3

E. Men

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

-.4

-.2

Percent
0

.1
Percent
0
-.1
-3

.6

-3

-.2

-.2

-.2

-.1

-.1

Percent
0

Percent
0
.1

.1

.2

.4

D. Aged 45-60

.2

C. Aged 25-45

.2

B. Unskilled

.3

A. Skilled

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

3

4

-3

-2

-1
0
1
2
Years Since Tax Change

Top 10

ACCRA
Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on real wages using Ps,t
by demographic splits for those with AGI in the bottom
90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification
of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for
mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See
section 2 for details. See section A.2.2 for details on each demographic split. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals
are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A21: Cumulative Growth in Income by Type of Income
B. Dividends Income

-2

-.15

-.1

-1

Percent
0

Percent
-.05

0

1

.05

2

A. Total Income

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

-3

-2

-1

Top 10

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

C. Rent Income

2

3

4

3

4

Top 10

-3

-.6

-2

-.4

Percent
-.2
0

Percent
-1
0

.2

1

.4

2

D. Interest Income

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with
AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. These outcomes are (a) total income, (b) dividends income, (c) rent income, and (d) interest income. Specifically, the
figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%,
α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state
GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals
are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A22: Cumulative Growth in Payrolls and Earnings
C. Real Payroll (Moretti)

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

2

3

4

Percent
0
-.05
-.1

-.15

-.15

-.1

-.1

Percent
-.05
0

Percent
-.05

0

.05

.05

.1

.1

B. Real Payroll (ACCRA)

.05

A. Payroll

-3

-2

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

2

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

2

3

4

3

4

Percent
-.05
0

Percent

-.1

-.1
-.2

-.15

-.15
-.2

82

Percent
-.1
-.05

0

0

.05

.1

F. Real Net Earnings (Moretti HPI)
.1

E. Real Net Earnings (ACCRA)

.05

D. Net Earnings

-1

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

2

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

Bottom 90

2

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change

2

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on outcomes for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with
ACCRA
AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. These outcomes are (a) nominal state payrolls, (b) real state payrolls using Ps,t
, (c) real state payrolls using
M oretti
ACCRA
Ps,t
, (d) nominal earnings net of contributions for social insurance and dividends, interest, and rental income, (e) real net earnings using Ps,t
, and
M oretti
(f) real net earnings using Ps,t
. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in
year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI,
and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust
and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A23: Cumulative Growth in State Wages
B. Real Wages (ACCRA)

-.15

-.1

-.1

Percent
0

Percent
-.05
0

.1

.05

.2

.1

A. Nominal Wages

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

ACCRA
Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on wages and real wages using Ps,t
for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally
in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for
the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes
in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details.
Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state;
95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

-.04

-.02

Percentage points
0
.02

.04

Figure A24: Cumulative Growth in Part-time Employment Rate

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the part-time employment rate for those with AGI in the bottom 90% nationally in
blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the baseline specification of equation 2 for the
impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in
AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details.
Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A25: Cumulative Growth in State Emp-to-Pop Ratio and Employment: Includes Non-Personal Income Taxes in Top Decile
B. Employment

-.1

-.1

-.05

Percent
0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

.1

.05

A. Employment/Population

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2
Top 10

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 90

2

3

4

Top 10

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment-to-population ratio and employment for those with AGI in the
bottom 90% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 10% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from the specification of
equation 2 for the impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 90%, α̂hB90 , and the top 10%, α̂hT 10 . However, unlike the baseline specification definition for
tax changes for the top 10%, I also allocate the non-personal income tax changes to top earners in the same proportion as the top 10% shares are allocated.
This is done in an attempt to resolve potential issues with exclusions of non-personal income taxes (corporate taxes, etc.) biasing estimates for the Top 10%
group. The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state
GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details. Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals
are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Figure A26: Cumulative Growth in Emp-to-Pop Ratio and Employment: Bottom 80% and Top 20%
B. Employment

-.1

-.1

Percent
-.05

0

Percentage points
-.05
0

.05

.05

A. Employment-to-Population Ratio

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 80

2
Top 20

3

4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
Years Since Tax Change
Bottom 80

2

3

4

Top 20

Notes: This figure shows event studies of a 1% of GDP tax increase on the state employment-to-population ratio and employment for those with AGI in the
bottom 80% nationally in blue and for those with AGI in the top 20% nationally in red. Specifically, the figure plots the estimates from equation 2 for the
impact of tax changes in year h for the bottom 80%, α̂hB80 , and the top 20%, α̂hT 20 . The baseline specification includes controls for mechanical changes in
AFDC, TANF, SNAP, SSI, and Medicaid spending as a percentage of state GDP, as well as cyclicality-quintile year fixed effects. See section 2 for details.
Standard errors are robust and clustered by state; 95% confidence intervals are shown as dotted lines. The sample period is 1980-2007.

Table A3: Summary Statistics
Panel A: State Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean Std. Dev. Min.
Year
1980
Log Employment
15.151
0.879
12.04
Log State GDP
26.585
0.976
23.36
Employment Rate
93.520
2.111
81.23
Emp/Pop
60.145
4.175
39.72
LFP Rate
64.277
3.676
46.27
Part-Time Emp Rate
18.747
3.655
10.06
Log Payroll
25.763
0.989
22.61
Log Hours
7.657
0.017
7.58
Log Wages
3.071
0.137
2.49
Log Comp-Constant Wages
2.996
0.122
2.45
Employment Growth
1.388
1.632
-6.77
GDP Growth
2.758
2.933
-32.89
Real GDP Growth (ACCRA)
2.655
3.692
-59.01
Real GDP Growth (Moretti)
2.670
3.273
-29.48
B90
-0.075
0.186
-1.08
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t
-0.013
0.171
-1.27

Max
2007
16.64
28.43
97.94
73.45
76.74
37.94
27.53
7.72
3.46
3.36
10.35
25.76
27.77
22.26
0.46
1.57

Panel B: National Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max
Year
1950 2007
GDP Growth
3.366
2.144
-1.93 7.75
Investment Growth
3.855
8.326
-17.67 24.13
Residential Investment Growth
2.141
11.791
-23.47 35.05
Consumption Growth
3.507
1.653
-0.83 7.12
Durable Consumption Growth
4.956
6.192
-8.68 19.33
Non-Durable Consumption Growth 2.653
1.422
-2.46 5.41
B90
Tt
-0.038
0.139
-0.45 0.28
TtT 10
-0.023
0.135
-0.49 0.31

87

N
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1400
1350
1350
1246
1350
1400
1400

N
58
57
57
57
57
57
57
58
58

Table A4: 2-Year Change - Demographic Robustness
Skilled
Bottom 90
Top 10
Unskilled
Bottom 90
Top 10

Panel A: Skill
LFP Rate Emp Rate Hours
-2.21*
-0.56
0.24
(1.20)
(0.45)
(0.93)
0.03
-0.33*
0.08
(0.40)
(0.19)
(0.32)
0.74
(1.21)
-0.53*
(0.32)

-2.12*
(1.20)
0.29
(0.28)

-2.11*** 0.69
(0.79)
(2.59)
0.48*** -0.76
(0.17)
(0.96)

Panel B: Age
Aged 25-45 LFP Rate Emp Rate Hours
0.53
-2.52**
-0.49
Bottom 90
(0.98)
(0.94)
(0.63)
Top 10
-0.17
0.08
0.20
(0.35)
(0.28)
(0.23)
Aged 45-60
0.65
-2.17***
-2.31**
Bottom 90
(1.48)
(0.69)
(0.87)
Top 10
0.58
-0.03
0.17
(0.46)
(0.22)
(0.33)

Men
Bottom 90
Top 10
Women
Bottom 90
Top 10

White
Bottom 90
Top 10
Non-White
Bottom 90
Top 10

Panel C: Sex
LFP Rate Emp Rate Hours
-0.52
-1.95**
-0.91
(0.98)
(0.83)
(0.78)
-0.21
0.20
0.26
(0.34)
(0.27)
(0.22)
-0.50
(0.94)
-0.30
(0.39)

-1.44
(0.97)
-0.15
(0.23)

-1.15
(0.92)
0.29
(0.32)

Panel D: Race
LFP Rate Emp Rate Hours
0.03
-1.68**
-1.00
(0.89)
(0.75)
(0.64)
-0.38
-0.02
0.20
(0.40)
(0.22)
(0.23)
-6.25**
(3.08)
0.89
(1.05)

0.01
(2.20)
0.40
(0.88)

Wage Real Wage
-1.05
1.91
(3.51)
(4.53)
-0.87
-0.43
(1.34)
(0.96)

-2.54
(1.78)
0.93
(0.69)

2.31
(3.01)
-0.36
(0.99)

Wage Real Wage
-2.85
-0.33
(2.84)
(3.66)
-1.33
-0.91
(1.06)
(0.97)
-1.92
(3.44)
-0.21
(2.01)

0.09
(4.69)
0.46
(1.62)

Wage Real Wage
-2.38
0.26
(2.92)
(3.95)
-0.23
0.15
(1.45)
(1.09)
-2.13
(2.27)
-1.71
(1.39)

-0.00
(2.80)
-1.14
(1.49)

Wage Real Wage
-3.10
-0.73
(2.57)
(3.41)
-0.45
-0.11
(1.62)
(1.28)
5.54
(5.82)
-3.16
(2.43)

7.52
(7.10)
-1.51
(3.01)

Notes: This table presents state-level estimates of two-year tax changes for different demographic groups. Each
specification is the same as column 1 in Table 1. The subsample (demographic group) of outcomes drawn from
the CPS varies, as specified in the first column. In the cases of the labor force participation rate and employment
rate, the outcomes are the simple difference, i.e., Ys,t − Ys,t−2 , rather than the ratio described in equation 3.
Hours are restricted to those working at least 48 weeks in the past year. See section A.2.2 for details on each
demographic split. In each specification, I absorb state-specific effects and cluster standard errors by state (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is 1980-2007.

88

Table A5: 2-Year Change - Policy Robustness (Additional)
Employment
Bottom 90
Top 10
State GDP
Bottom 90
Top 10
Employment Rate
Bottom 90
Top 10
Emp/Pop
Bottom 90
Top 10
Payroll
Bottom 90
Top 10
Net Earnings
Bottom 90
Top 10

Controls
1) COLA
2) SNAP Benefits x State
3) SNAP Benefits Per Household
4) FPL x State
5) FMAP
6) Max AFDC + TANF Benefits

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-4.74**
(1.79)
0.16
(0.93)

-3.21**
(1.54)
-0.10
(0.71)

-3.61**
(1.50)
0.29
(0.83)

-4.74**
(1.79)
0.16
(0.93)

-3.15**
(1.49)
0.22
(0.88)

-3.43**
(1.55)
0.21
(0.89)

-12.12***
(2.19)
0.40
(1.03)

-11.65***
(2.22)
0.39
(0.91)

-12.28***
(2.22)
0.87
(0.89)

-12.11***
(2.19)
0.40
(1.03)

-11.08***
(1.99)
0.75
(0.89)

-11.98***
(2.21)
0.75
(0.97)

-1.98*
(0.99)
0.05
(0.22)

-1.79**
(0.82)
0.06
(0.22)

-1.76**
(0.78)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.98*
(0.99)
0.05
(0.22)

-1.62**
(0.77)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.72**
(0.79)
0.07
(0.22)

-1.76
(1.19)
-0.26
(0.35)

-1.66
(1.00)
-0.31
(0.34)

-1.59
(0.95)
-0.22
(0.32)

-1.76
(1.19)
-0.26
(0.35)

-1.43
(0.94)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.52
(0.96)
-0.23
(0.34)

-8.78***
(2.95)
0.09
(1.10)

-8.36***
(2.55)
-0.13
(0.83)

-8.72***
(2.54)
0.45
(0.90)

-8.80***
(2.95)
0.09
(1.10)

-7.49***
(2.38)
0.32
(0.95)

-8.36***
(2.61)
0.34
(1.03)

-11.58***
(2.11)
0.59
(0.73)

-10.34***
(1.96)
0.57
(0.79)

-10.86***
(1.99)
0.83
(0.64)

-11.57***
(2.11)
0.59
(0.73)

-9.88***
(1.77)
0.72
(0.64)

-10.56***
(1.94)
0.75
(0.72)

Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
N
N
Y

Notes: This table presents state-level estimates of two-year changes in taxes for different groups on economic
activity using a variety of ways to account for sensitivity to state-specific policies. Each specification is the same as
column 1 in Table 1 with additional controls. Column 1 controls for the annual cost of living adjustment (COLA).
Columns 2 and 3 control for the ratio of total Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits to
GDP, calculated in different ways. Column 4 controls for the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) interacted with state
dummies. Column 5 controls for the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP). Column 6 controls for
total AFDC and TANF payments, as determined by the maximum payment for the modal households. See
sections A.2 and A.3 for more details on these controls. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is 1980-2007.

89

Table A6: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Economic Activity: Cyclical Robustness
Employment Rate
Bottom 90
Top 10
Emp/Pop
Bottom 90
Top 10
Payroll
Bottom 90
Top 10

90

Net Earnings
Bottom 90
Top 10
Controls
1) Baseline Cyclicality
2) Year
3) σGDP P C Cyclicality
4) Alternate β-diff Control #1
5) Alternate β-diff Control #2
6) Oil Price x State
7) Real Interest Rate x State
8) Oil Price x State + Region
9) Real Interest Rate x State + Region
10) State Trends

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.74**
(0.79)
0.05
(0.21)

-2.39***
(0.73)
0.14
(0.21)

-1.80**
(0.73)
0.14
(0.22)

-1.89**
(0.80)
-0.32
(0.23)

-1.42**
(0.56)
0.07
(0.18)

-2.33***
(0.78)
0.19
(0.24)

-2.44***
(0.83)
0.06
(0.22)

-2.26**
(0.79)
0.16
(0.25)

-2.54**
(0.81)
0.08
(0.21)

-1.70*
(0.95)
-0.01
(0.23)

-2.01**
(0.72)
-0.03
(0.28)

-1.95*
(0.99)
0.05
(0.22)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.62*
(0.89)
-0.12
(0.33)

-1.03
(0.99)
0.02
(0.39)

-1.08
(0.97)
-0.45
(0.33)

-0.49
(0.89)
-0.24
(0.31)

-1.59*
(0.94)
-0.06
(0.36)

-1.54
(0.94)
-0.20
(0.34)

-1.64
(0.95)
-0.05
(0.35)

-1.88
(1.05)
-0.11
(0.36)

-1.39
(1.08)
-0.26
(0.32)

-1.73
(1.45)
-0.25
(0.38)

-1.78
(1.18)
-0.27
(0.34)

-8.37***
(2.61)
0.32
(1.01)

-7.45**
(3.10)
0.47
(0.83)

-4.93*
(2.55)
-0.07
(0.85)

-7.95***
(2.20)
-0.25
(0.81)

-5.24*
(2.80)
0.11
(0.72)

-7.09**
(3.27)
0.34
(0.85)

-7.56**
(2.91)
-0.12
(0.70)

-6.18
(4.62)
0.34
(0.84)

-7.71*
(3.74)
-0.05
(0.75)

-8.17**
(3.06)
-0.09
(1.03)

-8.38*
(3.80)
-0.12
(0.81)

-8.79***
(2.94)
0.08
(1.11)

-10.59***
(1.95)
0.73
(0.70)

-7.99**
(3.30)
0.89
(0.87)

-5.10*
(2.56)
0.19
(0.85)

-10.84***
(1.91)
-0.13
(0.63)

-6.73**
(2.75)
0.55
(0.83)

-7.79**
(3.39)
0.65
(0.78)

-7.89**
(3.25)
0.49
(0.79)

-6.28
(4.50)
0.63
(0.84)

-8.00*
(3.86)
0.40
(0.80)

-10.15***
(2.13)
0.52
(0.71)

-9.94***
(2.21)
0.40
(0.44)

-11.47***
(2.11)
0.58
(0.73)

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

Notes: This table presents state-level estimates of two-year changes in taxes for different groups on economic activity using a variety of ways to account
for state-specific cyclicality, trends, and sensitivity to other macro shocks. Each specification is the same as column 1 in Table 1 other than the controls.
The first five columns present different ways to account for state-specific cyclicality (see section 2.1.1 or appendix B.1 for details); (1) baseline specification
with cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects, (2) year fixed effects, (3) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects where the quintiles are defined based on the
standard deviation in state GDP per capita, (4) cyclicality-decile by year fixed effects, and (5) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects that group states
only using the years before the sample (i.e., before 1980). The next five columns show controls for state-specific sensitivity to other shocks and trends; (6)
controls for oil price interacted with state dummies, (7) controls for real interest rate interacted with state dummies, (8) and (9) add region fixed effects to
(6) and (7), and (10) includes state-specific trends. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1) in all specifications other than
(8) and (9), which are clustered by region. The sample period is 1980-2007. See appendix A.2 for data definitions and sources.

Table A7: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Economic Activity: Policy Robustness
Employment Rate
Bottom 90
Top 10
Emp/Pop
Bottom 90
Top 10
Payroll
Bottom 90
Top 10
Net Earnings
Bottom 90

91

Top 10
Controls
1) Government Transfers Per Capita
2) Federal IG Spending Per Capita
3) Minimum Wage
4) OASDI
5) Supplemental Security Income
6) Max SNAP Benefits
7) Medicaid Benefits
8) AFDC + TANF Benefits
9) Mechanical Change in AFDC & TANF
10) Mechanical Change in SNAP & SSI
11) Mechanical Change in Medicaid

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.68**
(0.80)
0.06
(0.20)

-1.77**
(0.79)
0.04
(0.21)

-1.74**
(0.79)
0.04
(0.21)

-1.74**
(0.79)
0.04
(0.21)

-1.78**
(0.78)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.74**
(0.79)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.68**
(0.81)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.75**
(0.80)
0.05
(0.22)

-1.74**
(0.79)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.78**
(0.79)
0.04
(0.21)

-1.75**
(0.80)
0.05
(0.21)

-1.78**
(0.80)
0.06
(0.21)

-1.35
(0.95)
-0.20
(0.30)

-1.52
(0.97)
-0.24
(0.34)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.26
(0.33)

-1.59*
(0.95)
-0.23
(0.33)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.48
(0.98)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.52
(0.96)
-0.25
(0.33)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.52
(0.98)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.53
(0.96)
-0.24
(0.33)

-1.53
(0.98)
-0.23
(0.31)

-7.82***
(2.55)
0.47
(0.88)

-8.54***
(2.62)
0.28
(1.03)

-8.38***
(2.61)
0.29
(1.01)

-8.37***
(2.61)
0.29
(1.00)

-8.60***
(2.53)
0.36
(0.98)

-8.37***
(2.60)
0.33
(1.02)

-8.54***
(2.61)
0.31
(1.03)

-8.30***
(2.63)
0.25
(0.92)

-8.38***
(2.61)
0.32
(1.01)

-8.46***
(2.61)
0.26
(0.96)

-8.39***
(2.62)
0.33
(1.01)

-8.72***
(2.58)
0.20
(0.90)

-10.21***
(1.95)
0.83
(0.63)

-10.72***
(1.97)
0.69
(0.69)

-10.59***
(1.95)
0.75
(0.72)

-10.59***
(1.94)
0.69
(0.68)

-10.65***
(1.92)
0.74
(0.69)

-10.59***
(1.97)
0.73
(0.70)

-10.55***
(1.97)
0.73
(0.69)

-10.53***
(1.97)
0.67
(0.67)

-10.59***
(1.96)
0.73
(0.70)

-10.65***
(1.96)
0.69
(0.68)

-10.59***
(1.96)
0.73
(0.70)

-10.57***
(1.99)
0.67
(0.65)

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: This table presents state-level estimates of two-year changes in taxes for different groups on economic activity using a variety of ways to account
for sensitivity to state-specific policies. Each specification is the same as column 1 in Table 1 with additional controls. Columns 1 and 2 control for
total state transfers per capita and total federal transfers to a state per capita, respectively. Column 3 controls for the minimum wage. Columns 4-11
control for the following as a share of state GDP: OASDI payments, Supplemental Security Income payments, SNAP benefits (assuming max allotment per
recipient), Medicaid vendor payments, AFDC and TANF payments, mechanical changes in AFDC and TANF spending, mechanical changes in SNAP and
SSI spending, mechanical changes in Medicaid spending. See sections A.2, A.3, and C for more details on these controls and on the microsimulation-model
based mechanical changes. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is 1980-2007.

Table A8: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on State GDP: Cyclical Robustness
(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

92

Bottom 90
Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Baseline Cyclicality
2) Year
3) σGDP P C Cyclicality
4) Alternate β-diff Control #1
5) Alternate β-diff Control #2
6) Oil Price x State
7) Real Interest Rate x State
8) Oil Price x State + Region
9) Real Interest Rate x State + Region
10) State Trends

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Panel A:
-2.05
(2.18)
-7.39***
(1.34)
0.25
(1.44)
1.05*
(0.58)
0.10
(0.70)
-0.12
(0.57)
-9.19***
(3.40)
1.03
(1.56)
-10.22**
(3.96)

Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
-1.60
0.63
-1.76
-0.69
-1.91
-0.13
-1.25
-0.07
(2.44)
(1.74)
(2.33)
(1.98)
(2.75)
(1.90)
(3.81)
(2.72)
-8.15*** -5.24*** -6.69*** -6.71*** -7.95*** -7.54*** -7.51** -7.51***
(1.95)
(1.30)
(1.15)
(1.50)
(2.11)
(1.83)
(2.82)
(2.23)
-1.09
-0.85
-0.25
0.71
-0.75
-0.97
-0.56
-0.98
(1.71)
(1.34)
(1.55)
(1.71)
(1.80)
(1.65)
(2.39)
(2.31)
0.96
0.55
0.53
1.02
0.90
0.66
0.85
0.74
(0.60)
(0.64)
(0.63)
(0.64)
(0.61)
(0.52)
(0.60)
(0.54)
-0.08
-0.53
-0.11
0.03
-0.32
-0.59
-0.24
-0.48
(0.58)
(0.67)
(0.62)
(0.57)
(0.56)
(0.61)
(0.51)
(0.53)
-0.08
-0.65
-0.44
0.09
-0.47
-0.51
-0.24
-0.46
(0.57)
(0.57)
(0.65)
(0.56)
(0.54)
(0.53)
(0.36)
(0.42)
-10.84**
-5.45*
-8.70**
-6.69*
-10.62*
-8.64**
-9.31
-8.55
(5.09)
(2.95)
(3.44)
(3.94)
(5.69)
(3.85)
(7.66)
(5.34)
0.81
-0.64
-0.02
1.14
0.12
-0.44
0.37
-0.21
(1.44)
(1.52)
(1.48)
(1.50)
(1.36)
(1.29)
(1.13)
(1.13)
-11.65**
-4.81
-8.69**
-7.83*
-10.73*
-8.20*
-9.68
-8.35
(5.48)
(3.50)
(3.75)
(4.45)
(5.98)
(4.42)
(8.18)
(6.02)

-11.98***
(2.21)
0.75
(0.96)
0.00

-13.16***
(4.17)
0.90
(1.07)
0.00

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Panel B: Two-Year Changes
-7.60*** -11.71*** -9.81*** -12.81*** -12.78***
(2.37)
(2.21)
(3.05)
(4.46)
(3.79)
-0.10
0.18
0.74
0.53
0.26
(1.02)
(0.86)
(1.02)
(0.99)
(0.89)
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.06
(2.36)
-6.64***
(1.32)
0.65
(1.72)
0.95
(0.61)
-0.33
(0.74)
-0.67
(0.62)
-7.04*
(3.91)
-0.05
(1.68)
-6.99
(4.45)

-1.15
(2.64)
-6.83***
(1.61)
0.53
(2.18)
0.90***
(0.20)
-0.25
(0.52)
-0.59
(0.36)
-7.45
(4.50)
0.06
(0.75)
-7.51
(4.88)

-1.65
(2.48)
-7.29***
(1.32)
0.55
(1.77)
0.84
(0.65)
-0.18
(0.76)
-0.42
(0.59)
-8.39*
(4.27)
0.24
(1.71)
-8.63*
(4.84)

-11.70*
(5.89)
0.65
(1.04)
0.08

-12.36**
(4.77)
0.32
(0.98)
0.04

-11.64***
(2.28)
0.24
(1.01)
0.00

-11.58***
(2.29)
0.31
(0.60)
0.00

-11.98***
(2.20)
0.38
(1.04)
0.00

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

Notes: This table presents analogous results to Table 2 for state GDP. The first five columns present different ways to account for state-specific cyclicality
(see section 2.1.1 or appendix B.1 for details); (1) baseline specification with cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects, (2) year fixed effects, (3) cyclicalityquintile by year fixed effects where the quintiles are defined based on the standard deviation in state GDP per capita, (4) cyclicality-decile by year fixed
effects, and (5) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects that group states only using the years before the sample (i.e., before 1980). The next five columns
show controls for state-specific sensitivity to other shocks and trends; (6) controls for oil price interacted with state dummies, (7) controls for real interest
rate interacted with state dummies, (8) and (9) add region fixed effects to (6) and (7), and (10) includes state-specific trends. Standard errors are clustered
by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1) in all specifications other than (8) and (9), which are clustered by region. The sample period is 1980-2007. See
appendix A.2 for data definitions and sources.

Table A9: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on State GDP: Policy Robustness
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Panel A: Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
-2.27
-2.07
-2.58
-1.41
-3.07
-2.11
-1.57
-2.06
(2.11)
(2.17)
(2.18)
(2.13)
(1.81)
(2.00)
(2.08)
(2.18)
-7.54*** -7.45*** -7.31*** -6.39*** -5.14*** -6.59*** -7.19*** -6.91***
(1.48)
(1.36)
(1.34)
(1.33)
(1.20)
(1.30)
(1.37)
(1.26)
0.38
0.11
0.30
2.15
0.43
0.15
-0.16
0.54
(1.37)
(1.44)
(1.43)
(1.48)
(1.35)
(1.44)
(1.42)
(1.42)
0.94
1.03*
1.04*
0.97*
0.98
1.39***
0.86
1.00*
(0.57)
(0.59)
(0.58)
(0.56)
(0.68)
(0.42)
(0.58)
(0.57)
0.15
0.06
0.11
0.12
0.30
0.18
0.07
0.16
(0.62)
(0.70)
(0.71)
(0.65)
(0.54)
(0.52)
(0.70)
(0.64)
0.05
-0.16
-0.10
-0.15
0.17
-0.15
-0.17
-0.02
(0.53)
(0.57)
(0.56)
(0.54)
(0.52)
(0.43)
(0.55)
(0.53)
-9.22*** -9.60***
-9.09**
-6.82*
-6.13**
-9.50*** -9.46***
-7.94**
(3.03)
(3.43)
(3.41)
(3.48)
(2.63)
(3.18)
(3.33)
(3.32)
1.14
0.93
1.05
0.95
1.45
1.43
0.76
1.14
(1.35)
(1.58)
(1.56)
(1.48)
(1.56)
(1.04)
(1.55)
(1.43)
-10.36*** -10.54** -10.14**
-7.77*
-7.58** -10.93*** -10.22**
-9.08**
(3.46)
(4.03)
(3.97)
(3.96)
(3.09)
(3.39)
(3.93)
(3.77)

-2.10
(2.20)
-7.28***
(1.33)
0.19
(1.45)
1.05*
(0.58)
0.09
(0.71)
-0.13
(0.57)
-9.18***
(3.42)
1.01
(1.56)
-10.20**
(3.97)

-2.31
(2.15)
-7.91***
(1.41)
0.30
(1.40)
1.02**
(0.49)
0.08
(0.66)
-0.22
(0.53)
-9.92***
(3.31)
0.89
(1.39)
-10.82***
(3.81)

-2.03
(2.19)
-7.36***
(1.35)
0.28
(1.44)
1.07*
(0.58)
0.08
(0.70)
-0.13
(0.56)
-9.11**
(3.42)
1.02
(1.56)
-10.13**
(3.97)

-2.12
(1.85)
-4.13***
(1.34)
1.12
(1.24)
0.77*
(0.46)
0.26
(0.40)
0.24
(0.34)
-5.14**
(2.50)
1.27
(0.96)
-6.41**
(2.68)

Panel B: Two-Year Changes
-11.98*** -11.97*** -12.01*** -11.97***
(2.21)
(2.18)
(2.14)
(2.22)
0.80
0.66
0.76
0.77
(0.98)
(0.93)
(0.96)
(0.97)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

Bottom 90

93

Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Government Transfers Per Capita
2) Federal IG Spending Per Capita
3) Minimum Wage
4) OASDI
5) Supplemental Security Income
6) Max SNAP Benefits
7) Medicaid Benefits
8) AFDC + TANF Benefits
9) Mechanical Change in AFDC & TANF
10) Mechanical Change in SNAP & SSI
11) Mechanical Change in Medicaid

(2)

-11.43***
(2.17)
0.90
(0.85)
0.00

-12.23***
(2.23)
0.69
(0.98)
0.00

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

(3)

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

(4)

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

(5)

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

(6)

N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

(7)

(8)

-11.85***
(2.21)
0.76
(0.94)
0.00

-11.91***
(2.23)
0.69
(0.90)
0.00

-11.99***
(2.21)
0.75
(0.96)
0.00

-12.09***
(2.19)
0.69
(0.92)
0.00

-11.98***
(2.21)
0.76
(0.96)
0.00

-11.94***
(2.16)
0.66
(0.86)
0.00

N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: This table presents analogous results to Table 3 for state GDP. Columns 1 and 2 control for total state transfers per capita and total federal transfers
to a state per capita, respectively. Column 3 controls for the minimum wage. Columns 4-11 control for the following as a share of state GDP: OASDI
payments, Supplemental Security Income payments, SNAP benefits (assuming max allotment per recipient), Medicaid vendor payments, AFDC and TANF
payments, mechanical changes in AFDC and TANF spending, mechanical changes in SNAP and SSI spending, mechanical changes in Medicaid spending.
See sections A.2, A.3, and C for more details on these controls and on the microsimulation-model based mechanical changes. Standard errors are clustered
by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is 1980-2007.

Table A10: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Real State GDP: Cyclical Robustness
(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

94

Bottom 90
Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Baseline Cyclicality
2) Year
3) σGDP P C Cyclicality
4) Alternate β-diff Control #1
5) Alternate β-diff Control #2
6) Oil Price x State
7) Real Interest Rate x State
8) Oil Price x State + Region
9) Real Interest Rate x State + Region
10) State Trends

Panel A:
-0.29
(2.83)
-8.40***
(2.85)
2.11
(2.11)
0.91
(0.99)
0.88
(0.61)
-0.12
(0.77)
-6.59
(4.97)
1.67
(1.33)
-8.26
(5.10)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
0.02
3.44
-0.24
1.61
0.06
0.06
-0.12
0.24
(2.52)
(2.21)
(3.54)
(2.54)
(2.84)
(1.67)
(4.03)
(1.91)
-10.85*** -7.74*** -6.80*** -8.35*** -10.71*** -10.86*** -10.65** -11.16**
(2.87)
(1.95)
(2.36)
(2.74)
(2.97)
(3.37)
(4.20)
(4.20)
0.08
-0.33
3.52
2.36
-0.10
-1.09
-0.24
-1.09
(1.65)
(1.99)
(2.66)
(2.09)
(1.78)
(2.69)
(1.21)
(1.45)
1.49
0.58
1.49
1.33
1.48
1.02
1.36
1.12
(1.12)
(1.03)
(0.97)
(1.07)
(1.17)
(0.96)
(1.15)
(0.95)
0.91
0.40
1.37*
0.79
0.81
0.18
0.71
0.35
(0.78)
(0.70)
(0.71)
(0.68)
(0.79)
(0.86)
(0.77)
(0.71)
-0.00
-0.37
-0.99
0.14
-0.21
-0.68
-0.19
-0.59
(0.81)
(0.89)
(1.06)
(0.76)
(0.84)
(1.04)
(0.75)
(1.00)
-10.75**
-4.62
-3.52
-4.39
-10.76**
-11.89*
-11.01 -12.01**
(4.27)
(3.88)
(6.03)
(4.85)
(4.84)
(6.01)
(6.73)
(5.05)
2.40
0.61
1.87
2.27
2.09
0.52
1.88
0.89
(1.83)
(1.59)
(1.51)
(1.75)
(1.87)
(1.81)
(1.72)
(1.57)
-13.14**
-5.23
-5.39
-6.66
-12.85** -12.41**
-12.90 -12.90**
(5.17)
(4.33)
(6.19)
(5.42)
(5.69)
(5.74)
(7.42)
(5.29)

-9.70***
(3.46)
1.44*
(0.85)
0.00

-13.18***
(3.53)
2.09
(1.38)
0.00

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Panel B: Two-Year Changes
-6.96*** -8.98** -8.05** -13.27***
(2.36)
(3.63)
(3.39)
(3.82)
0.66
2.30**
1.57
1.83
(0.95)
(1.09)
(1.10)
(1.33)
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.17
(3.37)
-8.19**
(3.18)
1.17
(2.64)
0.62
(1.04)
0.32
(0.69)
-0.85
(0.84)
-6.85
(6.66)
0.09
(1.45)
-6.94
(6.67)

-0.38
(3.68)
-8.91**
(3.81)
1.08
(2.40)
0.67
(0.91)
0.50
(0.56)
-0.69
(0.55)
-8.21
(7.58)
0.47
(1.12)
-8.68
(7.29)

-1.46
(3.39)
-9.11***
(2.97)
1.64
(2.65)
0.68
(0.96)
0.63
(0.61)
-0.42
(0.79)
-8.92
(6.68)
0.89
(1.26)
-9.81
(6.79)

-14.28***
(3.78)
1.03
(1.05)
0.00

-12.54*
(5.66)
1.86
(1.53)
0.04

-14.15**
(4.55)
1.17
(1.12)
0.02

-10.22**
(4.06)
0.49
(0.86)
0.01

-10.87**
(4.51)
0.88
(0.81)
0.03

-11.32***
(3.81)
1.08
(0.77)
0.00

N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

ACCRA
Notes: This table presents analogous results to Table 2 for real state GDP using the ACCRA price index Ps,t
. The first five columns present different
ways to account for state-specific cyclicality (see section 2.1.1 or appendix B.1 for details); (1) baseline specification with cyclicality-quintile by year fixed
effects, (2) year fixed effects, (3) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects where the quintiles are defined based on the standard deviation in state GDP per
capita, (4) cyclicality-decile by year fixed effects, and (5) cyclicality-quintile by year fixed effects that group states only using the years before the sample
(i.e., before 1980). The next five columns show controls for state-specific sensitivity to other shocks and trends; (6) controls for oil price interacted with state
dummies, (7) controls for real interest rate interacted with state dummies, (8) and (9) add region fixed effects to (6) and (7), and (10) includes state-specific
trends. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1) in all specifications other than (8) and (9), which are clustered by region.
The sample period is 1980-2007. See appendix A.2 for data definitions and sources.

Table A11: State-level Effects of Tax Changes by Income Group on Real State GDP: Policy Robustness
(1)

B90
Ts,t
B90
Ts,t−1
B90
Ts,t−2
T 10
Ts,t
T 10
Ts,t−1
T 10
Ts,t−2

B90 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
T10 Sum: βt + βt−1 + βt−2
Bottom - Top:

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Panel A: Distributed Lag Model of Tax Changes for Different Income Groups
-0.32
-0.66
-0.66
-0.53
0.32
-1.09
-0.15
0.62
-0.42
(2.83)
(2.85)
(2.92)
(2.89)
(2.65)
(2.81)
(2.83)
(2.85)
(2.83)
-8.61*** -8.33*** -8.29*** -7.66** -6.28** -7.65*** -8.24*** -7.58*** -8.23***
(2.97)
(2.97)
(2.89)
(2.88)
(2.52)
(2.71)
(2.90)
(2.68)
(2.85)
2.19
1.92
2.91
3.91*
2.21
1.97
1.87
2.58
2.09
(2.09)
(2.18)
(2.22)
(2.01)
(1.93)
(2.08)
(2.12)
(1.96)
(2.11)
0.92
0.96
1.10
0.84
0.89
1.29
0.81
0.82
0.92
(1.01)
(1.00)
(0.97)
(0.96)
(0.86)
(1.12)
(1.01)
(1.07)
(0.99)
0.79
0.91
1.03*
0.86
1.10*
1.01
0.91
0.97
0.88
(0.63)
(0.60)
(0.58)
(0.59)
(0.57)
(0.67)
(0.59)
(0.59)
(0.62)
-0.04
-0.12
-0.12
-0.21
0.14
-0.14
-0.08
0.01
-0.15
(0.75)
(0.76)
(0.77)
(0.76)
(0.83)
(0.74)
(0.77)
(0.78)
(0.76)
-6.74
-7.07
-6.03
-4.28
-3.76
-6.78
-6.51
-4.38
-6.56
(4.93)
(5.12)
(5.15)
(5.04)
(4.27)
(4.67)
(5.04)
(4.62)
(4.98)
1.67
1.75
2.01
1.48
2.13
2.16
1.63
1.80
1.65
(1.34)
(1.36)
(1.34)
(1.26)
(1.32)
(1.62)
(1.36)
(1.37)
(1.35)
-8.41
-8.83*
-8.04
-5.76
-5.89
-8.93*
-8.15
-6.18
-8.21
(5.05)
(5.18)
(5.31)
(5.14)
(4.59)
(4.90)
(5.11)
(4.84)
(5.11)

95

Bottom 90
Top 10
P-Value (Bottom 90 = Top 10)
Controls
1) Government Transfers Per Capita
2) Federal IG Spending Per Capita
3) Minimum Wage
4) OASDI
5) Supplemental Security Income
6) Max SNAP Benefits
7) Medicaid Benefits
8) AFDC + TANF Benefits
9) Mechanical Change in AFDC & TANF
10) Mechanical Change in SNAP & SSI
11) Mechanical Change in Medicaid

-9.41***
(3.48)
1.52*
(0.87)
0.00

-9.87***
(3.50)
1.40
(0.84)
0.00

Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Panel B: Two-Year Changes
-9.70*** -9.71*** -9.71*** -9.67***
(3.53)
(3.43)
(3.44)
(3.51)
1.66**
1.38
1.44*
1.47*
(0.82)
(0.84)
(0.85)
(0.86)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

(10)

(11)

(12)

-0.69
(2.87)
-9.24***
(3.00)
2.36
(2.05)
0.92
(1.06)
0.85
(0.65)
-0.21
(0.71)
-7.57
(4.92)
1.56
(1.39)
-9.13*
(4.97)

-0.50
(2.85)
-8.38***
(2.86)
2.22
(2.08)
0.96
(1.00)
0.82
(0.62)
-0.16
(0.76)
-6.65
(5.00)
1.63
(1.33)
-8.28
(5.12)

-0.61
(2.89)
-6.22**
(2.86)
3.29*
(1.76)
1.11
(1.04)
1.14*
(0.66)
0.12
(0.72)
-3.54
(4.41)
2.37
(1.49)
-5.91
(4.71)

-9.64***
(3.50)
1.44*
(0.86)
0.00

-9.67***
(3.46)
1.39
(0.90)
0.00

-9.70***
(3.47)
1.44*
(0.85)
0.00

-9.83***
(3.47)
1.39
(0.84)
0.00

-9.72***
(3.47)
1.44*
(0.85)
0.00

-9.76***
(3.60)
1.55*
(0.83)
0.00

N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y

N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

ACCRA
Notes: This table presents analogous results to Table 3 for real state GDP using the ACCRA price index Ps,t
. Columns 1 and 2 control for total
state transfers per capita and total federal transfers to a state per capita, respectively. Column 3 controls for the minimum wage. Columns 4-11 control for
the following as a share of state GDP: OASDI payments, Supplemental Security Income payments, SNAP benefits (assuming max allotment per recipient),
Medicaid vendor payments, AFDC and TANF payments, mechanical changes in AFDC and TANF spending, mechanical changes in SNAP and SSI spending,
mechanical changes in Medicaid spending. See sections A.2, A.3, and C for more details on these controls and on the microsimulation-model based mechanical
changes. Standard errors are clustered by state (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The sample period is 1980-2007.

