                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHY ARE INDIAN CHILDREN SO SHORT?

                                          Seema Jayachandran
                                             Rohini Pande

                                         Working Paper 21036
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21036


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2015




A previous version of this paper was titled, “Why Are Indian Children Shorter Than African Children?"
We thank Lydia Kim, Suanna Oh, and Alexander Persaud for excellent research assistance, and Jere
Behrman, Angus Deaton, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Jean Dreze, Esther Duflo, Erica Field, Dominic Leggett,
Nachiket Mor, Debraj Ray, Tomasz Strzalecki, Alessandro Tarozzi and several seminar and conference
participants for helpful comments. Jayachandran acknowledges financial support from the National
Science Foundation and Pande from Harvard's Women and Public Policy Program. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Seema Jayachandran and Rohini Pande. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why Are Indian Children So Short?
Seema Jayachandran and Rohini Pande
NBER Working Paper No. 21036
March 2015
JEL No. D10,O12,O53

                                                ABSTRACT

India's child stunting rate is among the highest in the world, exceeding that of many poorer African
countries. In this paper, we analyze data for over 174,000 Indian and Sub-Saharan African children
to show that Indian firstborns are taller than African firstborns; the Indian height disadvantage emerges
with the second child and then increases with birth order. This pattern persists when we compare height
between siblings, and also holds for health inputs such as vaccinations. Three patterns in the data indicate
that India's culture of eldest son preference plays a key role in explaining the steeper birth order gradient
among Indian children and, consequently, the overall height deficit. First, the Indian firstborn height
advantage only exists for sons. Second, an Indian son with an older sibling is taller than his African
counterpart if and only if he is the eldest son. Third, the India-Africa height deficit is largest for daughters
with no older brothers, which reflects that fact that their families are those most likely to exceed their
desired fertility in order to have a son.


Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu

Rohini Pande
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rohini_pande@harvard.edu
1        Introduction
        One in four children under age ﬁve worldwide is so short as to be classiﬁed as stunted
(UNICEF, 2014).1 Roughly half of the world’s stunted children live in Asia and one third
in Africa. Child stunting, a key marker of child malnutrition, casts a long shadow over an
individual’s life: on average, people who are shorter as children are less healthy, have worse
cognitive skills, and earn less.2
        In contrast to the rapid increases in height that accompanied economic growth in West-
ern countries in recent centuries (Floud, Fogel, Harris, and Hong, 2011), economic growth
and height have failed to move in tandem in Africa and Asia (Deaton, 2007). India, the
world’s second most populous country and the one projected to have the world’s youngest
population by 2020, provides a particularly stark example. Between 1992 and 2005, India’s
economic growth exceeded 6 percent per year, yet stunting declined by just 0.6 percentage
points (1.3 percent) per year (Tarozzi, 2012). In 2005, 40 percent of Indian children under
age ﬁve remained stunted (IIPS, 2010). Thus, despite a GDP per capita that is higher than
roughly a hundred countries, India has the ﬁfth highest stunting rate in the world (UNICEF,
2013). The contrast between India and Sub-Saharan African countries is particularly strik-
ing, and is the focus of this paper. India performs better on most health and economic
indicators ranging from maternal mortality and life expectancy to food security, poverty in-
cidence, and educational attainment (Ramalingaswami, Jonsson, and Rohde, 1997; Gwatkin
et al., 2007). Yet, as Figure 1 shows, children born in India are, on average, shorter than
those born in Sub-Saharan Africa.
        In this paper, we document a set of patterns that suggests that diﬀerences in Indian par-
ents’ investments across their children contribute to India’s height disadvantage. We analyze
data on over 174,000 children from 25 Sub-Saharan African countries and India, drawn from
recent Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). First, we observe a much greater height
drop-oﬀ for later-born children in India than in Africa: height-for-age for ﬁrstborn children
    1
      Stunting is deﬁned as having child height-for-age 2 standard deviations or more below the worldwide
reference population median for one’s gender and age in months.
    2
      Taller people have greater cognitive skills (Glewwe and Miguel, 2007), fewer functional impairments
and better immunocompetence (Barker and Osmond, 1986; Barker et al., 1993; Falkner and Tanner, 1989),
and higher earnings (Strauss and Thomas, 1998; Case and Paxson, 2008). Hoddinott et al. (2013) track a
cohort of Guatemalan children for over 30 years and ﬁnd that those who are taller receive more schooling
and demonstrate better cognitive skills, increased household per capita expenditure and a lower probability
of living in poverty. An individual’s adult and child height are highly correlated (Tanner et al., 1956).



                                                    1
is actually higher in India than in Africa. The Indian height disadvantage materializes for
second-born children and increases for third and higher order births, at which point Indian
children have a mean height-for-age lower than that of African children by 0.3 standard
deviations of the worldwide distribution. We see the same pattern – a much steeper birth
order gradient in child height in India than in Africa – when the estimation only exploits
between-sibling variation. Thus, birth order is not proxying for family background diﬀer-
ences between smaller and larger families. Second, we consider an array of prenatal and
postnatal health inputs; as with height, we observe a stronger drop-oﬀ with birth order in
India than Africa.3
       Finally, Indian children of both genders exhibit a sharper birth order gradient in height
relative to African children. However, it is only among boys that we observe an Indian height
advantage for ﬁrstborns. Consistent with this fact, averaged across birth orders, the Indian
height deﬁcit only holds among girls.
       These patterns suggest that the prevalence of malnutrition in India is not an artifact
of using child height to measure malnutrition, in which case low child height in India would
simply reﬂect genetics.4 Genotypes do not vary with birth order or (as we discuss below)
siblings’ gender, so a genetic predisposition to be short would not give rise to the very signif-
icant birth order and gender composition eﬀects that we see. Even an epigenetic explanation
in which environmental factors interact with the genome, aﬀecting gene expression, seems
implausible: the fact that the same Indian children who are stunted also receive fewer pre-
natal and postnatal inputs makes it unlikely that the within-family stunting patterns only
reﬂect gene expression.5
       Rather, we propose that a preference for eldest sons in India – encompassing both a
desire to have at least one son and for the eldest son to be healthy – generates a starkly
unequal allocation of resources within families in India. This, in turn, underlies the observed
birth order and gender patterns in child height. Eldest son preference can be traced to (at
   3
     In addition, child hemoglobin levels also exhibits a steeper birth order drop-oﬀ in India.
   4
     One approach to test for the role of genetics is to examine whether wealthy and well-fed Indian children
are short by international standards. The ﬁndings are mixed (Bhandari et al., 2002; Tarozzi, 2008; Pana-
gariya, 2013). Another approach is to examine the height of Indian children who migrate to rich countries;
most authors ﬁnd that the gap between the Indian-born children and worldwide norms narrows but does
not close (Tarozzi, 2008; Proos, 2009).
   5
     To cause the height patterns by birth order and gender composition that we observe in India, even in an
epigenetic explanation, the environmental factor interacting with genetics would still likely need to be eldest
son preference.



                                                      2
least) two aspects of Hindu religion. First, Hinduism prescribes a patrilocal and patrilineal
kinship system: aging parents live with their son, typically the eldest, and bequeath property
to him (Dyson and Moore, 1983; Gupta, 1987). Second, Hindu religious texts emphasize post-
death rituals which can only be conducted by a male heir. These include lighting the funeral
pyre, taking the ashes to the Ganges River, and organizing death anniversary ceremonies
(Arnold et al., 1998).
     Eldest son preference will generate the observed birth order gradient among boys simply
because a lower birth order son is more likely to be the family’s ﬁrst son. Consistent with
this argument, a son born at birth order 2 is taller in India than Africa if and only if he is
the family’s eldest son.6
     Among girls, eldest son preference generates a birth order gradient through a more subtle
mechanism, namely fertility stopping rules. Families who start oﬀ only having daughters are
likely to exceed their desired fertility as they repeatedly try for a son. The birth of a late-
parity girl is akin to a negative expenditure shock to the family, and fewer resources will
be expended on her. Consistent with this, the India-Africa height gap is particularly large
for daughters who only have girls as elder siblings. This pattern stands in contrast to that
predicted by “sibling rivalry,” where siblings compete for household resources and not having
an older brother improves a child’s outcomes (Garg and Morduch, 1998).
     We do observe sibling rivalry in our data, even though its eﬀect on height is outweighed
by the fertility eﬀect. First, as mentioned above, a boy born at birth order 2 fares better if
he competes for resources with an older sister rather than older brother. Second, comparing
prenatal and postnatal investments in girls, we ﬁnd that the sibling rivalry eﬀect dominates
for in utero investments when child gender is unknown: a female fetus beneﬁts when the
parents do not yet have a male heir and hope that the pregnancy may yield the family’s
eldest son. However, once gender is revealed at birth and parents revise their fertility plans,
postnatal investments in the same pregnancy fall oﬀ. On net, among girls, the endogenous
fertility eﬀect from not fulﬁlling parental demand for a son dominates, and we observe a
birth order gradient in height.
   6
     Other papers examining gender variation in height in India include Mishra, Roy, and Retherford (2004)
who used the two earlier National Family Health Survey (NFHS) rounds to show that stunting in India varies
with the gender composition of siblings. Tarozzi and Mahajan (2007) show that child height improved more
for boys than girls between the ﬁrst two NFHS waves. Also related is Coﬀey, Spears, and Khera (2013) who
compare ﬁrst cousins living in the same Indian joint household and show that children born to the younger
brother in the household do worse, potentially due to their mother facing greater discrimination.


                                                    3
     Religious and regional variation in the birth order gradient within India is also consistent
with the posited cultural underpinnings of India’s birth order gradient. Islam places less
emphasis on the importance of having a son. Comparing across Indian Hindus and Muslims,
we only observe the birth order gradient in height among Hindus. Also, the height gradient
is absent in Kerala, an Indian state with strong matrilineal traditions.
     Explanations for the Indian birth order patterns that are unrelated to son preference
are unlikely to also explain the observed patterns by child gender and siblings’ gender. We
also go further to rule out several alternative explanations for the Indian birth order pattern.
First, other health- and environment-related factors that distinguish India from Africa such
as India’s higher child survival rate, worse maternal health and worse sanitation fail to
account for the observed birth order patterns. Second, the reason Indian later-borns are so
malnourished is not that family income declines over the lifecycle in India relative to Africa.
We ﬁnd that it is only among pregnant women that women’s health and nutrition in India
and Africa have diﬀerent time proﬁles; Indian women do relatively worse as family size grows,
but only when they are pregnant, whereas declines in family income would be evident even
when women are not pregnant. Finally, other cultural factors, including greater communal
care-giving in Africa and an historic preference for more family labor in Africa (related to
greater land abundance) cannot explain the observed patterns.
     Our ﬁndings are complementary to other research that relates environmental factors
and child height, such as Spears (2013) who focuses on open defecation as a cause of the
Indian height disadvantage. We emphasize the importance of a diﬀerent cultural norm –
eldest son preference – which aﬀects intra-household resource allocation and the take-up of
services.
     Cultural gender preferences and gender gaps in perceived returns to investment have
been previously invoked as an explanation for unequal resource allocation across siblings,
and we add to this literature (Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1982; Behrman, 1988; Garg and
Morduch, 1998; Oster, 2009). We also contribute to the literature on the unintended conse-
quences of son preference by demonstrating how dynamic fertility considerations related to
the sex composition of existing children cause inequality in health outcomes between genders,
among brothers, and even among sisters (Sen, 1990; Clark, 2000; Jensen, 2003; Jayachan-
dran and Kuziemko, 2011). Relatedly, while several studies document birth order gradients
in outcomes as varied as IQ, schooling, height, and personality (Behrman and Taubman,


                                               4
1986; Sulloway, 1996; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2007; Savage, Derraik, Miles, et al.,
2013), no prior study has examined cross-country diﬀerences in birth order eﬀects or shown
how birth order preferences, at least in some societies, are entwined with and potentially
derive from gender preferences. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper that em-
pirically links the literatures on birth order and quantity-quality fertility trade-oﬀs (Becker
and Lewis, 1973).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and
presents descriptive statistics for the sample. Section 3 presents evidence on the birth order
gradient in the Indian height disadvantage, and Section 4 presents evidence on eldest son
preference as the root cause. Section 5 tests alternative explanations for the within-family
patterns. Section 6 concludes.


2    Background and Data Description
    Net nutritional intake in childhood – the nutrients consumed less those lost due to the
disease environment – is reﬂected contemporaneously in child height and subsequently in
adult height. All else equal, taller adults do better on several dimensions of individual well-
being, a fact that points to the long-term cognitive and productivity impacts of childhood
malnutrition.
    The established link between child stunting and adverse long-term outcomes, as well as
the relative ease of measuring child height (versus, say keeping a comprehensive food diary for
a child) has led to the widespread use of height as a marker of child malnutrition. However,
and especially for cross-country comparisons, it is important to account for the other key
factor determining height: genetic potential. A common norm, and one we follow, is to create
the child’s height-for-age z-score based on the World Health Organization (WHO) growth
standard for children aged 0 to 5 years. The WHO standard is designed as a universally
applicable standard, describing how children should grow if they receive proper nutrition and
health care. It is premised on the fact that the height distribution among children under age
ﬁve who receive adequate nutrition and health care has been shown to be similar in most
ethnic groups (de Onis et al., 2006; WHO, 2006). The WHO constructs the distribution
of height using a sample of children from six aﬄuent populations across ﬁve continents
(children from Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman and the United States with no known
health or environmental constraints to growth and who were given recommended nutrition

                                              5
and health inputs) (WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group, 2006b). A z-score of
0 represents the median of the gender- and age-speciﬁc reference population, and a z-score of
-1 indicates that the child is 1 standard deviation below that reference-population median.
A height-for-age z-score of -2 is the cutoﬀ for being considered stunted.
       As discussed earlier, conditional on economic performance, India remains a conspicuous
negative outlier in terms of child height. The 2005-06 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-
3) is most recent Indian survey that collects child height data, is representative of India’s
twenty largest states, and employs the same sampling methodology and survey instrument as
the internationally-used Demographic and Health Surveys. The NFHS-3 is our data source
for Indian children. A widely discussed comparison for Indian children are children born
in Sub-Saharan Africa, which is a region whose level of development is similar to (but on
average lower than) India. It is also the comparison group used in the previous literature
on the Indian height puzzle (Ramalingaswami, Jonsson, and Rohde, 1996). We therefore
deﬁne as our comparison group the 25 Sub-Saharan African countries where Demographic
and Health Surveys collected child anthropometric data and occurred between 2004 and
2010 (to ensure a comparable time period to NFHS-3) . Throughout this paper, the “DHS
sample” refers to the set of 27 Demographic and Health Surveys for 25 Sub-Saharan African
countries plus India’s NFHS-3.
       The DHS surveys sample and interview mothers who are 15 to 49 years old at the time of
survey, and measure height for their children age ﬁve and under.7 Our sample comprises the
174,157 children for whom anthropometric data were collected in DHS surveys. In robustness
checks, we also use DHS surveys from other regions. Appendix Table 1 provides summary
statistics for the Indian and African subsamples, and the Data Appendix provides other
survey details.
       The average child age in our sample is 30.1 months in India and 28.1 months in Africa.
The average height-for-age z-scores in India and Africa are −1.58 and −1.44, respectively. A
key variable of interest is child birth order, which we deﬁne based on all children ever born
to a mother, currently alive or deceased. As African women have more children (3.9) than
their Indian counterparts (2.7), we observe a higher fraction of high birth order children in
Africa relative to India; the mean birth order is 2.6 in India and 3.7 in Africa. For the same
   7
    Due to high incidence of missing data for children in their 60th month of life, we limit the sample to
children who are 59 months old or younger.



                                                    6
reason of diﬀerential total fertility, the mother’s average age at birth for the children in our
sample is lower in India (24.8 years) than Africa (27.0 years).
      We also use data on prenatal and postnatal health-related behaviors. Prenatal behavior
includes the number of prenatal care visits, whether the pregnant woman received tetanus
shots and iron supplementation, and delivery at a facility, and India typically outperforms
Africa on these measures. (For example, 69 percent of the time, pregnant women in India
took iron supplements, compared to 62 percent in Africa.). Data on health inputs for young
children include whether he or she had a medical checkup within the ﬁrst two months of life,
whether he or she was given iron supplementation, and the total number of vaccinations.
India has higher vaccination rates, while postnatal checkups and child iron supplementation
are more common in Africa. Another child health outcome we examine is blood hemoglobin
for child under age ﬁve, which is higher on average in India.
      Appendix Table 1 also summarizes our control variables including maternal literacy,
which is higher in India, and living in a rural area, which is more common in Africa. The
DHS’s wealth index variable measures a household’s relative wealth within its country; the
mean level is not comparable across countries because it is a relative measure. Additional
outcomes examined in the Appendix Tables and variables used for heterogeneity analysis are
described in the Data Appendix.


3     Birth Order and Child Outcomes
      Birth order gradients in child height have been widely examined in rich and poor coun-
tries alike (Belmont, Stein, and Susser, 1975; Behrman and Taubman, 1986; Horton, 1988;
Savage, Derraik, Miles, et al., 2013). In this section we show that the relative birth order
gradient in child height, as well as in health inputs that might inﬂuence height, is much
larger in India than Sub-Saharan Africa.

3.1     Child height
      Figure 2 illustrates the diﬀerences in height by birth order between India and Sub-
Saharan Africa. The ﬁgure plots average child height-for-age (HFA) z-scores in India and
Africa, separately by birth order. Among ﬁrstborn children, height in India exceeds that in
Africa. An Indian deﬁcit emerges at birth order 2 and widens for birth order 3 and higher.
      Table 1 examines this pattern via regression analysis. In column (1) we show the


                                               7
average India-Africa gap, pooling all children. Indian children are, on average, 0.11 standard
deviations shorter than African children.
    In column (2) we disaggregate this height disadvantage by birth order. The outcome
variable remains HFA for child i born to mother m in country c.


      HF Aimc = α1 Ic + α2 Ic × 2nd Childimc + α3 Ic × 3rd+ Childimc + β1 2nd Childimc
                    +β2 3rd+ Childimc + γXimc + imc                                       (1)


The variable Ic is an indicator for Indian children. α1 is the India gap for ﬁrstborn children
(omitted birth order category), and α2 and α3 capture how the gap diﬀers for second-born
children and third-and-higher birth order children. Ximc is a vector of controls: it always
includes linear, quadratic and cubic terms for a continuous survey month-year variable (to
control for diﬀerences in survey timing) and child age dummy variables (in months, to control
for any sampling diﬀerences between India and Africa and to improve precision). In some
speciﬁcations it also includes mother’s age, child’s age and household covariates interacted
with the India dummy (plus main eﬀects). Throughout, standard errors are clustered at the
mother level.
    As seen from the India main eﬀect in Table 1, column (2), among ﬁrstborns, Indians are
signiﬁcantly taller than Africans. The India height disadvantage opens up at birth order 2:
The interaction of India and being second-born is −0.17 and highly signiﬁcant. The Indian
disadvantage then grows larger, with third and higher births having an HFA z-score gap of
−0.32 compared to African children (sum of main eﬀect and interaction term).
    Households where a second- or third-born child is observed in the data will, on average,
have a larger family size than households where a ﬁrstborn child is observed, and households
with higher fertility diﬀer along several dimensions. Thus, a key omitted variable concern
is that the birth order variable in between-household comparisons could be proxying for
high-fertility families (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2007). A common way to address
this concern is to control for family size. However, the sampling strategy in DHS surveys
restricts our ability to do this directly. First, a large fraction of interviewed women have
yet to complete their fertility. Second, we have height data for children age 5 and younger.
Thus, we always observe height for the youngest child in the household, and birth order and
family size are collinear for households where we only observe height for one child, which is


                                              8
roughly half of our sample. Therefore, we proceed by ﬁrst including household covariates
that strongly predict completed fertility and also control for maternal age which, conditional
on current family size, is also predictive of total fertility. Next, we include mother ﬁxed
eﬀects which allows us to fully control for family size diﬀerences by making within-family
comparisons.
     In column (3) we include three household covariates and their interactions with the
India dummy: a household wealth index, whether the mother is literate, and whether the
household is rural. These characteristics are strongly correlated with observed fertility for
women aged 45 and above, who very likely have completed their fertility: literate women
have one fewer child than illiterate women, fertility is higher by 0.5 children in rural areas,
and a 1 standard deviation change in the wealth index is associated with 0.4 fewer children.
Addition of these control variables, reduces the magnitude but not the signiﬁcance of the
coeﬃcients on Ic × 2ndChild and Ic × 3rd+Child.
     Another set of concerns relates to maternal and child age. Higher birth order children
are born to older mothers, so the birth order gradient might reﬂect an India-Africa gap in
the eﬀect of maternal age at birth on child height. In addition, birth order and child age
are correlated; among siblings the higher birth order child will, by deﬁnition, be younger.
We thus test the robustness to controlling for Ic × M otherAge and Ic × ChildAge, where
both mother’s age at birth and child’s age are measured continuously (we continue to control
for child age dummies). Column (4) shows that the coeﬃcients on Ic × 2nd Child and Ic ×
3rd+ Child are essentially unchanged when these controls are added.8
     Finally, in column (5) we include mother ﬁxed eﬀects and therefore only use within-
family variation for identiﬁcation. (Birth order and child’s age are even more strongly corre-
lated within a family, so we continue to control for Ic × ChildAge). The Indian birth order
gradient remains statistically signiﬁcant, and the results are similar to the unadjusted results
in column (2). The fact that the India birth order gradient is larger in magnitude in col-
umn (5) than in columns (3) and (4) suggests that, conditional on the household covariates,
unobserved diﬀerential selection of Indian households into higher fertility is positive. The
mother ﬁxed eﬀect speciﬁcation also demonstrates a negative birth order gradient in Africa
   8
     We are de facto also controlling for the mother’s current age, which is a linear combination of the child’s
age and the mother’s age at birth. The results are also robust to controlling for the birth spacing between
the child and his or her older sibling. Birth spacing is similar between India (mean of 36.3 months, median
of 31 months) and Africa (mean of 39.0 months, median of 33 months).



                                                       9
(the coeﬃcients on 2nd Child and 3rd+ Child are negative and signiﬁcant), consistent with
ﬁndings in many settings that low-parity children have better outcomes. The key ﬁnding is
that the birth order gradient in child height is twice as large in India as in Africa.
       Height-for-age is a continuous measure of height, but one might care speciﬁcally about
stunting, which is used to calculate malnutrition prevalence. Column (6) presents the mother
ﬁxed eﬀects results using stunting (HFA z-score ≤ −2) as the outcome. Relative to their
African counterparts, the disadvantage for Indian second borns is 11 percentage points, and
for third borns, 14 percentage points. Thus, for stunting, the high birth order penalty is two
to three times as large in India as in Africa. Appendix Table 2, column (1) shows a similar
pattern using height in centimeters as the outcome.
       Appendix Table 2 reports additional robustness checks. To conﬁrm that higher fertility
in Africa relative to India is not driving our results, we show that the mother ﬁxed eﬀect
speciﬁcation is robust to restricting the sample to children who are birth order 4 and below
(column 2) and also to dropping African surveys with fertility above the median for our full
African sample (column 3). In both cases, sample restrictions imply less precisely estimated
coeﬃcients, but point estimates remain very similar to the column (5) speciﬁcation in Table
1. Another potential concern is sex-selective abortion in India. In column (4), in the Indian
subsample, we only keep the 25 percent of observations that are in primary sampling units
where the rate of mothers reporting using ultrasound during pregnancy is below 5 percent.
There are no ultrasound data in the African DHS data. Again, the standard errors increase
but the point estimates remain similar.9
       One ﬁnal concern is that what we interpret as an abnormally steep birth order gradient
in India is actually an abnormally shallow gradient in Africa. Appendix Table 3 consid-
ers alternative comparison groups. First, in columns (1)-(3) we use a comparison group
deﬁned economically rather than geographically. The comparison group comprises 18 coun-
tries from around the world that conducted one or more DHS surveys between 2004 and
2010 and whose GDP per capita in the survey year was within 50 percent (either higher or
lower) of India’s 2005-06 GDP per capita. Second, recent genome studies have reconstructed
   9
    Another potential confounder is that polygamy and polygyny are more common in Africa. Polygamy
would generally work against our ﬁndings, but if a woman is polygynous, then a second or third birth could
be her ﬁrst child with a particular partner. Appendix Table 2, column (5) shows similar results when we
restrict the sample to mothers who have only had children with one partner. Finally, column (6) shows our
results are robust to considering an alternative (but more endogenous) deﬁnition of birth order, namely birth
order among currently living children.


                                                     10
prehistoric migration patterns from modern-day genetic distance and show evidence of Indo-
European migration and genetic similarity between India, Europe, Central Asia, and West
Asia (Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza, 1994). In columns (4)-(6) we consider the 16 Eu-
ropean and Central and West Asian countries with DHS surveys. Given the relative paucity
of surveys in this region we expand the time period to cover 1995 to 2012. In both cases,
we observe a stronger birth order gradient in India than in the comparison group. The one
diﬀerence is the absence of a ﬁrstborn advantage in India, which is not too surprising since,
on average, these comparison groups are signiﬁcantly richer than the Sub-Saharan Africa
comparison group.

3.2      Child investments
       The steeper birth order gradient in height in India relative to Sub-Saharan Africa (and
other comparison groups) casts doubt on a genetic-based explanation for Indian stunting,
since purely genetic diﬀerences would likely be manifested in children of all birth orders.
Moreover, the persistence of this pattern even when we only make comparisons between
siblings suggests that take-up of services, not access per se, underlies the Indian height
deﬁcit. In Table 2 we directly show this: the decline with birth order in prenatal and
postnatal investments in children is relatively steeper in India.10
       In columns (1) to (4), the outcome variables are based on retrospective information
about inputs in utero and at childbirth, typically only for the youngest child in the family
(rendering the sample smaller and mother ﬁxed eﬀect speciﬁcations infeasible). To address
selection concerns, all regressions include household covariates (wealth index, female literacy,
and rural residence), child’s and mother’s age, and their interactions with the India dummy
(i.e. same speciﬁcation as Table 1, column 4). On average, Indian women are more likely to
obtain prenatal care, take iron supplements, and receive tetanus shots during pregnancy but
are less likely to deliver at a health facility. However, for all outcomes other than tetanus
shots, we observe a sharper decline with birth order in India relative to Africa. The gradient
magnitudes are large enough that for two of the three inputs where the India average exceeds
the Africa average (prenatal visits and iron supplementation), later-born Indian children get
fewer inputs than their African counterparts.11
  10
     The purpose of analyzing health inputs is to directly show that the resources parents allocate to their
children falls sharply with birth order in India, not to make causal claims that these inputs inﬂuence height.
  11
     As we control for household covariates interacted with India, the tables do not report the gap among


                                                     11
      Columns (5) to (7) consider three postnatal investments. The prevalence of postnatal
checkup is much lower in India than Africa (reﬂecting an Indian social norm of maternal
home conﬁnement for forty days after birth) and child iron pill consumption is also lower.
However, Indian children are more likely to get vaccinated. There in no diﬀerential birth
order gradient across India and Africa for postnatal checkups and iron pill consumption. In
contrast, vaccinations show a strong negative India birth order gradient.12 Column (8) shows
the average eﬀect when we pool indicator variables representing the inputs in columns (1)
to (7) (see Data Appendix for further details on construction of this variable).
      The birth order gradient in child health investments points to a behavioral basis for
the height birth order gradient. Column (9) shows that this parental behavior aﬀects other
dimensions of child health: children’s hemoglobin level exhibits a much stronger birth order
gradient in India than Africa.


4       Culture and Height Deﬁcits
      A striking fact about the height deﬁcit of Indian children is its concentration among
later-born children. Why do Indian parents choose to have additional children but then
drastically reduce investments in them? Below, we provide evidence that points to a role of
Hindu norms that prioritize having at least one son.

4.1      Gender and height deﬁcits
4.1.1    Cross-country comparisons: India versus Africa
      Does the relative steepness of the birth order gradient in India vary with child gender?
In Table 3, column (1) we estimate a regression of the form reported in Equation (1) but
expanded to include interactions with a dummy for child gender. First, unlike with boys, the
ﬁrstborn height advantage is absent for Indian girls (relative to their African counterparts).
Speciﬁcally, the main eﬀect for India implies that, on average, ﬁrstborn Indian sons are 0.15
z-score points taller than their African counterparts. However, this eﬀect is absent for girls as
the coeﬃcient on India × Girl is −0.15. Second, the subsequent steeper birth order gradient
for Indian children is similar across genders; the triple interactions of India, higher birth
ﬁrstborns (i.e., the main eﬀect for India). This comparison of absolute levels is based on a speciﬁcation
without household covariates.
  12
     We do not examine breastfeeding as an outcome because the choice of how long to breastfeed is deter-
mined both by its health beneﬁts and subsequent fertility (Jayachandran and Kuziemko, 2011).


                                                   12
order, and the girl dummy, while negative, are statistically insigniﬁcant. In column (2) we
include household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age and their interactions with India.
The birth order gradient patterns remain similar but the signiﬁcance of the India × Girl
coeﬃcient decreases. In column (3), we include mother ﬁxed eﬀects and therefore compare
children within the same household. While the coeﬃcients are fairly similar, the standard
errors increase considerably; we lack statistical power to examine the interaction of gender
and birth order within families.
    In column (4) we summarize the average gender bias in the Indian height deﬁcit. The
India dummy is small and insigniﬁcant and the coeﬃcient on India × Girl is −0.18. Thus,
overall, only Indian girls show a child height disadvantage relative to Sub-Saharan Africa. In
column (5) we include household covariates and in column (6) we estimate a regression with
mother ﬁxed eﬀects. The coeﬃcient of India × Girl decreases somewhat across columns but
remains signiﬁcant.
    Columns (7) and (8) show the same speciﬁcations with the pooled prenatal and postnatal
investments. Girls receive relatively fewer inputs in India, and the diﬀerential Indian birth
order gradient in inputs holds for both genders. Here, we report speciﬁcations with household
covariates and child and mother’s age because data for most inputs was only collected for
the youngest child in the family.

4.1.2   Within-India comparisons
    In India, child height drops oﬀ strongly with birth order and, on average, the height
deﬁcit is concentrated among girls. Our hypothesis is that son preference links these two
facts. As prima facie evidence, Table 4 examines whether the birth order gradient in height
is accentuated for Indian religions and regions that have a stronger culture of son preference.
    In column (1) we compare the birth order gradient between Indian Hindus and Muslims.
Relative to Hinduism, Islam places less emphasis on needing a son for religious ceremonies,
and Islamic inheritance rules disfavor women less. Several papers provide evidence that
son preference, in turn, is weaker among Muslims; for example the sex ratio is less skewed
among Muslims than Hindus (Borooah and Iyer, 2005) and the gender gap in child mortality
is smaller (Bhalotra, Valente, and Soest, 2010). Column (1) shows that, relative to Indian
Hindus, Indian Muslims have a much more muted birth order gradient.
    Next, we compare Kerala and the rest of India. Historically, a distinctive feature of Ker-


                                              13
ala’s social organization has been the prevalence of matrilineality, which has been linked to
an absence of son preference (Oommen, 1999). Indeed, according to the 2001 census, Kerala
had a male-to-female ratio among children six and younger of 1.04, which is less skewed than
any other Indian state (nationwide average is 1.08) and in line with the naturally occurring
ratio. Strikingly, the birth order gradient in height observed in the rest of India is absent
for Kerala (column 2). Finally, we examine heterogeneity by the child sex ratio, calculated
for each state-by-urban cell (which is the ﬁnest administrative level at which we can match
census sex ratio data to the DHS). The sex ratio is increasing in the proportion male, so
the prediction is that low-sex-ratio regions should have a smaller birth order gradient, or
positive interaction terms. Here we do not ﬁnd evidence of heterogeneity.13
       In columns (4) to (6) we examine heterogeneity within India in prenatal and postnatal
investment. Again, Muslim families exhibit less steep investment drop-oﬀs with birth order
than Hindu families, and Kerala has a less steep gradient than other Indian states. We ﬁnd
that states with less skewed sex ratios have a smaller relative disadvantage for birth order
2, as predicted, but not for birth order 3 and higher.

4.2      Eldest son preference: How culture predicts height deﬁcits
       Roughly four ﬁfths of India’s population is born Hindu. Hinduism is a religion that
emphasizes the importance of male heirs – for propagating the bloodline, for inheritance,
for old-age care of parents, and for cremation rituals. This has perpetuated a culture of
eldest son preference among Hindu parents, who both desire at least one son and then,
once the eldest son is born, prioritize him over his siblings. Below we provide evidence that
suggests that this cultural norm underlies the observed birth order and gender patterns in
child height.
       Among boys, eldest son preference automatically generates a birth order gradient, since
the eldest son is, by deﬁnition, lower birth order than his brothers. Among girls, the mech-
anism is more subtle and relates to fertility-stopping rules. To understand this, consider
a family with ﬁxed resources that has a desired fertility of two children but wants at least
one son.14 Ex ante these two preferences are compatible because the likelihood of any child
  13
     With eldest son preference, the sex ratio is a poor proxy for son preference because it decreases sharply
with desired fertility and thus measures a mixture of son preference and desired fertility (Jayachandran,
2014).
  14
     In our data, the majority of Indian mothers report an ideal family size of 2 children.



                                                     14
being male is (very close to) 50 percent. If the ﬁrstborn child is a daughter, the parents will
realize that they may need to exceed their desired fertility to ensure a son. They will choose
how much to spend on this daughter given their available resources and an expected family
size of three. Now suppose their second child is also a girl. Her birth makes it certain that
they will need to exceed their desired fertility of two in order to have a son, and increases
their expected family size from three to four. When her parents are choosing how much to
spend on the second daughter, she will receive fewer early-life resources than her older sister
did because the expected family size has increased from three to four.
     For parents who do not yet have a son, each additional daughter’s birth causes them
to revise their fertility plans upward and reduce expenditures on the most recently born
daughter in order to save for their prospective eldest son. Moreover, parents might not fully
update their fertility plans when the ﬁrst daughter is born but rather wait until it becomes
certain that they will need to exceed their desired fertility. This myopia would amplify the
extent to which the birth of second or later daughter is a positive shock to expected family
size and thus to future expenses. In this manner, even absent an intrinsic parental preference
for ﬁrst-born daughters relative to later-born daughters, updating of fertility plans combined
with ﬁxed household resources imply fewer investments in later-born daughters.15
     In this model, an elder brother, especially one born at birth order 1, is advantageous
for a later-born girl. This prediction stands in contrast to the “sibling rivalry” hypothesis
whereby having brothers (relative to sisters) is associated with worse outcomes for a child
(Garg and Morduch, 1998). Below we will show empirically that the standard sibling com-
petition mechanism is indeed at play, but in terms of child height, it is outweighed by the
fertility stopping mechanism. In other words, the “sibling rivalry” hypothesis is germane
but incomplete because it fails to account for family size being endogenous to the gender
composition of siblings. One factor that distinguishes the two channels is that the fertility-
stopping mechanism only materializes once child gender is known, i.e., after birth, whereas
the competition mechanism exists before and after birth.16 Moreover, another prenatal ad-
vantage of no older brothers is that parents may invest heavily in the pregnancy given a 50
percent chance that the mother is pregnant with the family’s eldest son. In summary, we
  15
     Here, we describe the behavior of families that use fertility continuation rather than sex-selection to
have a son; we discuss how sex selection aﬀects our results in section 4.4.
  16
     More precisely, before birth, the fertility-stopping mechanism is based on expected gender; the mecha-
nism becomes stronger once gender is revealed after birth.



                                                    15
will test the following predictions:

Prediction 1. Relative to African counterparts, later parity girls with no older brothers in
India will

  a. Show larger height deﬁcits.

  b. Face larger disadvantages in postnatal than prenatal investments.

      Fertility-stopping behavior that is conditional on the gender of siblings also suggests that
while eldest sons in India should do well regardless of birth order, those born at very late
parity may suﬀer, as their parents signiﬁcantly exceeded their desired fertility. Speciﬁcally, a
family with desired fertility of two children and an eldest son born at birth order 1 or 2 need
not exceed its desired fertility. By contrast, an eldest son born at birth order 3 might fare
better than his sisters and better than any subsequent sons, but across families, he might be
disadvantaged relative to eldest sons born at earlier birth order because his family expended
resources on his two older sisters. This generates additional testable predictions related to
eldest sons:

Prediction 2. Relative to African counterparts, outcomes for eldest sons in India will vary
with birth order as follows:

  a. Eldest sons born within their family’s desired family size, even if not at birth order 1,
       should be favored equally.

  b. High birth order eldest sons will fare worse than eldest sons born at lower birth order.

4.3      Elder sibling composition and height deﬁcits: Evidence
      To test the predictions laid out above we ask how, conditional on birth order, the
composition of one’s older siblings aﬀects outcomes. Speciﬁcally, we estimate:


Yicm = α1 Ic + α2 Ic × 2nd Childimc + α3 Ic × 3rd+ Childimc + δ1 Ic × Girl + δ2 Ic × N oElderBro
             +δ3 Ic × Girl × N oElderBro + β1 2nd Childimc + β2 3rd+ Childimc + δ4 Girl × N oElderBro
             +δ5 Girlimc + δ6 N oElderBroimc + γXimc + imc                                          (2)


This is an expanded form of equation (1), where the key additional regressors are the inter-
action of the India dummy with a dummy for having no older brother (N oElderBro) and

                                                16
the triple interaction between India, having no older brother, and being a girl (I × Girl ×
N oElderBro). We are interested in δ2 which captures the diﬀerential outcome for a family’s
eldest son in India, and δ3 which captures the diﬀerential outcome for a girl in India who is
either the ﬁrstborn or only has sisters as older siblings.
    Table 5 reports the results. We begin by showing how the gender composition of existing
children aﬀects subsequent fertility plans diﬀerentially across India and Africa. In column
(1) we use the sample of mothers and the outcome is her reported desire to have additional
children. The coeﬃcient on Ic × N oElderBro is negative indicating that an Indian mother
who has had her eldest son is less likely to want more children. In contrast, the coeﬃcient
on Ic × Girl × N oElderBro is large, positive, and statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the birth
of a girl in a family that only has daughters increases Indian mothers relative desire for
additional children. Since the speciﬁcation controls for birth order and its interaction with
India, this is not simply a recast of the birth order patterns: Conditional on birth order, the
gender composition of children inﬂuences mothers’ preferences over fertility continuation.
These ﬁndings are robust to controlling for household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s
age interacted with India (column 2).
    Next, we consider child height as the outcome variable. In column (3) we observe a
positive and signiﬁcant coeﬃcient on Ic × N oElderBro: relative to his African counterpart,
an Indian eldest son enjoys a 0.12 z-score height advantage. The coeﬃcient on Ic × Girl ×
N oElderBro shows that the opposite is true for girls: having no older brother is worse than
having an older brother. The net eﬀect for girls of having an elder brother is lower in India
than Africa (Ic × N oElderBro + Ic × Girl × N oElderBro), but insigniﬁcant. The addition
of controls in column (4) weakens the signiﬁcance of these interaction coeﬃcients, but the
pattern of lower height for girls in India who only have sisters as elder siblings remains
reasonably strong.
    Further evidence on the oﬀsetting positive and negative eﬀects for girls of having a
brother comes from comparing patterns across prenatal and postnatal investments. In gen-
eral, child gender becomes known at birth (later in this section, we discuss robustness to
prenatal sex determination). Prior to this (i.e., at the prenatal stage), girls without older
brothers beneﬁt from the absence of sibling rivalry and also enjoy inputs intended for the
(possible) eldest son. Post-birth, the negative eﬀects of being born a daughter in a fam-
ily with no sons materialize as the parents re-optimize fertility and expenditure decisions.


                                              17
Thus, daughters without an older brother should be advantaged in terms of prenatal inputs
relative to postnatal inputs. To test this prediction, we use the data on the prenatal and
postnatal inputs (ﬁrst examined in Table 2) and restrict the sample to girls (because the
hypothesis we are testing refers to the treatment of daughters). Consistent with the negative
eﬀect of having no older brother materializing after birth (Prediction 1b), the coeﬃcient on
Ic × P renatalInputs × N oElderBro is positive and signiﬁcant.
      Next, we consider the predictions for eldest sons. Column (3) allows us to test Prediction
2a, which is that eldest sons born at later parity should also be favored, at least as long as
they were born within their family’s desired family size. The relative Indian advantage for an
eldest son at birth order 2 in India is given by Ic +Ic × 2nd Child +Ic × N oElderBro, which
is positive and signiﬁcant (p-value of 0.048 reported in column 3). Meanwhile, consistent
with Prediction 2b assuming families want two children (the modal preference in India), an
eldest son born at birth order 3 does worse in India than Africa (p-value of 0.004).
      Certainly eldest son preference does not explain all observed birth order patterns. For
example, in unreported results, we observe a birth order gradient even between the family’s
second and third sons. Nonetheless, several patterns in the data point strongly to eldest
son preference being an important determinant of resource allocation across siblings and
of fertility stopping behaviors in India. As a consequence, a cultural norm of eldest son
preference contributes to low child height in India and, relatedly, the strong birth order
gradient for child height that we document.

4.4      Robustness to sex-selection
      The above analysis assumes that a child’s sex is exogenous, but sex-selective abortions
may render observed child gender, especially among later parity children, endogenous in
India. In this subsection, we discuss how sex selection could aﬀect our results.
      Sex selection could cause diﬀerential selection into high fertility in India compared to
Africa (where sex-selection is much less common). The use of sex-selective abortion in India
varies with the mother’s literacy, for example (the use of ultrasound is more common among
literate women, and the sex ratio of their children is more skewed). If literate mothers are
more likely to use sex-selection to ensure a son within their desired family size of two or
three, while illiterate mothers instead just continue having children to try for a son, then
sex selection could cause poorer families to be relatively overrepresented at high birth order


                                               18
in India. This selection could cause bias because mother’s literacy likely has direct eﬀects
on child height. However, this type of selection does not seem to be biasing our estimates of
the steeper birth order gradient in India. Our results in Table 1 already sought to address
the more general possibility of diﬀerential selection into high fertility in India versus Africa.
The India-Africa gap in the birth order gradient is robust to allowing for diﬀerential eﬀects
by maternal literacy (and other family characteristics potentially correlated with use of sex
selection) in India, as well as to using family ﬁxed eﬀects. In addition, the steeper birth
order gradient in India is similar when we restrict the Indian subsample to primary sampling
units (PSUs) with low ultrasound use (Appendix Table 2, column 4).
     Thus, the type of selection problem that we have not yet addressed is related to child
gender: sex-selection could cause diﬀerential selection into having high parity girls; when we
observe girls at birth order 2 or 3, for example, they might be from relatively less literate
households in India. This selection problem could be exacerbated when we condition on older
siblings’ gender. For example, more educated Indian households could be overrepresented in
the group whose ﬁrst-born is a daughter and second-born is a son.
     It is important, therefore, to check if sex-selection biases our results when the regres-
sions exploit variation in child’s gender and siblings’ gender, e.g., those reported in Table 5.
Maternal education appears to be one of the strongest predictors of sex-selection in India
(Pörtner, 2014).17 It would be worrisome if our results were entirely driven by the literate
subsample, where the assumption of exogenous child gender is tenuous. Appendix Table 4
examines the same speciﬁcations as Table 5, columns (3)-(4) – how does height vary with
whether you have an older brother? – separately for the subsamples of illiterate women and
literate women. Reassuringly, the results are similar across the two subsamples; in particular,
the coeﬃcient on Ic × Girl × N oElderBro is very similar across the speciﬁcations.
     Use of sex-selection is more common in urban areas, so columns (5) to (8) of Appendix
Table 4 compare the results in rural and urban areas. Again, the coeﬃcients of interest are
similar across the two subsamples. Finally, in columns (9) and (10) we restrict the Indian
subsample to those PSUs with very low use of ultrasound, and the negative eﬀect of having
no older brother on girls’ height becomes stronger. This pattern is, in fact, what we would
  17
     Self-reported ultrasound use during pregnancy is 47 percent among literate women but only 12 percent
among illiterate women in India. The sex ratio in our Indian subsample at birth order 2 is 1.13 for literate
women and 1.06 among illiterate women. Ultrasound use in urban versus rural areas is 51 percent versus 20
percent. The sex ratio at birth order 2 is 1.14 in urban areas and 1.08 in rural areas.



                                                    19
predict. The fertility-stopping mechanism that generates this counterintuitive advantage of
having an older brother is only pertinent for families that use fertility continuation rather
than sex-selection to obtain their eldest son.
     In short, while child gender is certainly not exogenous in India, at least beyond birth
order 1, the key empirical patterns that we document – both the birth order gradient in
child height and the additional patterns that suggest the root cause is eldest son preference
– do not seem to be an artifact of selection bias caused by use of sex-selective abortions. In
fact, our argument is that eldest son preference generates a birth order gradient partly via
families trying again for a son, so it is reassuring that some of our predictions are seen more
strongly among “try again” families than among those that use sex-selection to obtain a son.


5     Alternative Explanations
     We argue that cultural norms that privilege the eldest son in India can help explain
the observed drop-oﬀ in resource allocation across siblings, and the resulting high rate of
child stunting. Below, we examine the empirical support for three classes of alternative
explanations for the height patterns: other health-related explanations, economic conditions,
and other norms related to child-rearing practices.
     Note that in addition to the evidence we present below, alternative explanations for
the birth order gradient in height would generally not predict the several other patterns
observed. These patterns include how height varies with older siblings’ gender, how health
inputs vary with birth order and gender, and how having an older brother diﬀerentially
impacts girls’ prenatal versus postnatal inputs. In this sense, eldest son preference is likely
unique in oﬀering a parsimonious explanation for not just the birth order gradient but also
a suite of other facts.

Health and disease environment
Mortality selection among children. Infant mortality is lower in India than Sub-Saharan
Africa. It is therefore natural to expect that relatively weak (and short) children are more
likely to survive through childhood in India than Sub-Saharan Africa. This, in turn, would
lower observed average child height in India relative to Africa. For mortality selection to fur-
ther explain India’s relatively steeper birth order gradient, infant survival in India would need
to be especially high for later-born children (where the largest Indian height disadvantage is


                                                 20
observed). In column (1) of Appendix Table 5 we show the opposite holds; infant mortality
among children of later birth order is signiﬁcantly higher in India than Africa. This fact
militates against the possibility that mortality selection underlies the steeper height gradi-
ent in India. Moreover, it is consistent with later-born Indian children being relatively more
malnourished and provides additional evidence that later-born Indian children fare poorly.

Maternal health. Indian mothers are on average six centimeters shorter than Sub-Saharan
African mothers (1.52 meters versus 1.58), and this, arguably, reﬂects the fact that Indian
women’s health at the beginning of their childbearing years is worse. It is plausible that across
successive childbirths, Indian mothers’ health deteriorates more rapidly to the detriment of
infant health. This possibility is related to Deaton and Drèze’s (2009) gradual catch-up
hypothesis which posits that it could take generations to close the height gap in India if a
mother’s malnutrition and poor health as a child, in turn, aﬀect her children’s size.
     To test this hypothesis, we ask whether mothers’ childhood malnutrition and poor
health, as proxied by their height, have diﬀerential eﬀects by birth order. Column (2) of
Appendix Table 5 presents regressions where we include interactions between mother’s height
and birth order as additional covariates. This allows us to examine whether there is an eﬀect
of maternal height that varies by child’s birth order and can “knock out” the stronger birth
order gradient in India. The key coeﬃcients on M other sHeight × BirthOrder dummies
are positively signed but small and statistically insigniﬁcant. Importantly, they leave the
coeﬃcients on India interacted with higher birth order dummies unaﬀected.

Disease environment Another possibility is that later born Indian children face a worse
disease environment, related to poor sanitation. The likelihood that a household reports open
defecation is 46 percent in India and 32 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa. Spears (2013) points
to the high rate of open defecation in India as a contributor to the prevalence of child stunting.
Even if a household’s sanitation infrastructure does not change over time, later-born children
may have more exposure to disease because older siblings expose them to pathogens or they
receive care from inferior caregivers. Appendix Table 5, column (3) examines whether there
is a stronger birth order gradient for diarrhea in India. Indian mothers’ responses suggest
an increase in the likelihood that third and later-born children have had diarrhea in last two
weeks, but the eﬀect size is small. Column (4) directly examines whether open defecation
can (statistically) explain the India birth order gradient. The point estimates suggest that



                                               21
the prevalence of open defecation has, if anything, smaller consequences for height for higher
birth order children; in any case, controlling for the rate of open defecation does not diminish
the magnitude of the India-Africa birth order gradient in child height. Needless to say, it
remains possible that open defecation contributes to low child height in India; absent open
defecation, the intercept term for India could be higher.

Economic conditions
       Higher birth order children are born later in their parents’ lives, on average. If families
have a limited ability to intertemporally smooth consumption, then resources available per
child will vary with the time proﬁle of household income. If Indian parents have relatively less
income than Sub-Saharan African parents when later parity children are born, then these
children may receive relatively fewer resources and have worse outcomes. (Here, age, or
more speciﬁcally marriage duration, is the relevant measure of “time,” rather than calendar
time.)18
       This is perhaps the most challenging alternative to test; while we can compare child
height across siblings, we lack time-varying measures of household income or wealth that
capture the family’s resources when those siblings were born. Instead, we provide an in-
direct test: holding constant number of children born, we compare maternal nutritional
inputs and outcomes across pregnant and not-pregnant women. If Indian households have
less income over time, then maternal food consumption should decline in India relative to
Africa, independent of their pregnancy status. In contrast, our preference-based explanation
suggests that later-in-life declines in maternal consumption should be concentrated among
pregnant women.
       Data on food consumption were collected for Indian and Sub-Saharan African mothers
who have given birth in the last three years (hence, our sample excludes women who have
no children or are pregnant with their ﬁrst child). We create a consumption index which
averages ﬁve indicator variables for whether the mother reports consuming speciﬁc food items
during the recall period. The data are fairly crude, asking whether the mother consumed a
type of food but not the amount, but they give an indication of dietary diversity and the
nutritional inputs for women. Essentially everyone has consumed starchy foods, so we focus
on the categories with variation (and which are important sources of protein and vitamins),
 18
      A related idea, which seems less plausible but is possible, is diﬀerences in the lifecycle proﬁle of prices.



                                                        22
namely leafy vegetables, fruit, dairy, and meat/ﬁsh/eggs. The regression speciﬁcation allows
impacts to vary by a woman’s pregnancy status, family size, and their interaction.
    Appendix Table 6, column (1) shows a sharper birth order gradient for pregnant Indian
women (the omitted category), i.e., a greater drop-oﬀ in food consumption across successive
pregnancies. Thus, Indian mothers who are pregnant with their third or higher birth order
child are disadvantaged nutritionally. (Indian women report higher consumption levels than
African women across all pregnancies; our results demonstrate that the gradient is sharper
for Indians.) The point estimates also suggest a much smaller relative decline in consumption
among non-pregnant Indian mothers (positive triple interaction term for India, has two or
more children, and not pregnant). This evidence weighs against diﬀerent time proﬁles of
income. In column (2) we consider mother’s hemoglobin levels as the outcome and again
observe a diﬀerential gradient among women as they have more children. And as with food
consumption, this gradient varies with a woman’s pregnancy status. Speciﬁcally, across
successive pregnancies the drop oﬀ for Indian mothers exceeds that for Sub-Saharan African
mothers (negative coeﬃcients for India interacted with number of children), but the gradient
is much smaller among non-pregnant women (positive triple interactions). This is further
evidence against the hypothesis that ﬁnancial resources of Indian households dropping oﬀ
more steeply over the lifecycle compared to African households underlies the observed birth
order patterns.
    A complementary test is to consider the sample of Indian couples where we observe
consumption outcomes for both spouses. (The male consumption module is, unfortunately,
ﬁelded in very few Sub-Saharan African surveys.) A caveat is that nutritional needs vary by
gender, and diﬀerentially so when a woman is pregnant. Also, the age proﬁle of hemoglobin
diﬀers between even healthy men and women and is aﬀected by pregnancy. The results in
columns (3) and (4) are noisy but the pattern of coeﬃcients mirrors that in columns (1)
and (2). Declines in food consumption in India as family size increases are concentrated
among pregnant women and do not extend to their husbands. Hence, the gender gap in
consumption widens during pregnancies, suggesting diﬀerential investment in children rather
than a general decline in the way women are treated over time. We do not see the same
pattern for hemoglobin, however.




                                             23
Other cultural norms
Communal child-rearing In addition to income, another constrained resource is parental
time. Parents might have less time to take care of later-born infants because they also
have older children to look after. One reason this scarcity of time might be more acute in
India is because in Sub-Saharan Africa there is a possibly stronger norm of relatives and
neighbors helping raise children (Goody, 1982; Akresh, 2009). We create a proxy for the
extent of “communal child-rearing” at the PSU level, namely the proportion of women’s
children under age 10 years who are non-resident in their household. This proportion is
indeed higher in Africa (9.8 percent) than India (2.3 percent). This factor, however, does
not explain the India-Africa diﬀerential birth order gradient. Appendix Table 5, column (5)
shows that while the extent of communal child-rearing does indeed dampen the birth order
gradient, the eﬀect size and gap in this practice across Sub-Saharan Africa and India are too
small to explain much of the stronger birth order gradient in India.

Land scarcity A ﬁnal possibility we consider is that the high relative investment in earlier born
children in India reﬂects historical land scarcity. In Africa, where land is more abundant, later
born children could have been (and could still be) more valuable in helping with agriculture.
We test this idea by using the 1961 ratio of population to land area as a proxy for historical
land scarcity. By this metric, land is indeed more scarce in India than Africa. However, as
shown in Appendix Table 5, column (6), this factor cannot explain why height drops oﬀ so
steeply with birth order in India.


6     Conclusion
    This paper sheds light on the puzzlingly high rate of stunting in India by comparing
child height-for-age in India and Sub-Saharan Africa. We present three facts that support
the “environment” side in the genes-versus-environment debate and, more speciﬁcally, point
to parents’ intra-family allocation decisions as a key factor underlying child malnutrition in
India. First, among ﬁrstborns, Indians are actually taller than Africans; the height disadvan-
tage appears with the second child and increases with birth order. The particularly strong
birth order gradient in height in India is robust to including family ﬁxed eﬀects, which helps
rule out most selection concerns. Second, investments in successive pregnancies and higher
birth order children decline faster in India than Africa. Third, the India-Africa birth order


                                               24
gradient in child height is larger for boys if the family has a son already; Indian parents seem
to disinvest in their subsequent children once their eldest son is born. Meanwhile, for Indian
girls, second-borns are relatively disadvantaged by having no elder brothers, consistent with
the family conserving resources in anticipation of having another child to try for a son. These
facts suggest that parental preferences – speciﬁcally, a strong desire to have and invest in an
eldest son – underlie much of India’s child stunting.
    One might expect unequal allocation in the household to matter less as India develops.
With greater ﬁnancial resources, all children might be well nourished enough to achieve
their height potential. However, when we compare households by wealth, the Indian birth
order gradient in height is actually relatively larger among wealthier households. Thus,
India appears to still be far from the level of wealth at which, despite unequal allocation,
children are all suﬃciently nourished. This implies that even as India develops, the problem
of malnutrition might be slow to fade, unless policies are put in place that inﬂuence or
counteract the intrahousehold allocation decisions that parents are making. Moreover, eldest
son preference leads parents to invest in their children unequally in ways that extend beyond
malnutrition. For instance, do investments in children have diminishing returns? If so,
the skewed parental decisions that we have shown could be depressing India’s total human
capital and economic growth – as well as creating within-family inequality.




                                              25
References
Akresh, R. (2009): “Flexibility of Household Structure: Child Fostering Decisions in Burk-
 ina Faso,” Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), 976–997.

Arnold, F., et al. (1998): “Son Preference, the Family-Building Process and Child
 Mortality in India,” Population Studies, 52, 301–315.

Barker, D. J. P., et al. (1993): “Fetal Nutrition and Cardiovascular Disease in Adult
 Life,” The Lancet, 341(8850), 938–941.

Barker, D. J. P., and C. Osmond (1986): “Infant Mortality, Childhood Nutrition, and
 Ischaemic Heart Disease in England and Wales,” The Lancet, 327(8489), 1077–1081.

Becker, G. S., and H. G. Lewis (1973): “On the Interaction Between the Quantity and
 Quality of Children,” 81(2, Part 2), S279–S288.

Behrman, J. R. (1988): “Nutrition, Health, Birth Order and Seasonality: Intrahousehold
 Allocation among Children in Rural India,” Journal of Development Economics, 28(1),
 43–62.

Behrman, J. R., and P. Taubman (1986): “Birth Order, Schooling, and Earnings,”
 Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3).

Belmont, L., Z. A. Stein, and M. W. Susser (1975): “Comparison of Associations of
 Birth Order With Intelligence Test Score and Height,” Nature, 255(5503), 54–56.

Bhalotra, S., C. Valente, and A. V. Soest (2010): “The Puzzle of Muslim Advantage
 in Child Survival in India,” Journal of Health Economics, 29(2), 191–204.

Bhandari, N., et al. (2002): “Growth Performance of Aﬄuent Indian Children Is Similar
 to That in Developed Countries,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 80(3), 189–
 195.

Black, S., P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2007): “Older and Wiser? Birth Order and
 IQ of Young Men,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13237.

Borooah, V. K., and S. Iyer (2005): “Religion, Literacy and the Female-to-Male Ratio,”
 Economic and Political Weekly, 40(5), 419–427.

Case, A., and C. Paxson (2008): “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
 Outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3), 499–532.

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza (1994): The History and Geography
 of Human Genes. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Clark, S. (2000): “Son Preference and Sex Composition of Children: Evidence from India,”
 Demography, 37(1), 95–108.



                                           26
Coffey, D., D. Spears, and R. Khera (2013): “Women’s Status and Children’s Height
 in India: Evidence from Joint Rural Households,” Working paper.
de Onis, M., A. W. Onyango, E. Borghi, C. Garza, H. Yang, et al. (2006):
  “Comparison of the World Health Organization (WHO) Child Growth Standards and the
  National Center for Health Statistics/WHO International Growth Reference: Implications
  for Child Health Programmes,” Public Health Nutrition, 9(7), 942–947.
Deaton, A. (2007): “Height, Health and Development,” Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Science, 104(33), 13232–13237.
Deaton, A., and J. Drèze (2009): “Food and Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpreta-
 tions,” Economic & Political Weekly, 46(7), 42–65.
Dyson, T., and M. Moore (1983): “On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy, and De-
 mographic Behavior in India,” Population and Development Review, 9(1), 35–60.
Falkner, F., and J. Tanner (1989): “The Low-Birth-Weight Infant,” in Human Growth:
  A Comprehensive Treatise, ed. by F. Falkner, and J. Tanner, vol. 1, pp. 391–413. Plenum,
  New York.
Floud, R., R. W. Fogel, B. Harris, and S. C. Hong (2011): The Changing Body:
  Health, Nutrition, and Human Development in the Western World Since 1700. Cambridge
  University Press.
Garg, A., and J. Morduch (1998): “Sibling Rivalry and the Gender Gap: Evidence from
 Child Health Outcomes in Ghana,” Journal of Population Economics, 11(4), 471–493.
Glewwe, P., and E. A. Miguel (2007): “The Impact of Child Health and Nutrition on
 Education in Less Developed Countries,” in Handbook of Development Economics, ed. by
 T. P. Schultz, and J. Strauss, vol. 4, pp. 3561–3606. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Goody, E. (1982): Parenthood and Social Reproduction: Fostering and Occupational Roles
 in West Africa. Cambridge University Press, Cambidge, UK.
Gupta, M. D. (1987): “Selective Discrimination Against Female Children in Rural Punjab,
 India,” Population and Development Review, 13(1), 77–100.
Gwatkin, D., et al. (2007): “Socio-Economic Diﬀerences in Health, Nutrition and Pop-
 ulation Within Developing Countries: An Overview,” Health, Nutrition and Population
 Network Informal Paper Series, World Bank.
Hoddinott, J., et al. (2013): “Adult Consequences of Growth Failure in Early Child-
 hood,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.
Horton, S. (1988): “Birth Order and Child Nutritional Status: Evidence from the Philip-
 pines,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 36(2), 341–354.
IIPS (2010): District Level Household and Facility Survey (DLHS-3), 2007-08. International
  Institute for Population Sciences, Mumbai.

                                           27
Jayachandran, S. (2014): “Fertility Decline and Missing Women,” Working Paper 20272,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jayachandran, S., and I. Kuziemko (2011): “Why Do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less
  Than Boys: Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 126(3), 1485–1538.

Jensen, R. (2003): “Equal Treatment, Unequal Outcomes? Generating Sex Inequality
  Through Fertility Behavior,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Mishra, V., T. K. Roy, and R. D. Retherford (2004): “Sex Diﬀerentials in Childhood
 Feeding, Health Care and Nutritional Status,” Population and Development Review, 30(2),
 269–295.

Oommen, M. A. (1999): Rethinking Development: Kerala’s Development Experience, vol. 2.
 Concept Publishing Company, New Delhi.

Oster, E. (2009): “Does Increased Access Increase Equality? Gender and Child Health
 Investments in India,” Journal of Development Economics, 89(1), 62–76.

Panagariya, A. (2013): “Does India Really Suﬀer from Worse Child Malnutrition Than
  Sub-Saharan Africa?,” Economic and Political Weekly, 48(18).

Pörtner, C. C. (2014): “Sex Selective Abortions, Fertility, and Birth Spacing,” mimeo,
  Seattle University.

Proos, L. A. (2009): “Growth and Development of Indian Children Adopted in Sweden,”
 Indian Journal of Medical Research, 130, 646–650.

Ramalingaswami, V., U. Jonsson, and J. Rohde (1996): “Commentary: The Asian
 Enigma,” The Progress of Nations, UNICEF, (available at www.unicef.org/pon96/
 nuenigma.htm).

         (1997): “Malnutrition: A South Asian Enigma,” in Malnutrition in South Asia: A
  Regional Proﬁle, ed. by S. Gillespie, no. 5, pp. 11–22. UNICEF Regional Oﬃce for South
  Asia, Kathmandu, Nepal.

Rosenzweig, M. R., and T. P. Schultz (1982): “Market Opportunities, Genetic En-
 dowments, and Intrafamily Resource Distribution: Child Survival in Rural India,” The
 American Economic Review, 72(4), 803–815.

Savage, T., J. G. B. Derraik, H. L. Miles, et al. (2013): “Birth Order Progressively
  Aﬀects Childhood Height,” Clinical Endocrinology, 79(3), 379?–385.

Sen, A. (1990): “More Than 100 Million Women Are Missing,” New York Review of Books,
  37(20).

Spears, D. (2013): “How Much International Variation in Child Height Can Sanitation
  Explain?,” Mimeo, Princeton University.

                                          28
Strauss, J., and D. Thomas (1998): “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 36(2), 766–817.

Sulloway, F. J. (1996): Born To Rebel. Pantheon, New York.

Tanner, J., M. Healy, R. Lockhart, J. MacKenzie, and R. Whitehouse (1956):
 “Aberdeen Growth Study: I. The Prediction of Adult Body Measurements from Measure-
 ments Taken Each Year from Birth to 5 Years,” Archives of Disease in Childhood, 31(159),
 372.

Tarozzi, A. (2008): “Growth Reference Charts and the Nutritional Status of Indian Chil-
 dren,” Economics and Human Biology, 6(3), 455–468.

        (2012): “Some Facts about Boy versus Girl Health Indicators in India: 19922005,”
  CESifo Economic Studies, 58(2), 296–321.

Tarozzi, A., and A. Mahajan (2007): “Child Nutrition in India in the Nineties,” Eco-
 nomic Development and Cultural Change, 55(3), 441–486.

UNICEF (2013): Improving Child Nutrition: The Achievable Imperative for Global Progress.
 UNICEF, New York.

        (2014): “Levels and Trends in Child Malnutrition: UNICEF/WHO/The World
  Bank Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates,” Discussion paper.

WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group (2006a): “Assessment of Dif-
 ferences in Linear Growth Among Populations in the WHO Multicentre Growth Reference
 Study,” Acta Paediatrica, 450.

        (2006b): WHO Child Growth Standards: Methods and Development. World Health
  Organization, Geneva, (available at http://www.who.int/childgrowth/standards/
  technical_report/en/index.html).




                                           29
                                                  Figure 1: Child height versus national GDP

                                 -.5


                                                                                             SEN
   Mean height-for-age z-score




                                                                                                          COG


                                                                                      GHA     STP                   SWZ
                                 -1




                                                                          SLE                                             NAM

                                                                                       KEN
                                                                          GIN
                                                                            MLI                     CMR
                                                                                            LSO
                                            ZWE         LBR                     UGA

                                                                                TCD
                                                                                      TZA
                                 -1.5




                                                                                             ZMB
                                                                          TZA
                                            COD
                                                                                       LSO          NGA   IND
                                                                         MDG
                                                              ETH
                                                                         RWA
                                                                NER
                                                                 MWI
                                 -2




                                        5               6                   7                                   8               9
                                                              ln(GDP per capita) in birth year

                                                    Africa       India                        Africa fitted values




The blue dots and red triangle indicate survey-speciﬁc means for Sub-Saharan Africa and Indian
surveys, respectively. The mean is calculated over all children less than 60 months old with
anthropometric data. The blue line is the best linear ﬁt for Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                                         30
                                   Figure 2: Child height in India and Africa, by child’s birth order


                   -1.2



                                                   -1.34
     Mean height-for-age z-score
                            -1.4




                                                                   -1.37
                                           -1.39


                                                                           -1.48             -1.47
     -1.8       -1.6




                                                                                                      -1.83
                   -2




                                        Birth order 1           Birth order 2              Birth order 3+

                                                               Africa              India




The ﬁgure depicts the mean child height-for-age z-scores for Sub-Saharan Africa and India, by the
birth order of the child. The mean is calculated over all children less than 60 months old with
anthropometric data.




                                                                  31
                                                Table 1: Birth order gradient in the India height gap


                                            HFA z-score       HFA z-score        HFA z-score       HFA z-score        HFA z-score          Stunted
                                               (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                 (6)
       India                                  -0.110∗∗∗          0.080∗∗∗
                                               [0.014]            [0.023]
       India × 2nd child                                        -0.168∗∗∗          -0.144∗∗∗         -0.158∗∗∗          -0.263∗∗          0.105∗∗∗
                                                                 [0.030]            [0.030]           [0.030]            [0.110]           [0.027]
       India × 3rd+ child                                       -0.401∗∗∗          -0.211∗∗∗         -0.231∗∗∗          -0.414∗∗          0.141∗∗∗
                                                                 [0.029]            [0.029]           [0.036]            [0.193]           [0.046]
       2nd child                                                 0.038∗∗           0.067∗∗∗            0.021            -0.208∗∗∗         0.045∗∗∗
                                                                 [0.019]            [0.019]           [0.019]            [0.066]           [0.014]
                                                                -0.063∗∗∗          0.057∗∗∗          -0.106∗∗∗          -0.465∗∗∗         0.093∗∗∗
32




       3rd+ child
                                                                 [0.017]            [0.017]           [0.021]            [0.106]           [0.023]
       Africa mean of outcome                   -1.435            -1.435            -1.435             -1.435            -1.435             0.390
       HH covariates × India                      No                No               Yes                Yes                No                No
       Child’s age × India                        No                No                No                Yes               Yes                Yes
       Mother’s age at birth × India              No                No                No                Yes                No                No
       Mother FEs                                 No                No                No                 No               Yes                Yes
       Observations                            174,157           174,157           174,157            174,157           174,157            174,157

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. HFA z-score
     is the child height-for-age z-score, and Stunted is deﬁned as having an HFA z-score ≤ 2. 2nd child is an indicator for children whose birth order is 2.
     3rd+ child is an indicator for children whose birth order is 3 or higher. Child age dummies are included in all columns, and survey month controls
     are included in Columns 1-4. Survey month controls are linear, quadratic and cubic terms for a continuous variable representing the month and year
     of the survey. In Columns 3-4, the main eﬀect India is included in the regression but is not shown. In Columns 5-6, the main eﬀect India is absorbed
     by child’s age × India or a full set of mother ﬁxed eﬀects. Household covariates in Columns 3-4 include DHS wealth index, mother’s literacy, rural,
     dummies for missing values of literacy, and household covariates × India. In Column 4, a linear variable for mother’s age at birth and mother’s age
     at birth × India are included in the regression. See Data Appendix for further details.
                                                                  Table 2: Child health inputs


                                                      Prenatal inputs                                    Postnatal inputs
                                                   Mother        Mother’s                    Postnatal
                                     Total                                    Delivery at                     Child        Child’s
                                                  took iron       total                        check                                      Pooled       Child’s Hb
                                    prenatal                                    health                     taking iron   total vacci-
                                                   supple-       tetanus                     within 2                                     inputs         level
                                     visits                                    facility                       pills        nations
                                                    ments         shots                       months
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)            (9)
     India × 2nd child              -0.448∗∗∗       -0.012         0.028       -0.035∗∗∗       -0.010        -0.002         -0.073∗       -0.005        -0.103∗∗∗
                                     [0.056]        [0.008]       [0.017]       [0.006]        [0.013]       [0.005]        [0.042]       [0.004]        [0.029]
     India × 3rd+ child             -1.140∗∗∗     -0.095∗∗∗        0.009       -0.107∗∗∗        0.012         0.003         -0.342∗∗∗    -0.050∗∗∗      -0.146∗∗∗
                                     [0.059]       [0.009]        [0.019]       [0.008]        [0.013]       [0.006]         [0.055]      [0.004]        [0.033]
     2nd child                      -0.123∗∗∗       -0.005       -0.095∗∗∗     -0.077∗∗∗       0.020∗∗       -0.004         -0.064∗∗     -0.033∗∗∗       -0.024
                                     [0.031]        [0.005]       [0.012]       [0.004]        [0.010]       [0.004]         [0.028]      [0.002]        [0.021]
33




     3rd+ child                     -0.536∗∗∗     -0.014∗∗∗      -0.204∗∗∗     -0.143∗∗∗      -0.019∗∗      -0.022∗∗∗       -0.378∗∗∗    -0.079∗∗∗      -0.101∗∗∗
                                     [0.032]       [0.005]        [0.013]       [0.004]        [0.010]       [0.005]         [0.032]      [0.003]        [0.023]
     Africa mean of outcome           3.828         0.617         1.406          0.469          0.293         0.112          6.187         0.627         10.145
     India mean of outcome            4.031         0.687         1.867          0.449          0.090         0.055          6.593         0.754         10.271
     Household & age controls          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
     Observations                    120,570       122,977       122,530        173,772        39,248        95,986         127,544       802,627        91,505


     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Control
     variables included are survey month controls, child age dummies, household covariates, mother’s age at birth, and household covariates, child’s age,
     and mother’s age interacted with India. The main eﬀect India is included in all regressions but is not shown. Total prenatal visits, mother took
     iron supplements, mother’s total tetanus shots, and postnatal check within 2 months are only available for the youngest living child in the family;
     postnatal check within 2 months is collected in only 13 African surveys. Delivery at health facility, child taking iron pills, and total vaccinations are
     available for all births in the past 5 years; child taking iron pills is collected in only 10 African surveys; total vaccinations is only available for children
     ages 13-59 months. In Column 8, dummies for 4 prenatal and 3 postnatal inputs are pooled together to create the outcome. The dummies are: 1)
     total prenatal visits >4; 2) mother took iron supplements; 3) mother’s total tetanus shots >1; 4) child was delivered at a health facility; 5) child is
     taking iron pills; 6) total vaccinations >7; 7) child had postnatal check within 2 months of birth. See Data Appendix for further details.
                                           Table 3: Child gender and the birth order gradient in height


                                      HFA            HFA            HFA            HFA            HFA            HFA           Pooled         Pooled
                                     z-score        z-score        z-score        z-score        z-score        z-score        inputs         inputs
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
     India                          0.151∗∗∗                                      -0.020         -0.024                                      -0.051∗∗∗
                                     [0.032]                                      [0.018]        [0.018]                                      [0.002]
     India × Girl                   -0.146∗∗∗        0.039         -0.151        -0.182∗∗∗      -0.164∗∗∗       -0.128∗       -0.041∗∗       -0.008∗∗∗
                                     [0.044]        [0.133]        [0.262]        [0.023]        [0.023]        [0.071]        [0.016]        [0.003]
     India × Girl × 2nd child        -0.077         -0.054          0.038                                                      -0.005
                                     [0.063]        [0.062]        [0.229]                                                     [0.008]
     India × Girl × 3rd+ child       -0.057         -0.024          0.036                                                      -0.008
                                     [0.056]        [0.069]        [0.207]                                                     [0.009]
34




     India × 2nd child              -0.131∗∗∗      -0.132∗∗∗       -0.277∗                                                     -0.003
                                     [0.044]        [0.044]        [0.160]                                                     [0.005]
     India × 3rd+ child             -0.373∗∗∗      -0.217∗∗∗      -0.430∗∗                                                    -0.047∗∗∗
                                     [0.040]        [0.050]        [0.218]                                                     [0.006]
     Africa mean of outcome          -1.435         -1.435         -1.435         -1.435         -1.435         -1.435         0.448          0.448
     Household & age controls          No            Yes             No             No            Yes             No            Yes            Yes
     Mother FEs                        No             No            Yes             No             No            Yes            No             No
     Observations                   174,157        174,157        174,157        174,157        174,157        174,157        802,627        802,627

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Child
     age dummies are included in all regressions, and all columns control for survey month except for Columns 3 and 6, which have mother ﬁxed eﬀects.
     Columns 2, 5, 7, and 8 additionally include household covariates and mother’s age. Columns 2 and 7 have household covariates, child’s age, and
     mother’s age interacted with Girl, India, and Girl × India. The main eﬀect India is included in Columns 2 and 7 but is not shown. In Columns 1-3
     and 7, coeﬃcients for Girl, 2nd child and 3rd+ child birth order dummies, the birth order dummies × Girl are included in the regression but are not
     shown. In Columns 4-6 and 8, the main eﬀect Girl is included in the regression but is not shown.
                                                Table 4: Heterogeneity within India by son preference


                                                                                      Below-median                                          Below-median
     Gender preference proxy:                        Muslim            Kerala                              Muslim            Kerala
                                                                                      child sex ratio                                       child sex ratio

                                                  HFA z-score       HFA z-score        HFA z-score      Pooled inputs     Pooled inputs     Pooled inputs
                                                     (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)
     Gender pref proxy × 2nd child                   0.147∗∗           0.223∗              0.062            0.007            0.042∗∗∗          0.011∗∗
                                                     [0.067]           [0.132]            [0.046]          [0.008]            [0.009]          [0.005]
     Gender pref proxy × 3rd+ child                  0.203∗∗            0.249              0.001           0.032∗∗∗          0.081∗∗∗           -0.001
                                                     [0.081]           [0.206]            [0.057]           [0.009]           [0.014]           [0.007]
     2nd child                                      -0.153∗∗∗         -0.138∗∗∗         -0.164∗∗∗         -0.030∗∗∗         -0.030∗∗∗         -0.034∗∗∗
                                                     [0.027]           [0.023]           [0.033]           [0.003]           [0.003]           [0.004]
35




     3rd+ child                                     -0.363∗∗∗         -0.325∗∗∗         -0.304∗∗∗         -0.117∗∗∗         -0.117∗∗∗         -0.113∗∗∗
                                                     [0.033]           [0.029]           [0.041]           [0.004]           [0.003]           [0.005]
     p-value: Gender pref proxy × 2nd child           0.934             0.514             0.002             0.001             0.182             0.000
              + 2nd child=0
     p-value: Gender pref proxy × 3rd+ child          0.031             0.710             0.000             0.000             0.010             0.000
              + 3rd+ child=0
                                                    Hindus &                                              Hindus &
     Sample                                                             India             India                               India             India
                                                    Muslims                                               Muslims
     Household & age controls                          Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     Observations                                    36,657            43,043             43,043           214,400           250,702           250,702


     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. The sample
     is restricted to India and control variables included in all columns are survey month controls, child age dummies, household covariates, mother’s age,
     and household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age × Gender pref proxy. The main eﬀect Gender pref proxy is included in all regressions but is
     not shown. Child sex ratio is deﬁned as the number of boys aged 0-6 years over the number of girls aged 0-6 years in the respondent’s state-by-rural
     cell. See Data Appendix for further details.
                                                             Table 5: Heterogeneity by the gender of older siblings


                                                               Wants more            Wants more
                                                                                                           HFA z-score            HFA z-score          Pooled inputs         Pooled inputs
                                                                children              children
                                                                  (1)                   (2)                      (3)                   (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                                                                        ∗∗∗                                                                                         ∗∗∗
     India                                                       -0.153                                         0.028                                     -0.120
                                                                  [0.013]                                      [0.056]                                     [0.009]
     India × 2nd child                                           -0.415∗∗∗             -0.433∗∗∗               -0.074               -0.106∗∗              -0.025∗∗∗              -0.016∗∗
                                                                  [0.012]               [0.012]                [0.049]               [0.049]               [0.008]                [0.008]
     India × 3rd+ child                                          -0.315∗∗∗             -0.460∗∗∗             -0.281∗∗∗              -0.179∗∗∗             -0.091∗∗∗             -0.043∗∗∗
                                                                  [0.012]               [0.013]               [0.055]                [0.060]               [0.009]               [0.009]
     India × Girl                                                -0.163∗∗∗             -0.112∗∗∗                0.017                 0.166
                                                                  [0.019]               [0.033]                [0.078]               [0.151]
     India × No elder brother                                    -0.032∗∗∗                0.014               0.123∗∗∗                0.060                -0.010                 -0.009
                                                                  [0.010]                [0.010]               [0.045]               [0.044]               [0.008]                [0.007]
     India × Girl × No elder brother                              0.238∗∗∗              0.227∗∗∗              -0.163∗∗               -0.115∗
36




                                                                   [0.016]               [0.015]               [0.064]               [0.064]
     India × Prenatal input                                                                                                                               0.215∗∗∗               0.163∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                           [0.011]                [0.020]
     India × Prenatal input × No elder brother                                                                                                             0.019∗∗                0.015∗
                                                                                                                                                           [0.009]                [0.009]
     Africa mean of outcome                                        0.679                  0.679                -1.435                -1.435                 0.447                 0.447
     p-value: India × No elder brother +                           0.000                  0.000                 0.412                 0.247
       India × Girl × No elder brother=0
     p-value: India + India × 2nd child +                                                                       0.048
       India × No elder brother=0
     p-value: India + India × 3rd+ child +                                                                      0.004
       India × No elder brother=0
     Sample                                                      Mothers                Mothers               Children              Children                Girls                 Girls
     Household & age controls                                      No                     Yes                   No                    Yes                    No                    Yes
     Observations                                                119,056                119,056               174,157               174,157                392,180               392,180

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Control variables included are survey
     month controls and child age dummies. Even columns control for mother’s age, household covariates, and household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age × India. Columns 2
     and 4 additionally include household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age × Girl and India × Girl. Column 6 also includes household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age ×
     Prenatal input and Prenatal input × India. The main eﬀect India is included in even columns but is not shown. All other main eﬀects (2nd child, 3rd+ child, Girl, No elder brother,
     Prenatal input, and interactions) in addition to India × Prenatal input × 2nd child and India × Prenatal input × 3rd+ child are included but not shown. The sample in Columns 1-2
     is mothers, and the child and sibling gender variables are in reference to the youngest child in the household (in the case that the youngest child is a twin or a triplet, the latest born is
     used). The sample in Columns 3-4 is the main sample of children aged 1-59 months, and the sample in Columns 5-6 is girls aged 1-59 months. See Data Appendix for further details.
                                                                 Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics


                                                                India     Africa                                                                           India     Africa
                                                              subsample subsample                                                                        subsample subsample
      Mother’s age at birth (years)                              24.767        26.954              Child’s age (months)                                    30.051         28.062
                                                                 [5.239]       [6.857]                                                                    [16.872]       [17.026]
      Mother’s total children born                                2.745         3.876              Child is a girl                                          0.465          0.494
                                                                 [1.829]       [2.543]                                                                     [0.499]        [0.500]
      Preceding birth interval (months)                          36.333        38.962              Child’s birth order                                      2.625          3.742
                                                                [21.431]      [22.247]                                                                     [1.808]        [2.477]
      Total prenatal visits                                       4.031         3.828              Child’s HFA z-score                                     -1.575         -1.435
                                                                 [3.483]       [3.095]                                                                     [2.114]        [2.466]
      Mother took iron supplements                                0.687         0.617              Child is stunted                                         0.414          0.390
                                                                 [0.464]       [0.486]                                                                     [0.493]        [0.488]
      Mother’s total tetanus shots                                1.867         1.406              Child’s hemoglobin level (g/dl)                         10.271         10.145
                                                                 [0.941]       [1.202]                                                                     [1.568]        [1.680]
      Delivery at health facility                                 0.449         0.469              Child is deceased                                        0.050          0.072
                                                                 [0.497]       [0.499]                                                                     [0.217]        [0.259]
      Postnatal check within 2 months                             0.090         0.293              Child taking iron pills                                  0.055          0.112
                                                                 [0.287]       [0.455]                                                                     [0.228]        [0.315]
37




      Mother is literate                                          0.584         0.492              Child’s total vaccinations                               6.746          6.296
                                                                 [0.493]       [0.500]                                                                     [2.744]        [3.108]
      DHS wealth index                                           -0.219        -0.145              Diarrhea in last 2 weeks                                 0.095          0.157
                                                                 [0.949]       [0.928]                                                                     [0.293]        [0.364]
      Rural                                                       0.632         0.719              Open defecation                                          0.456          0.322
                                                                 [0.482]       [0.449]                                                                     [0.498]        [0.467]
      Mother wants more children                                  0.336         0.679              % non-resident among children                            0.023          0.098
                                                                 [0.473]       [0.467]                                                                     [0.039]        [0.086]
      Mother’s height (meters)                                    1.519         1.583              Land scarcity                                            5.035          2.617
                                                                 [0.058]       [0.069]                                                                        –           [1.143]
      Mother’s hemoglobin level (g/dl)                           11.582        12.023              Child sex ratio (boys/girls)                             1.079            –
                                                                 [1.731]       [1.829]                                                                     [0.051]           –
      Mother’s consumption index (non-pregnant)                   1.924         2.246              Log GDP per capita (in child’s birth year)               7.735          6.891
                                                                 [1.096]       [1.331]                                                                     [0.125]        [0.653]
      Mother’s consumption index (pregnant)                       1.861         2.265              Main sample of children <60 months (N)                  43,043        131,114
                                                                 [1.085]       [1.302]
                                                                                                   Children with siblings in main sample (N)               20,054         68,209


     Notes: The means of the speciﬁed variables are calculated separately for the India and Africa subsamples. Standard deviations appear in brackets. The following variables
     are summarized at the mother level: total children born, mother is literate, wants more children, mother’s height, hemoglobin level, and consumption index (non-pregnant and
     pregnant). Total prenatal visits, mother took iron supplements, total tetanus shots, postnatal check within 2 months are also, in eﬀect, summarized at the mother level because
     they are only available for the most recent birth. Variables summarized at the child level include: mother’s age at birth, preceding birth interval, delivery at health facility,
     DHS wealth index, rural, all child variables (ﬁrst 9 variables in the second column), diarrhea in last 2 weeks, open defecation, % non-resident among children, land scarcity,
     child sex ratio, and log GDP.
                             Appendix Table 2: Birth order gradient in the India height gap: Robustness checks


                                     Height in cm         HFA z-score         HFA z-score         HFA z-score         HFA z-score         HFA z-score
                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                (6)
     India × 2nd child                 -1.283∗∗∗            -0.244∗             -0.269∗              -0.156             -0.259∗∗            -0.315∗∗∗
                                        [0.341]             [0.143]             [0.156]              [0.185]             [0.122]             [0.111]
     India × 3rd+ child                -1.840∗∗∗             -0.375             -0.453∗              -0.416             -0.364∗             -0.507∗∗
                                        [0.596]              [0.264]            [0.267]              [0.311]            [0.219]              [0.200]
     2nd child                         -0.840∗∗∗           -0.386∗∗∗            -0.211∗            -0.206∗∗∗           -0.245∗∗∗            -0.230∗∗∗
                                        [0.202]             [0.089]             [0.125]             [0.065]             [0.078]              [0.065]
     3rd+ child                        -1.833∗∗∗           -0.830∗∗∗            -0.443∗∗           -0.462∗∗∗           -0.552∗∗∗            -0.486∗∗∗
                                        [0.322]             [0.157]              [0.205]            [0.104]             [0.131]              [0.107]
38




     Africa mean of outcome              81.006              -1.402              -1.187              -1.435              -1.422              -1.435
     Mother FEs                           Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Child’s age × India                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                                                                                                   Excludes
                                                                                 Below           Indian PSUs           Children           Birth order
                                                          Birth order
     Sample                                All                                  median            with >5%             with same         among living
                                                              ≤4
                                                                                fertility         ultrasound             father             siblings
                                                                                                       use
     Observations                       174,157             125,991              82,441             141,736             112,784             174,157

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Control
     variables included are child age dummies and child’s age × India. The main eﬀect India is absorbed by child age’s × India or a full set of mother
     ﬁxed eﬀects. In Columns 2-5, the sample restrictions are as follows: children of birth order 4 or less; children from African countries with below
     median fertility, plus India; children in Indian PSUs where less than 5% of mothers reported using ultrasound during pregnancy, plus Africa; children
     whose mothers (likely) had children with only one partner. In Column 6, birth order is redeﬁned as the birth order among currently living siblings.
     See Data Appendix for further details.
     Appendix Table 3: Using other comparison groups: Countries with similar GDP to India, and Europe, Central & West Asia



     Comparison sample:                              Countries with similar GDP to India                       Europe, Central & West Asia
                                                HFA z-score       HFA z-score       HFA z-score       HFA z-score       HFA z-score       HFA z-score
                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
     India                                          -0.003                                              -0.884∗∗∗
                                                    [0.023]                                              [0.028]
     India × 2nd child                            -0.115∗∗∗         -0.107∗∗∗          -0.265∗∗          -0.055∗            -0.034           -0.259∗∗
                                                   [0.030]           [0.030]            [0.111]          [0.033]            [0.033]           [0.121]
     India × 3rd+ child                           -0.311∗∗∗         -0.152∗∗∗          -0.463∗∗         -0.305∗∗∗         -0.120∗∗∗         -0.627∗∗∗
                                                   [0.028]           [0.035]            [0.196]          [0.032]           [0.039]           [0.224]
     2nd child                                      -0.016            -0.031          -0.203∗∗∗         -0.078∗∗∗         -0.105∗∗∗         -0.231∗∗∗
                                                    [0.019]           [0.019]          [0.067]           [0.023]           [0.024]           [0.080]
39




     3rd+ child                                   -0.154∗∗∗         -0.186∗∗∗         -0.414∗∗∗         -0.162∗∗∗         -0.216∗∗∗          -0.296∗∗
                                                   [0.016]           [0.021]           [0.110]           [0.022]           [0.027]            [0.150]
     Comparison group mean of outcome               -1.390            -1.390            -1.390            -0.595            -0.595            -0.595
     HH covariates × India                            No               Yes                No                No               Yes                No
     Child’s age × India                              No               Yes               Yes                No               Yes               Yes
     Mother’s age at birth × India                    No               Yes                No                No               Yes                No
     Mother FEs                                       No                No               Yes                No                No               Yes
     Observations                                  172,065           172,065           172,065            85,553            85,553            85,553


     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Child age
     dummies are included in all regressions, and all columns include survey month controls, except for Columns 3 and 6, which have mother ﬁxed eﬀects.
     The main eﬀect India is included but not shown in Columns 2 & 5. In Columns 1-3, the omitted category includes 23 DHS’s (2004-2010) of countries
     with height data that had a log GDP per capita within in a 50% upper and lower bound of India’s 2005-6 log GDP per capita in its survey year.
     In Columns 4-6, the omitted category includes 16 DHS’s (1995-2012) of European, Central and West Asian countries with height data available. In
     Column 5, we use mother completed grade 4 or higher as a control instead of mother’s literacy due to the large amount if missing data for mother’s
     literacy in the the Europe, Central & West Asia sample. Completion of grade 4 or higher is recoded as 0 if mother’s literacy is available in the data
     and she is illiterate.
                                Appendix Table 4: Heterogeneity by older siblings’ gender: Robustness to sex-selection


                                                                                                                                                   Excludes Indian
     Sample:                                        Illiterate              Literate                    Rural                      Urban           PSUs with >5%
                                                                                                                                                   ultrasound use

                                                HFA          HFA        HFA         HFA         HFA          HFA            HFA         HFA         HFA        HFA
                                               z-score      z-score    z-score     z-score     z-score      z-score        z-score     z-score     z-score    z-score
                                                 (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)
     India                                    -0.236∗∗∗                 0.038                   0.012                      -0.120                 -0.416∗∗∗
                                               [0.090]                 [0.072]                 [0.069]                     [0.096]                 [0.101]
     India × 2nd child                         -0.005       -0.027     -0.083     -0.139∗∗      0.009           -0.012    -0.209∗∗∗   -0.248∗∗∗     0.066      0.041
                                               [0.082]      [0.082]    [0.062]     [0.062]     [0.062]          [0.062]    [0.081]     [0.082]     [0.093]    [0.093]
     India × 3rd+ child                        -0.076       -0.059    -0.228∗∗∗   -0.223∗∗∗   -0.200∗∗∗         -0.096    -0.425∗∗∗   -0.284∗∗∗     0.018      0.041
                                               [0.088]      [0.094]    [0.072]     [0.079]     [0.068]          [0.074]    [0.095]     [0.105]     [0.099]    [0.108]
     India × Girl                               0.036        0.240     -0.008       0.139       0.019           -0.003     -0.002       0.412       0.113      0.102
                                               [0.124]      [0.226]    [0.100]     [0.198]     [0.096]          [0.183]    [0.134]     [0.255]     [0.140]    [0.281]
40




     India × No elder brother                   0.070        0.039    0.136∗∗       0.092     0.130∗∗            0.057      0.113       0.059       0.040      0.025
                                               [0.068]      [0.069]   [0.059]      [0.058]    [0.055]           [0.054]    [0.079]     [0.078]     [0.081]    [0.081]
     India × Girl × No elder brother           -0.152       -0.142    -0.155∗      -0.111     -0.157∗∗          -0.102     -0.155      -0.146     -0.260∗∗    -0.244∗∗
                                               [0.097]      [0.098]   [0.086]      [0.085]     [0.078]          [0.077]    [0.114]     [0.113]     [0.113]     [0.112]
     Africa mean of outcome                    -1.602       -1.602     -1.250      -1.250      -1.582           -1.582     -1.057      -1.057      -1.435      -1.435
     p-value: India × No elder brother +        0.254        0.154     0.775       0.764        0.632            0.424      0.625       0.299       0.008       0.007
       India × Girl × No elder brother=0
     p-value: India + India × 2nd child +       0.007                  0.068                   0.002                       0.001                   0.000
       India × No elder brother=0
     p-value: India + India × 3rd+ child +      0.000                  0.382                   0.290                       0.000                   0.000
       India × No elder brother=0
     Household & age controls                    No          Yes         No         Yes         No            Yes            No         Yes         No          Yes
     Observations                              86,752       86,752     86,113      86,113     121,474       121,474        52,683      52,683     141,736     141,736

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Control variables
     included are survey month controls and child age dummies. All columns include birth order dummies and birth order dummies interacted with Girl and India
     × Girl. Even columns additionally control for mother’s age at birth, household covariates, and household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age interacted
     with India, Girl, and India × Girl. Columns 2 and 4 omit literacy covariates and Columns 6 and 8 omit rural covariates. The main eﬀect India is included
     in even columns but is not shown. All other main eﬀects (birth order dummies, Girl, No elder brother, and interactions) are included but not reported. The
     sample for Columns 9-10 includes Indian children living in PSUs with a mean ultrasound usage of <5% and Africa.
                                     Appendix Table 5: Alternative explanations for the Indian birth order gradient


                                                                                                      Diarrhea in last
                                                                Deceased           HFA z-score                               HFA z-score          HFA z-score          HFA z-score
                                                                                                          2 weeks
                                                                   (1)                   (2)                (3)                    (4)                  (5)                  (6)
     India × 2nd child                                           0.006∗              -0.144∗∗∗              0.002              -0.172∗∗∗            -0.134∗∗∗            -0.178∗∗∗
                                                                 [0.003]              [0.033]              [0.005]              [0.031]              [0.034]              [0.055]
     India × 3rd+ child                                         0.011∗∗∗             -0.197∗∗∗             0.011∗∗             -0.237∗∗∗            -0.206∗∗∗            -0.220∗∗∗
                                                                 [0.004]              [0.039]              [0.005]              [0.037]              [0.040]              [0.061]
     2nd child                                                  -0.019∗∗∗             -0.221               -0.001                 0.007               -0.012                0.000
                                                                 [0.002]              [0.391]              [0.003]               [0.022]              [0.029]              [0.046]
     3rd+ child                                                 -0.018∗∗∗             -0.579              0.010∗∗∗             -0.118∗∗∗            -0.143∗∗∗             -0.090∗
                                                                 [0.002]              [0.439]              [0.003]              [0.024]              [0.032]              [0.050]
     2nd child × Mother’s height                                                       0.151
                                                                                      [0.247]
     3rd+ child × Mother’s height                                                      0.293
                                                                                      [0.277]
     2nd child × Open defecation                                                                                                  0.049
                                                                                                                                 [0.034]
41




     3rd+ child × Open defecation                                                                                                 0.032
                                                                                                                                 [0.037]
     2nd child × % non-resident among children                                                                                                         0.342
                                                                                                                                                      [0.209]
     3rd+ child × % non-resident among children                                                                                                       0.445∗
                                                                                                                                                      [0.229]
     2nd child × Land scarcity                                                                                                                                              0.008
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.017]
     3rd+ child × Land scarcity                                                                                                                                            -0.005
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.019]
     Africa mean of outcome                                       0.072                -1.435               0.157                -1.435               -1.435               -1.435
     Household & age controls                                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
     Observations                                                199,665              172,630              173,570              168,840              174,157              174,157

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Control variables included are survey
     month controls, child age dummies, mother’s age at birth, household covariates, and household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age at birth interacted with India. Column
     2 additionally controls for household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age at birth × Mother’s height. Column 4 additionally controls for household covariates, child’s age,
     and mother’s age at birth × Open defecation. Open defecation is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the mother reports that the household has no toilet facility. Column 5 also
     controls for household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age at birth × % non-resident among children. Column 6 for household covariates, child’s age, and mother’s age at
     birth× Land scarcity. Land scarcity is deﬁned as the log of the respondent’s country’s total population in 1961 divided by its land area in square km in 1961. The main eﬀect
     India is included in all columns but not shown. In Column 1, the sample is restricted to children ages 13-59 months, as infant mortality is censored for children less than 1 year
     old. See Data Appendix for further details.
                     Appendix Table 6: Adult food consumption and hemoglobin



Sample:                                                African & Indian mothers              Indian parents

                                                        Food con-                       Food con-
                                                                       Hemoglobin                      Hemoglobin
                                                        sumption                        sumption
                                                                         level                           level
                                                          index                           index
                                                           (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)
India × Has 1 child                                                      -0.618∗∗∗
                                                                          [0.199]
India × Has 2+ children                                   -0.140∗        -0.952∗∗∗
                                                          [0.081]         [0.238]
India × Has 1 child × Not pregnant                                         0.263
                                                                          [0.208]
India × Has 2+ children × Not pregnant                     0.093         0.509∗∗
                                                          [0.085]        [0.248]
Mother × Has 1 child                                                                      -0.047          -0.448
                                                                                          [0.166]         [0.348]
Mother × Has 2+ children                                                                  -0.236          -0.775∗
                                                                                          [0.196]         [0.420]
Mother × Has 1 child × Not pregnant                                                        0.049          -0.165
                                                                                          [0.175]         [0.366]
Mother × Has 2+ children × Not pregnant                                                    0.224           0.017
                                                                                          [0.205]         [0.439]
Africa mean of outcome                                       2.248        11.988
p-value: India × Has 2+ children × Not preg                  0.069        0.000
p-value: India × Has 1 child × Not preg                                   0.000
p-value: Mother × Has 1 child × Not preg                                                   0.978           0.000
p-value: Mother × Has 2+ children × Not preg                                               0.841           0.000
Household & age controls                                   Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Observations                                              59,928         148,408          40,076          34,240


Notes: Standard errors are clustered by mother and appear in brackets. Asterisks denote signiﬁcance: * p < .10, **
p < .05, *** p < .01. In Columns 1-2, control variables included are survey month controls, household covariates,
mother’s age at birth, household covariates and mother’s age at birth interacted with India, Not pregnant, and
India*Not pregnant. In Column 1, the sample includes mothers who have given birth to at least 1 child in the
last 3 years; data to construct the mother’s food consumption index in a comparable way to India is available in
10 African surveys. In Column 2, the sample includes mothers who have given birth in the last 5 years or have
never given birth; data on mother’s hemoglobin level is available in 21 African surveys. In Column 3-4, the control
variables included are household covariates, mother’s age at birth, household covariates and mother’s age at birth
interacted with India, Mother, and India × Mother. The sample includes Indian women who have given birth to
at least 1 child in the past 5 years or have never given birth and their husbands, if both answered consumption
questions. Men whose wives are pregnant are also coded as pregnant, and the omitted category is men whose wives
have never given birth. See Data Appendix for further details.


                                                        42
Data Appendix
DHS surveys used
     The data sets included from Sub-Saharan Africa are Democratic Republic of the Congo 2007 (V),
Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) 2005 (V), Cameroon 2004 (IV), Chad 2004 (IV), Ethiopia 2005 (V),
Ghana 2008 (V), Guinea 2005 (V), Kenya 2008-9 (V), Liberia 2007 (V), Lesotho 2004 (IV), Lesotho 2009
(VI), Madagascar 2003-4 (IV), Mali 2006 (V), Malawi 2004 (IV), Niger 2006 (V), Nigeria 2008 (V),
Namibia 2006-7 (V), Rwanda 2005 (V), Sierra Leone 2008 (V), Senegal 2005 (IV), Sao Tome 2008 (V),
Swaziland 2006-7 (V), Tanzania 2004-5 (IV), Tanzania 2010 (VI), Uganda 2006 (V), Zambia 2007 (V), and
Zimbabwe 2005-6 (V). The DHS questionnaire version (IV, V, or VI) is given in parentheses. The data set
for India is India 2005-6 (NFHS-3).

Height-for-age z-score
    For comparing height across children of diﬀerent gender and age, we create normalized variables using
the World Heath Organization (WHO) method (WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group,
2006b). The WHO provides the distribution of height separately for boys and girls, by age in months from
a reference population of children from Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman and the United States.
Because child height has a skewed distribution, the WHO recommends a restricted application of the LMS
method using a Box-Cox normal distribution. The formula used is as follows:

                                                  (observed value/M )L−1
                                      z-score =
                                                          L×S
The WHO provides the values of M , L and S for each reference population by gender and age. M is the
reference median value for estimating the population mean, L is the power used to transform the data to
remove skewness, and S is the coeﬃcient of variation.

Child’s age
    For all children whose anthropometric data are recorded, the DHS also provides measurement date.
Our child age variable is in months, and is constructed by calculating the number of days elapsed between
child’s birth and measurement date, and then converting this age into months. When we refer to a child as
n months old, we mean the child is in its nth month of life such that a child who is one week old is in its
1st month of life, hence 1 month old.

Birth order
    Birth order is deﬁned as birth order among children ever born to one’s mother. Multiple births, such
as twins, are assigned the same birth order. For a child born subsequent to a multiple birth, birth order is
incremented by the size of the multiple birth, e.g., the next child born after ﬁrstborn twins is birth order 3.

Prenatal variables
     Total prenatal visits is collected for the most recent birth in the past 5 years. Hence, our sample is
restricted to youngest living child from each family for this variable. It is available in all 27 African DHS’s
and the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of the total number of prenatal visits during the pregnancy. It
is 0 if the mother never went for a prenatal visit, and the maximum number of visits is top-coded at 20.
     Mother took iron supplements is collected for the most recent birth in the past 5 years. It is available
in all 27 African DHS’s and the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of whether she took iron supplements
during the pregnancy of her youngest living child.
     Mother’s total tetanus shots is collected for the most recent birth in the past 5 years. The exception is
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2007), which collected it for all births in the past 5 years; we
restrict the sample to the most recent birth for consistency. It is available in all 27 African DHS’s and the
NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of the number of tetanus toxoid injections given during the pregnancy
to avoid convulsions after birth. The DHS recorded having more than 7 injections as 7.



                                                       43
     Delivery at health facility is collected for all births in the past 5 years. It is available in all 27 African
DHS’s and the NFHS. It is calculated based on the mother’s self-report of where child was delivered.
Delivery at a home is deﬁned as a delivery at any home, including the respondent’s home, her parents’
home, traditional birth attendant’s home or some other home. Any delivery that did not occur at a home
is considered a delivery at health facility.

Postnatal variables
     Postnatal check within 2 months is collected for the most recent birth in the past 5 years. It is
available in 13 African DHS’s (Ghana 2008, Kenya 2008-9, Liberia 2007, Lesotho 2009, Nigeria 2008,
Namibia 2006-7, Sierra Leone 2008, Sao Tome 2008, Swaziland 2006-7, Tanzania 2010, Uganda 2006,
Zambia 2007, and Zimbabwe 2005-6) as well as the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of whether the
child received a postnatal check within 2 months after it was born.
     Child taking iron pills is collected for all births in the past 5 years. It is available in 10 African DHS’s
(Ghana 2008, Kenya 2008-9, Liberia 2007, Nigeria 2008, Namibia 2006-7, Sierra Leone 2008, Sao Tome
2008, Swaziland 2006-7, Tanzania 2010, and Uganda 2006) as well as the NFHS. It is the mother’s
self-report of whether the child is currently taking iron pills.
     Child’s total vaccinations is collected for all births in the past 5 years. It is available in all 27 African
DHS’s and the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of the total number of vaccinations the child has
received to date from among those that the DHS collects data on: BCG, 3 doses of DPT, 4 doses of polio,
and measles. Thus the value of child’s total vaccinations is 9 if the child received all vaccines. The sample
is restricted to children who should have completed their course of vaccinations, speciﬁcally those age 13-59
months, as the recommended age for the vaccinations is up to age 12 months.

Other child outcomes
    Pooled inputs. We include regressions that pool all four prenatal inputs and three postnatal inputs,
transforming continuous variables into dummy variables for being above the sample median. The dummy
variables are: 1) total prenatal visits >4; 2) mother took iron supplements; 3) mother’s total tetanus shots
>1; 4) child was delivered at a health facility; 5) child is taking iron pills; 6) total vaccinations >7; 7) child
had postnatal check within 2 months of birth.
    Child’s Hb level is the child’s hemoglobin level in g/dl adjusted by altitude. It is deﬁned for children 6
months or older and is not available for 6 surveys: Chad 2004, Kenya 2008-9, Liberia 2007, Namibia
2006-7, Nigeria 2008, and Zambia 2007.
    Infant mortality is an indicator for whether the child is deceased is collected for all births in the past 5
years. It is available in all 27 African DHS’s and the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of whether the
child is deceased. The sample is restricted to children age 13-59 months because whether they died in
infancy is censored for children under age 1 year.
    Diarrhea in last 2 weeks is collected for all births in the past 5 years. It is available in all 27 African
DHS’s and the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of whether the child had diarrhea in the 2 weeks before
the survey.

Maternal outcomes
    Wants more children is created based on the question, “Would you like to have another child, or would
you prefer not to have more children?” It is coded as 0.5 if the mother said she is undecided whether she
wants to have more children and 0 if she wants no more children or has been sterilized. This variable is
missing if the woman is infecund or indicated that she has never had sex.
    Mother’s food consumption index is constructed based on the DHS and NFHS variables on mother’s
food consumption. Mother’s food consumption is available in 10 African DHS’s (Ghana 2008, Liberia 2007,
Nigeria 2008, Namibia 2006-7, Sierra Leone 2008, Sao Tome 2008, Swaziland 2006-7, Uganda 2006, Zambia
2007, and Zimbabwe 2005-6). These surveys asked detailed questions about food and liquid items
consumed in the last 24 hours to mothers who have given birth in the last three years. Based on this, we
create indicators for whether the mother consumed something from the following ﬁve food groups in the
previous day: eggs/ﬁsh/meat, milk/dairy, fruits, pulses/beans, and leafy vegetables. For instance, for the
eggs/ﬁsh/meat group, eggs, ﬁsh, meat are three separate questions, and we create an indicator for whether


                                                        44
mothers consumed any of the three food items for those who answered all three questions. The
consumption index is generated by adding the ﬁve indicators. The NFHS has related but diﬀerent
questions about mother’s food consumption. The survey asked all women how frequently they consume a
speciﬁed food item. Hence we code daily consumption as 1, weekly consumption as 1/7, and occasionally
and never as 0 to make the variable comparable to the ones from the African surveys. We generate
variables indicating consumption of the same 5 food groups, and sum them to generate the consumption
index. When comparing Indian and African women, we restrict the sample to women who are living with a
child younger than 36 months for consistency across surveys. The NFHS also asked the same set of
consumption questions to fathers, so Indian father’s consumption is coded the same way.
    Mother’s hemoglobin level is collected for all women in some DHS’s and the NFHS, and is available for
a smaller sample of women whose household is selected for hemoglobin testing in other DHS’s. Overall,
mother’s hemoglobin level is available in 21 African DHS’s and the NFHS. It is adjusted by altitude in all
surveys except for Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) 2005 (V), and measured in g/dl. We restrict the
sample to women who have given birth in the last 5 years or never given birth.

Variables used in heterogeneity analyses
    Child sex ratio is calculated as the number of boys aged 0-6 years old over the number of girls aged 0-6
years old in the respondent’s state-by-region (either urban or rural) and comes from the 2001 Indian
census. Higher values indicate greater gender imbalance favoring boys.
    Mother’s height is measured for mothers of children born in the 5 years preceding the survey. It is
available in all 27 African DHS’s and the NFHS. Mother’s height is converted to meters and is coded as
missing if the height is less than 1.25 meters.
    Open defecation is available for all births in the past 5 years in the full sample of 27 African DHS’s and
the NFHS. It is the mother’s self-report of whether the household has no toilet facility.
    % non-resident among children is calculated as the percentage of children aged 10 years or lower who
are living outside of the household, calculated at the level of primary sampling unit (PSU). Children’s age
and whether they are living in the household are available in the full sample of 27 African DHS’s. Each
mother’s total number of living children 10 years old or younger are calculated, and summed at the PSU
level. Then, the percentage of such children living outside of the household is calculated.
    Land scarcity is the calculated as the log of each country’s total population in 1961 over its land area
in square km in 1961 and comes from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).

Other variables
     DHS wealth index is calculated by the DHS as a summary measure of the household’s standard of
living. It is based on a household’s ownership of selected assets, such as televisions and bicycles; materials
used for housing construction; sources of drinking water; and toilet facilities. Through principal component
analysis, the DHS assigns a factor score to each of the assets, generating a standardized asset score speciﬁc
to each survey. Within each full survey sample, the variable has a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.
Because our sample comprises the subsample of households with children under age 5, the mean and
standard deviation per survey are not identically 0 and 1.
     Mother is literate is available for the full sample of 27 African DHS’s and the NFHS. It is the mother’s
self-report of whether she can read in any language.
     Preceding birth interval is the number of months between the mother’s second or higher birth and the
birth directly preceding it. It is calculated using the age of the mother’s children and is top-coded at 120
months.

Sample deﬁnitions
    The main sample includes children age 1-59 months who have anthropometric data. There is a high
rate of missing data for children in their 60th month of life, and hence we limit the sample to children who
are 59 months old or younger. In Appendix Table 2, column (3,) Below median fertility indicates that
children are either from India or from African countries with below median fertility. Fertility level is
calculated as the mean number of children per mother for each African survey. Then the median value
among the African surveys is used to determine which surveys have below median fertility values. Excludes


                                                     45
Indian PSUs with > 5% ultrasound use indicates that the Indian sample has been restricted to children
living in PSUs with an average ultrasound usage of < 5% as reported by the mother. Children with the
same father is the sample restricted to households in which all children presumably have the same father.
Such households meet the following conditions: the mother’s total number of unions is 1, the ﬁrstborn
child’s age in years is smaller than or equal to the number of years since the parents’ marriage, and the
mother is currently married. Countries with similar GDP to India include 23 DHS’s administered between
2004-2010 from countries that have height data available and that had a log GDP per capita within a 50%
upper and lower bound of India’s 2005-6 log GDP per capita. These countries are: Benin 2006, Bolivia
2008, Burkina Faso 2010, Cambodia 2005, Cambodia 2010, Cameroon 2004, Chad 2004, Egypt 2005,
Ghana 2008, Haiti 2005, Honduras 2005, Kenya 2008, Lesotho 2004, Lesotho 2009, Mali 2006, Moldova
2005, Nigeria 2008, Sao Tome and Principe 2008, Senegal 2005, Senegal 2010, Tanzania 2010, Timor-Leste
2009, Zambia 2007, Zimbabwe 2005, Zimbabwe 2010.
     Europe, Central & West Asia includes 16 DHS’s spanning 1995-2012 for European, Central and West
Asian countries with height data available: Albania 2008-2009, Azerbaijan 2006, Armenia 2005 & 2010,
Jordan 2012, 2007 & 2002, Moldova 2005, Turkey 2003 & 1998, Kazakhstan 1999 & 1995, Kyrgyz Republic
2012 & 1997, Tajikistan 2012, and Uzbekistan 1996.




                                                   46
