                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DO “CONSUMER-DIRECTED” HEALTH PLANS BEND
                           THE COST CURVE OVER TIME?

                                       Amelia M. Haviland
                                       Matthew D. Eisenberg
                                         Ateev Mehrotra
                                        Peter J. Huckfeldt
                                           Neeraj Sood

                                       Working Paper 21031
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21031


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




This study was funded in part by a grant from the National Institute of Aging (NIA) and the NIH Common
Fund for Health Economics (Grant R01-AG043850). Prior grants from the California Health Care
Foundation and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation enabled the construction of the data source
for this study. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Amelia M. Haviland, Matthew D. Eisenberg, Ateev Mehrotra, Peter J. Huckfeldt, and Neeraj
Sood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do “Consumer-Directed” Health Plans Bend the Cost Curve Over Time?
Amelia M. Haviland, Matthew D. Eisenberg, Ateev Mehrotra, Peter J. Huckfeldt, and Neeraj
Sood
NBER Working Paper No. 21031
March 2015 , Revised July 2015
JEL No. I1,I13

                                              ABSTRACT

“Consumer-Directed” Health Plans (CDHPs) combine high deductibles with personal medical accounts
and are intended to reduce health care spending through greater patient cost sharing. Prior research
shows that CDHPs reduce spending in the first year. However, there is little research on the impact
of CDHPs over the longer term. We add to this literature by using data from 13 million individuals
in 54 large US firms to estimate the effects of a firm offering CDHPs on health care spending up to
three years post offer. We use a difference-in-differences analysis and to further strengthen identification,
we balance observables within firm, over time by developing weights through a machine learning
algorithm. We find that spending is reduced for those in firms offering CDHPs in all three years post.
The reductions are driven by spending decreases in outpatient care and pharmaceuticals, with no evidence
of increases in emergency department or inpatient care.


Amelia M. Haviland                                    Peter J. Huckfeldt
H. John Heinz III College                             Division of Health Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University                            School of Public Health
5000 Forbes Ave.                                      University of Minnesota
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                  420 Delaware Street Southeast Mmc88
haviland@cmu.edu                                      Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                      huckfeld@umn.edu
Matthew D. Eisenberg
H. John Heinz III College                             Neeraj Sood
Carnegie Mellon University                            Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                  3335 S. Figueroa Street, Unit A
meisenbe@andrew.cmu.edu                               Los Angeles, CA 90089-7273
                                                      and NBER
Ateev Mehrotra                                        nsood@healthpolicy.usc.edu
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Ave. Boston, MA 02115
mehrotra@rand.org
                                                                                                      3


   1. Introduction


   Consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs), health plans in which high deductibles are paired

with tax-advantaged personal medical accounts, are becoming increasingly common. Enrollment

in CDHPs in the employer-sponsored market has grown from 4% to 20% over the last five years

(KFF and HRET 2014). CDHPs are the dominant type of plan on the individual health market,

accounting for nearly four fifths of the plans offered on the federal health insurance exchange.

CDHPs are promoted as a strategy for reducing health care spending and some have suggested

that the increasing prevalence of CDHPs may have contributed to the recent slowdown in US

health care spending (Cutler and Sahni 2013; Haviland et al. 2012).


   While the theory and empirical evidence regarding the impact of CDHPs on spending in the

short term is clear, the longer-term impacts are less certain. Conceptually, higher deductibles and

the associated increase in out-of-pocket costs suggest that patients will reduce their health care

spending in the short term. Not surprisingly, there is robust empirical evidence that CDHPs

effectively incentivize patients to change their health care use and reduce costs in the first year

after introduction (e.g. Buntin et al. 2011; Lo Sasso et al. 2010). However, the effects of CDHPs

on spending in the longer term are a priori ambiguous and the empirical evidence on the long

term effect of CDHPs on spending is limited (Fronstin et al., 2013; Borah et al. 2011; Wharam et

al. 2011). In this paper, we address this gap in the literature by describing a theoretical

framework for long term impacts and empirically evaluating the long term effects of CDHPs on

health care spending. We do the latter by analyzing up to 3 years of data post-CDHP offer from

54 large employers, half of which offered a diverse set of CDHPs to their employees. By

investigating a diverse set of firms, we are able to analyze heterogeneities in long term CDHP

impacts by CDHP plan structure.
                                                                                                       4


   Research on CDHPs must address the observational nature of the data; neither this paper, nor

any other in the last two to three decades, has run an experiment and randomly assigned health

insurance plans with variable cost sharing. The options for identifying the effect of CDHPs as

they are currently offered are limited. One option some have pursued is to compare those

enrolling in CDHPs to those working for the same firms but enrolling in other plans with lower

cost sharing. This avoids firm level selection but is subject to individual level selection bias. An

alternative used by a few study teams is to focus only on full-replacement firms, those that

choose to offer only CDHP(s) to all their employees. This approach strategically avoids

individual level selection bias but limits generalizability and introduces firm level selection bias.

In contrast, we take a previously unexplored middle road and compare the cost trends for all

individuals at firms offering CDHPs to cost trends for individuals at similar firms not offering

CDHPs. This is an intent-to-treat design as the focus is on individuals offered CDHPs and not on

individuals enrolled in CDHPs. Since the decision to offer CDHPs is made by the employer, this

intent-to-treat design eliminates any individual level selection bias. The design also likely

reduces any firm level selection bias as offering a CDHP alongside other plans is a moderate step

relative to full replacement with a CDHP.


   In addition, we implement a difference in difference identification strategy allowing us to

control for time invariant firm level differences. Given this identification strategy, the key

assumption required to identify the impact of CDHP offer is that firms choosing to offer a CDHP

(treatment firms) in the study period would, on average, have had the same time trend in costs as

firms choosing not to offer, had the treatment firms not offered CDHPs. Although we cannot

directly test this assumption, we mitigate any violations by controlling for time-varying changes

in employee composition through a novel application of a machine learning technique in order to
                                                                                                      5


develop weights that balance firms’ health plan enrollee composition over time. The estimates

from this intent to treat analysis are straightforward to interpret as the effect of offering CDHPs

on health care spending.


   At the firm level, we find that CDHP offer is associated with an approximately 5 percent

reduction in total health care spending in each of the three years after CDHPs were introduced

relative to cost growth observed for non-offering employers. The long term decreases in

spending are focused in outpatient care and drugs and there is little impact on inpatient or

emergency department spending. If these effects are due only to changes in health care spending

among those enrolled in CDHPs, they imply local average treatment effects for those enrolled in

CDHPs of an approximately 15 percent reduction in total spending in each the first three years.

Differences in impacts by CDHP plan structure are not statistically significant. However,

consistent with our hypotheses, the pattern of the point estimates suggests that the impact of

CDHPs is greater when paired with HSAs (versus HRAs) and when employers make smaller

account contributions.


   The remainder of the paper begins with an outline of the conceptual framework surrounding

the long term effects of CDHPs and a brief review of related literature, followed by descriptions

of the data and variables, presentation of analytic methods, results, and discussion.


   2. Conceptual Framework


   2.1 Optimality of Care Choices Resulting in Short Term Cost Reductions


   Whether CDHPs continue to keep health care costs down in the long term depends on two

unknown factors. First is the nature of the health care choices patients make in the short term to

reduce costs. At one extreme all patients make optimal value-based health care decisions leading
                                                                                                       6


to sustainable cost reductions in the long term. At the other extreme patients indiscriminately

reduce care, and in particular they forgo needed care, leading to deteriorating health and higher

health care spending in the long term. The second unknown factor is whether CDHP financial

incentives continue to be effective over time, as balances in personal medical accounts may

grow.


    What we know about these two factors is limited. CDHP enrollees may cut back on

necessary or high-value care because of imperfect information on insurance coverage, health

care price, and health care quality or myopia that leads consumers to heavily discount the future

consequences of current action. Empirical evidence on the nature of cost-saving changes in

health care use is mixed but suggests there is some cause for concern. Twenty-five years ago, the

RAND Health Insurance Experiment (HIE) (Newhouse 1993) found that increased cost sharing

caused patients to reduce both necessary and unnecessary care. More recent observational studies

have similarly provided evidence that CDHP enrollees reduce some necessary preventive and

chronic care (Haviland et al. 2011; Charlton et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2010; Huckfeldt et al. 2015).

And two recent studies asking CDHP enrollees about the key features of their coverage found

that the vast majority of enrollees did not know the deductible did not apply to certain high value

care (Reed et al. 2012; Reed et al. 2009).


    The nature of health care choices made to reduce spending in the short term, and their

impacts on long term spending are likely to differ by type of care. The RAND HIE found

different price elasticities for different types of services (e.g. -0.14 for hospital care and -0.31 for

outpatient care) (Manning et al. 1987). These differences can be driven by relatively better or

worse price and quality information availability and perceptions of the current and future value

of different types of care. Specific patterns of differential impacts by type of care can thus inform
                                                                                                     7


whether CDHPs enrollees are forgoing necessary care. For instance, if a sharp decline in

outpatient spending in the short term is followed by increased ED use and inpatient spending in

the long term, this would be suggestive of people cutting back on necessary care.


   Regarding the continued effectiveness of CDHP financial incentives two recent reports

provide some information regarding account balances over time. One summarizes balances of

1.5 million HSAs held at five large banks (AHIP 2014). This summary shows balances

increasing on average from about $1,200 when opened to $2,700 by the third year. However, in

2012, they show more than 60% of HSAs end the year with balances of less than $1,000. The

second study uses survey data from members of an internet panel and finds that 47% of HRA

and HSA account holders combined had balances less than $1,000 in 2008 (Fronstin, 2014). It is

unknown how representative these findings are.


   2.2 Effect of Learning


       While substantial barriers exist for patients in making optimal value-based health care

decisions, these may be mitigated by CDHP-offering employers making health care decision

tools available, particularly if these improve over time. Greater familiarity with these tools has

been demonstrated to allow CDHP enrollees to more effectively shop for lower cost providers

(Whaley et al. 2014). In addition, over time, CDHP enrollees may gain other skills and

knowledge relevant to making high value health care choices. This could include becoming more

familiar with the plan design and coming to understand that most preventive care is excluded

from the deductible (Buntin et al. 2011; Reed et al. 2012). With this knowledge, CDHP enrollees

may stop forgoing necessary care, making spending reductions more plausibly sustainable.


   2.3 Plan Structure
                                                                                                    8


   Enrollees’ responses to CDHPs as time goes on are likely to depend on plan features that

determine the extent of enrollee cost exposure. Differences in such features may underlie the

mixed findings in the limited literature on long term CDHP impacts (see next section for a

summary of this literature). These features include type of personal medical account, Health

Reimbursement Account (HRA) versus a Heath Savings Account (HSA), the level of the

deductible, and the level of employer contribution to the account. HRAs and HSAs are similar in

that contributions are pre-tax, both employer and employee may make contributions, and funds

roll over from year-to-year. There are, however, important differences. First, employers must

contribute funds to HRAs, retain ownership of the account, and typically keep any balance when

an employee leaves the firm. HSAs, in contrast, are owned by the employee, funds may be used

tax-free for health care costs at any time including retirement, and funds may be withdrawn for

other purposes but with tax consequences. Thus HSAs provide a stronger incentive to save. The

variability in employer account contribution and the size of the deductible will also impact the

enrollee’s exposure to the increased cost sharing. Our data allow us to investigate the potentially

different impacts of these common CDHP benefit designs over time.


   3. Related Literature


   There have been a number of studies examining the short term impacts of offering a CDHP

in the employer sponsored health insurance setting. An excellent review of this work (Bundorf,

2012) concludes there is robust evidence that CDHPs usually lead to reduced spending growth in

the first year they are offered by employers. The effect sizes have consistently been found to be

between 5 (Losasso et al. 2010) and 24 percent (Haviland et al. 2011). These first year effects

were mostly driven by changes in pharmaceutical (Parente et al. 2008) and outpatient spending

(Buntin et al. 2011). Below, we focus on the small literature investigating longer term impacts.
                                                                                                       9


   There are four studies assessing impacts of CDHPs on spending over more than a one year

time frame. One case study compared an employer which fully replaced traditional plans with

two CDHP options to a second employer that continued to offer traditional plans over a 4 year

time horizon (Fronstin et al., 2013). The CDHPs were HSA eligible and the employer deposited

$700/1300 in employee’s accounts for individuals/families. In the first year of offer, the authors

found reductions in all components of health care spending except inpatient stays (but including

emergency department visits), relative to the comparison firm. However, at four years after offer,

employees in the intervention firm had lower spending in only pharmaceuticals and laboratory

tests, but not any other aspect of inpatient or outpatient care.


   The other three studies assess impacts of CDHPs on two years of spending. Borah and

colleagues (2011) also studied a single intervention firm and, contrary to Fronstin et al. (2014),

found no impact on spending in either the first or second year after offer relative to a comparison

firm. The remaining two studies differ in two ways. First, they both make use of multiple CDHP-

offering firms. Second, they use those enrolling in non-CDHPs at the CDHP-offering firms as

their comparison group. LoSasso et al. (2010) study data from one insurer and hundreds of firms

where the CDHPs offered were paired with HSAs and had an average deductible of $1,500. The

employer account contribution and plan-specific deductible was not noted. CDHP enrollment

was associated with a 5-7 percent decrease in spending relative to individuals at the same firms

who did not enroll in a CDHP (they used a subset of 1-to-1 propensity score matched individuals

in sensitivity analyses). They report that more of the reduction occurs in the first rather than the

second year but do not provide a statistical significance test of the difference. Charlton et al.

(2011), also compared CDHP enrollees to non-CDHP enrollees within the same firms and find

relative decreases in spending in both years.
                                                                                                     10


   Finally there are four studies that do not measure the impact of CDHPs on spending but focus

on utilization. Wharam et al. (2011) and Wharam et al. (2013), compare hospital utilization for

many small firms, each of which fully replaced their prior HMO plan with a CDHP, to a set of

small firms that continued to offer only the HMO two years after offer of CDHP. The CDHPs

offered have a range of deductibles (some as low as $500) and neither the distribution of these

deductibles nor employer account contribution levels are reported. They find that for CDHP

enrollees emergency department use is lower in both years but the reduction in inpatient stays is

only lower in the first year. Because these are full replacement firms these studies are not subject

to bias due to individual level CDHP enrollment selection. We would likely expect their

utilization results to generalize to other small firms offering a single health insurance plan to

their employees, particularly in the same region and industries.


   The other two utilization studies, Kozhimannil et al. (2013) and Reddy et al. (2014), make

use of data from one firm, Harvard, to compare utilization of those choosing to enroll in an HMO

to that of CDHP enrollees over two years. In both years CDHP enrollees had fewer office visits

(for both higher and lower priority conditions), laboratory tests, and emergency department use

than HMO enrollees. They also find reductions in inpatient stays in the first year followed by

increases in the second year.


   Thus, findings on the long term impact of CDHPs on spending are inconclusive with four

studies to date with different findings: similar reductions in the first two years, no reductions in

some or all types of spending by the second/fourth year, or no impact in any year. However, due

to the different settings, CDHP designs, comparison groups, and identification strategies, it is not

necessarily surprising that results have varied. The utilization studies find reductions in ED use
                                                                                                                     11


and a variety of outpatient care in both CDHP years and reductions in inpatient visits in the first

year only, with one study showing a significant increase in the second year.


    The prior work has a number of important limitations. The case studies have just one

intervention firm which limits generalizability, particularly as the findings of these studies do

differ. The only study to assess impacts beyond two years is one of these case studies. The

studies that compare CDHP enrollees to non-CDHP enrollees at CDHP-offering employers are

subject to potential individual level selection bias. These studies use regression adjustment on

observed covariates and (in one case) propensity-score matching to address potential bias, but

whether such adjustment is sufficient is unclear as there are likely unobserved factors affecting

both plan selection and future health care use.1 Studies using employers fully replacing their non-

CDHP offerings with a CDHP may be more likely to suffer from firm level selection bias.2 Each

case study shows the impacts of a CDHP with a single set of design features and the multi-firm

studies did not have access to plan level information regarding the design features of the CDHPs.

Hence, it is unknown whether the differing results in the literature may be due to the shifting

CDHP design features across, and within, studies.3 Finally, none of the studies make statistical

comparisons of first year vs. longer term impacts.



  Prior literature finds that when CDHPs are offered as an option alongside traditional plans, those who enroll in the
1

CDHP tend to be considerably healthier and a bit younger and wealthier than those who enroll in other plans
(McDevitt et al. 2014).
  Particularly for small employers, this could arise if large increases in health care costs lead to the switch to CDHPs
2

but also tend to be followed by lower costs merely by regression to the mean. For large employers it has been fairly
uncommon to offer only CDHPs and this decision may be coupled with other unique firm features affecting health
care costs.
  The treatment effect being estimated, the impact of CDHPs on spending, may not be the same across papers. This
3

could be due to either the CDHPs in question or the plans the comparison groups are enrolled in having
substantially different designs. CDHPs are preferred-provider organization (PPO) plans and in all four spending
studies the comparison groups have also been enrollees of PPOs, just those with low deductibles. Some studies
instead use health maintenance organization plans (HMOs) as the comparator. Prior literature has suggested that cost
growth is slower in HMOs than PPOs (for example Health Affairs, 2000, Baker, Cantor, Long, Marquis) and thus
                                                                                                                12


    We add to this literature and improve over past limitations in three ways. First, we study the

impacts of CDHPs on health care spending for three years using data from more than 20 large

CDHP-offering employers and almost five million employees and dependents located throughout

the U.S. None of the four multi-firm studies have gone beyond two years of impacts and two did

not have access to data on spending. Second, by using an intent-to-treat design and

benchmarking the lower deductible PPO-offering comparison firms to national trends we avoid

bias due to individual level selection into CDHPs and ensure that any impacts are attributable to

differences in cost sharing rather than differences in plan type. Third, we are able to investigate

potential heterogeneous treatment effects due to extent of CDHP cost sharing. In comparison,

prior studies have focused on either a single CDHP design or multiple, unspecified CDHP

designs.


    4. Data


        The data was constructed by our research group specifically to study CDHPs across a

wide range of employers, plan types, and geographic areas. The data include enrollment and

claims data from 2003 through 2007 from 54 large U.S. employers. These data are supplemented

by detailed insurance benefit design, geocoded socio-demographic information, and firm-level

survey data. In total the data includes 13 million person years of data (~5 million from CDHP-

offering firms and ~8 million from non-CDHP offering firms) in hundreds of health plans

offered by all major and many of the smaller health insurance carriers in the U.S.


        The employers were chosen in two ways. The first group includes 26 employers that were

identified and recruited to join the study because they reported offering a CDHP at some point

this comparison may yield different results due to the difference in comparison group. Fewer than 14% of those with
employer sponsored insurance are enrolled in HMOs whereas 57% are in PPOs (KFF 2014).
                                                                                                  13


between 2004 and 2007. These firms were clients of Towers Watson and were selected to include a

range of CDHP benefit designs, proportions of employees enrolling in those CDHPs, geographic

regions, and industries. Two of the recruited firms had very low rates of CDHP adoption in only 2007

(less than 3.0% take-up). These two firms were switched to the comparison group. The remaining 28

firms were selected from firms contributing data to the MarketScan data product produced then by

Thomson Reuters, now maintained by Truven Health Analytics. These 28 firms were selected to

roughly match the geographic region, size, and industry distribution of the recruited set of employers.

See Appendix table A1-1 for full information on all sample restrictions.


       The key independent variable of interest is whether a firm offered CDHPs. For this

analysis, we define a firm as offering a CDHP in a given year if they offered a CDHP and greater

than 5% of their employees were in a CDHP. We use this information to define three treatment

indicator variables: first year of CDHP offer, second year of CDHP offer, and third year of

CDHP offer. We also create parallel indicator variables designating the first and second years

prior to CDHP offer.


       We characterized the relative strength of the cost sharing incentives of the CDHPs with

three variables. One is an indicator for type of personal medical account the CDHP offered –

HSA versus HRA. Second is based on the employer contribution to the personal medical

accounts where low and high are defined by a median split across offering employers ($500).

The third variable describes the effective deductible, defined as the deductible minus employer

account contribution. Again this was defined as low or high by the median split ($1,250). These

indicators are interacted with the main CDHP offer indicators in some models. Deductible levels

were calculated from the claims data for all plans. For CDHPs, deductible values and other

benefit design features (HSA vs. HRA, employer contribution), were confirmed via surveys and
                                                                                                     14


interviews with human resources executives at each CDHP offering firm. For the local average

treatment effect (LATE) analyses described below we also create an indicator variable

designating whether or not each individual in CDHP offering firms in years of offer is enrolled in

a CDHP.


       The outcome variables are constructed from the claims data. The main outcome was total

annual health costs per person which was the total of amounts paid, by all payers including

enrollee, for health care services in each plan year. In addition to total health care costs, costs are

also divided into four mutually exclusive categories: outpatient, pharmaceutical, inpatient, and

emergency department.


       Individual level covariates are obtained from the enrollment data accompanying the

claims: Census region interacted with living in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), age, age

squared, family type, and sex. In addition the following zip-code level Census data were linked

based on geocoded employee address: median household income, % unemployed, % college

degree, % high school degree, % Black, % non-Hispanic White. The Census region by MSA

indicator variables are included as geographic fixed effects. Firm and calendar-year fixed effect

indicators are created from the claims and enrollment data.


   5. Methods

   5.1. Econometric Model


       We seek to identify the average effect of employer CDHP offer in the first, second and

third years after CDHPs are introduced by an employer. We use an employer level difference-in-

differences empirical approach, estimating the differences in cost growth over time between

treatment (CDHP offering firms) and control firms.
                                                                                                      15


        To model total spending, we use a generalized linear model (GLM) with gamma-type

errors and a log link to account for the skew in healthcare costs and the truncation at zero. We

chose the gamma log specification through a model selection process where, using only firm

years in which CDHPs were not offered, we estimated GLMs with either an identity link or log

link and with either constant variance, proportional to the mean variance, or proportional to the

mean squared variance and assessed the mean square error (MSE), mean absolute prediction

error (MAPE), Akaike information criterion (AIC), and Bayesian information criterion (BIC)4.


        Our baseline specification to identify the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect is:

(1)



where, y is a measure of costs for individual i in firm f in year t, the Pre- and Post- variables

indicate year relative to first CDHP offer (with Pre1, the baseline year before CDHP offer, as the

omitted category), X is a vector of individual demographics, zip code characteristics, and

geographic fixed effects, Year is a vector of calendar year fixed effects, and Firm is a vector of

firm fixed effects. The unit of analysis is the person-year. We include individuals in the models

when they are enrolled in a health plan for one or more full plan years.5 We cluster standard

errors at the firm level.


        The coefficients of interest are the difference-in-differences (DiD) estimators,     ,      , and

    . They indicate how much lower or higher average total health care cost growth is in each of

the three years after CDHP offer relative to what it would have been without CDHP offer, after

controlling for time invariant firm characteristics and secular trends. The coefficient on the Pre2

Fit statistics from model selection procedure can be found in table A1-2.
4

Table A1-1 shows impacts of these sample restrictions on our analytic sample.
5
                                                                                                   16


indicator is included to test for differences in cost growth between treatment and control firms

prior to CDHP offer in the treatment firms. The key identifying assumption is that treatment

firms would have had the same time trends as control firms in the absence of CDHP offer by

treatment firms. In the next section, we describe a novel machine learning based approach that

mitigates the possibility that this identifying assumption is violated.


       We estimate (1) for total annual health care costs and separately on health care costs for

each of the four types of care (outpatient, inpatient, emergency department, or prescription

drugs). To test for differential effects by strength of CDHP incentive, we estimate (1) with Post1,

Post2, and Post3 interacted with a) personal medical account type (HSA or HRA), b) employer

contribution to personal medical accounts (above or below median contribution), and c) effective

deductible (above or below median). In these additional models, the coefficients of interest are

the treatment interaction terms and the total effects by type of treatment.


       We also estimate the impact of CDHP enrollment, rather than offer, under the additional

assumption of no spillovers of the CDHPs onto employees at CDHP offering firms who are not

CDHP enrollees. To estimate this local average treatment effect (LATE), researchers often turn

to an instrumental variables approach where treatment offer is an instrument for enrollment

(Finkelstein et al. 2012). This two stage least squares approach is not feasible in our setting as we

are estimating a non-linear model with three binary endogenous regressors and three binary

instruments. Instead, we estimate the LATE by dividing the DiD estimates (Table 3) by the

average take-up rates in the relevant firm year.


   5.2. A Machine Learning Approach to Achieve Consistent Within Firm Composition

       Over Time
                                                                                                     17


   The firms in our study are large, most with multiple locations, and many with a significant

proportion of lower income employees. Due to employee turnover and firm acquisitions, the

employees and dependents of each firm change over time. As a result, our estimates may capture

both the effects of CDHPs and changes in composition if the firm fixed effects and a simple

specification of the time varying person-year level covariates are insufficient to address year-to-

year fluctuations in the composition of employees. For example, it is possible that younger

employees leave control firms at a higher rate than treatment firms. CDHPs’ lower premiums

may be particularly attractive to younger employees who on average have lower incomes and

relatively little need for health care, which may lead to higher retention of these employees. If

this is the case then we would not be able to distinguish the effects of differential retention of

young employees from the true CDHP effect.


   One approach for dealing with attrition and other changes in composition would be to

investigate a continuously enrolled cohort in CDHP and control firms over the entire sample

period. However, a continuously enrolled population may differ in observed and unobservable

ways from those with incomplete enrollment over the sample period; this is particularly true

given the long time span we examine. Instead we use a novel approach that reduces potential

bias in the difference-in-differences estimates by keeping a close approximation to the

(weighted) joint distribution of covariates of individuals receiving coverage through each firm

constant over time. Because the procedure balances the full joint distribution, it removes reliance

on the particular specification of covariates in the outcome model. The balancing weights stand

in for the set of potentially complex non-linear interactions required to obtain balance in the joint

distribution of covariates over time for every firm. In this sense, we ensure that the firm fixed

effects ‘work’ in that they are representing sets of individuals whose joint distribution of
                                                                                                     18


observed covariates is time-invariant. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to identify and

control for this source of potential bias in a more systematic way than firm fixed effects and/or

simply specified regression control for individual level observed covariates.


       Our approach proceeds as follows. For each treatment firm we assign weights to those

present in each non-baseline year such that, after weighting, the joint distribution of covariates

for each non-baseline year matches that observed in the firm’s baseline year (year prior to CDHP

offer). Similarly, we assign weights to the individuals in each year in each control firm to match

the joint distribution of covariates for individuals in that firm observed in 2005 (the middle of the

study period as there is no baseline year defined by initiation of treatment). The models used to

create the weights were estimated separately for each employer and each pair of years (the

baseline and a single non-baseline year). As a result, the cost growth we observe after weighting

removes the effects of changes in observed socio-demographics, zip code characteristics, or

geographic location of employees and their dependents from year to year. This makes the CDHP

effect ‘doubly-robust’ as if either the models predicting year for each pair of years for each firm

or the cost model specification of the individual level covariates is correct, and the observed

covariates are sufficient, then the treatment effect estimate will be unbiased (Kang and Schafer

2007).


       To construct the weights, we use a statistical machine learning methodology, generalized

boosted regression (implemented in a streamlined version of the R package TWANG6). Using

generalized boosted regression in this context is preferable to the more commonly estimated

Logit model for two reasons. First, generalized boosted regression fits highly flexible models



    http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/twang/vignettes/twang.pdf.
6
                                                                                                           19


incorporating complex interactions of the covariates, leading to weights that produce better

balance on the full joint distribution rather than just the marginal for each variable individually

(McCaffrey et al., 2004). Second, this method produces a distribution of weights that are less

extreme and hence less able to cause variance inflation, a well-known problem with the Logit

(Lee et al. 2011). Generalized boosted regression is an iterative procedure where the stopping

rule is based on the degree of success in creating covariate balance. At each iteration, the

procedure searches over simple regression tree models, each fit to the residuals from the model

in the prior iteration, and selects the one that best improves the fit of the model to the data.

Regression trees describe the relationship between a dependent variable and covariates by

partitioning observations into regions defined by values of the covariates. That new regression

tree adjustment is added to the model at the prior iteration to create the new model. The final

model is the additive sum of the collection of simple regression tree models each one providing

the best improvement at its iteration (McCaffrey et al. 2004). There are different metrics used to

establish balance for the stopping rule and while the standardized difference in means is

common, we chose to use the KS statistic, a measure of the extent of differences in the

cumulative distribution functions of two variables or sets of variables, as the criteria for stopping

the process in order to balance the full distributions of covariates, not just their means. The

methodology also allowed us to identify situations in which changes over time within firm were

too fundamental to be balanced and we dropped such firm-years from the analysis based on there

being any covariate, which had a KS statistic greater than 0.05.7




    See table A1 for the effect of this and all other data restrictions on the resulting analytic sample
7
                                                                                                                 20


    We achieved excellent balance on covariates8 within firm over time9. Appendix Figures A1-3

through A1-6 plot the distribution of the balance statistics for control and treatment firms that

were retained. As the figures demonstrate, balance was good to start with in many instances and

the methodology greatly reduced the differences in standardized effect sizes and KS statistics

when they were present. We apply these weights in all descriptive statistics and models.


    5.3. Sensitivity of results to balanced panel of firms


    As described above, the firms in our data offer CDHPs in different calendar years while the

data window is fixed in calendar time. In the models, we include the largest number of pre- and

post-CDHP years available in the data. This means we estimate the post-offer effects using an

unbalanced panel (i.e., different firms identify each year’s effect). To be more specific, the

estimated first-year effect is identified by 24 firms, the second year effect by 20 of those firms,

and the third year effect by 13 of those firms. Thus in our main specification, any differences in

the second or third year effect relative to the first year effect could be the result of changes in

CDHP effects over time and/or changes in firm composition. In order to distinguish between

these sources of change, we re-estimate the main models twice, first restricting to only those

firms with at least two years of data following CDHP offer and second restricting to only those

firms with at least 3 years of data following CDHP offer.


    6. Description of the Sample and the Treatment




8
  We balanced on gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
(zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), % White (zip), 9 census
region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
  The generalized boosted regression procedure has tuning parameters: we set the maximum regression tree level at
9

2, the shrinkage at 0.01, and the bagging fraction at 1.
                                                                                                                 21


     Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the weighted sample, stratified by treatment status.

The roughly five million treatment individuals look fairly similar on observables to the eight

million control individuals. The enrollees at CDHP offering firms are slightly older, more likely

to be without children, and reside in zip codes with a lower median household income.


     Figure 1 demonstrates that the weighted cost growth in control firms is very similar to that

seen in the private insurance market nationally over this time period (CMS, 2013), suggesting

strong external validity. Figure 2 shows that the cost growth for control firms is also similar to

that for the subset of treatment firms for which we have two years of data prior to the CDHP

offer. This supports the key assumption of the difference-in-difference identification strategy.

While not an assumption required for our identification strategy, the average cost levels in the

baseline year are also similar: $3,051 (SE = $472) for control firms and $3,284 (SE = $518) for

treatment firms.10


     Figure 3 and Table 2 summarize the nature of the CDHP offer. Averaged across all

employees and dependents of CDHP offering firms, offering a CDHP is associated with a 2-3

fold increase in average deductibles (Figure 3). In contrast, average deductibles increase

smoothly and quite gradually in the control firms. Average deductibles increase from the 1st to

3rd year post offer among the treatment firms because of increases in the proportion of employees

enrolling in CDHPs (Table 2).


     The remaining columns of Table 2 summarize the key features of the CDHPs being offered

in each treatment year. In the first two years of offer, the mix of HSAs and HRAs is

approximately 50/50, average employer account contributions are approximately $150 and

  Standard errors are calculated as the standard deviation of the firm means divided by the square root of the
10

number of firms.
                                                                                                        22


average effective deductibles are close to $1,000. We have data for 13 of the 24 treatment firms

for a third year post offer. These firms have a higher proportion of HRAs than HSAs and more

generous employer account contributions. For additional information on changes in firm

composition over time see Appendix Table A3-1.


   7. Results

   7.1. Intent-to-treat effect


   Relative to control firms and the pre-offer years, firms offering a CDHP had an estimated

6.6, 4.3, 3.4 percent lower annual spending in the first three years respectively (p < 0.05 for each

difference) (Table 3, column 1). In addition, the CDHP second pre-year trend coefficient is

insignificant, supporting the assumption of a parallel trend in the absence of CDHP offer. In

section 6.4 below, we discuss whether the post CDHP offer impact is changing over time

controlling for differential composition of treatment firms over time.


   The CDHP effect varies considerably across spending category. Relative to non-offering

firms, annualized spending growth on pharmaceuticals is 5 to 9.5 percentage points lower in the

three years after firms offer CDHPs (p < 0.01) and spending growth on outpatient care is 3.0 to

6.8 percentage points lower in the first three years though the estimate loses statistical

significance in the third year (p < 0.05 in first two years). In contrast, for inpatient cost growth,

we have only marginally statistically significant evidence of lower spending relative to non-

offering firms in the first two years of CDHP offer (p < 0.10) while the third year estimate is

non-significant and very close to zero. Finally, we do not detect any differences in cost growth

for emergency department (ED) care in any of the first three years of CDHP offer although, due

to high variance in ED spending, estimates are imprecise.
                                                                                                                  23


     7.2. Local average treatment effect


     The results in Table 4 indicate how large the impact on cost growth would be for those

enrolled in CDHPs if they were the only ones contributing to the reduced cost growth, i.e. if

there were no spillovers to employees offered but not enrolled in CDHPs. These estimates range

from 7 to 22 percentage point reductions in health care cost growth in the first three years of

enrollment in a CDHP (p < .005, standard errors range from 3 to 9 percentage points).


     In columns three and four (Table 4), we estimate an additional intent to treat model including

only the five firms who have a high CDHP takeup. 11 For these firms any contributions of

spillovers to CDHP offer effects would be limited. As expected, the intent-to-treat estimates are

larger, ranging from 9 to 13 percentage point reductions in cost growth (p<0.01). However, the

local average treatment effect estimates are similar to those for the full sample (none of the

effects are significantly different from the full sample estimates). This finding supports the

hypothesis that the reductions in cost growth may be attributable primarily to CDHP enrollees

rather than spillovers to those enrolled in other plans.


     7.3. Differential Impact of CDHP by Degree of Cost Sharing Incentives


     In Table 5, we consider whether CDHP design features lead to differential impact on

spending. Each row displays the estimated first, second, and third year CDHP offer effects

stratified on whether an HRA or HSA was offered, employer account contribution, and effective

deductible. These are calculated using post-estimation from models with CDHP offer interaction

terms (see Appendix Tables A2-4, A2-5, and A2-6 for those results). There are no statistically


  Five firms met the high takeup criteria of being above the 75%tile of take-up in all available post years. The mean
11

take-up rates in these firms were 90%, 92%, and 95% in the first, second, and third post years, respectively.
                                                                                                     24


significant differences in CDHP effects across any of these three specifications. However, the

pattern of results suggests greater cost reductions that last longer for firms offering CDHPs with

HSAs (rather than HRAs), with lower employer contributions to personal medical accounts, and

with higher effective deductibles.


   7.4. Testing sensitivity to balanced firm panel


   The models in which we restrict the treatment group to only include firms with at least 2

years of data post CDHP offer or with at least 3 years of data post CDHP offer are shown in

Appendix Tables A3-2 and A3-3. When we restrict to firms with at least 2 years of data post

CDHP offer, the year 1 post-offer effects on total costs and costs of each component of health

care are very similar to the full sample results (Table A3-2). This is not surprising as only four

firms are lost. The 20 firms with at least 2 years of post CDHP offer data are similar to the full

sample of 24 firms in CDHP take-up, HRA/HSA mix, and employer contribution to personal

medical accounts (Table A3-1). In contrast, the impact in the first and second years of CDHP

offer for the 13 firms with three years of data post offer are smaller (closer to zero) and less often

statistically significant compared with the full sample of 24 firms. Compared to the full sample,

the 13 firms with 3 years of post-CDHP offer data were more likely to pair the plans with HRAs

versus HSAs and to give greater employer account contributions.


   While the point estimates for Years 1, 2, and 3 post-offer are monotonically decreasing with

time since offer, the change in firm composition just discussed complicates any interpretation of

this pattern. With the full sample (Table 3), we cannot reject that the CDHP offer effects are the

same in each of the three years post offer (0.09 < p < 0.34). This is because the third year

estimates are available for only 13 out of 24 CDHP firms. These 13 firms offered CDHPs with
                                                                                                       25


systematically weaker incentives than those first offered later in the study period. Thus the

change in point estimates overtime could reflect this change in firm composition.


    However, when we restrict the sample to just a balanced panel of the 13 firms, we again find

that the CDHP effect point estimates monotonically decrease overtime. Again the differences

between the years are not statistically significant. Overall based on this analysis we conclude that

there is weak evidence that the cost saving effects of CDHPs diminish overtime and moderate

evidence that they do not increase over time.


    8. Summary and Discussion


    With health care costs continuing to grow faster than GDP (CMS 2014; BEA 2014) it is

critical to understand the effectiveness of cost-reduction strategies. Prior literature has

established that CDHPs reduce spending in the short term. However, the longer term impacts are

less clear. There has been concern that CDHP enrollees will decrease their use of necessary care

and this will result in increased spending in the long term due to greater complications.


    This study substantially adds to our knowledge on the long term cost impacts of CDHPs. We

estimated spending trends for three years across over 13 million people across the country in an

analysis estimating CDHP impacts without the threat of individual level selection bias. We find

that health care cost growth among firms offering a CDHP is significantly lower in each of the

first three years after offer. This result suggests that, at least at large employers, the impact of

CDHPs persists and is not just a one-time reduction in spending. However, an important caveat

is that the decrease in spending may be smaller in year 3 compared to year 1 post-offer.

Recognizing that the differences are not statistically significant, these results are suggestive and

consistent with a decreasing impact of CDHPs over time.
                                                                                                    26


   The decreases in total spending growth observed are primarily due to reductions in spending

on outpatient care and pharmaceuticals. In contrast, by the third year there are no differences in

either emergency department or inpatient spending. There are several potential explanations for

this differential impact depending on whether reductions in costs are achieved through price

shopping, switching to higher-value treatment options, or blanket reductions in care.

Pharmaceutical spending is ideally suited for learning over time as chronic medications are

purchased regularly and price information is fairly accessible (Huckfeldt et al. 2015). Also,

generic drugs, where available, provide a clearer signal regarding value than most treatment

options. Some patients may also believe that taking their medications less regularly has little

health consequence, although research has shown that cost-sharing induced reductions in

pharmaceutical use can lead to increased hospitalizations (Chandra et al. 2010). In contrast,

emergency department care and inpatient care may be less amenable to any of the three

mechanisms for reducing costs. It is difficult to obtain price information and in many instances

the care is emergent making it impossible to shop for care. In addition, the incentives to reduce

spending might be limited as the cost of one inpatient episode will typically be greater than the

deductible. Outpatient care is intermediate between these two extremes. Outpatient physician

visits tend to be repeated more than inpatient care but less than pharmaceutical purchases,

perceptions of the harms of reducing care are likely to be similarly intermediate, and price and

quality information is difficult to obtain.


   Our results on the differential impact of CDHP design features on spending are not

statistically significant. However, our estimates are consistent with what theory would suggest:

CDHPs with larger financial incentives are associated with greater and more long lasting

reductions in spending than CDHPs with smaller financial incentives. As families increasingly
                                                                                                      27


enroll in CDHPs with a variety of design features, further research is needed to determine which

structures are most beneficial.


       The magnitude of the first year effects we observe are consistent with most prior research

investigating the short-term effect of CDHPs. Similar to LoSasso et al. (2010), Charlton et al.

(2011), and Fronstin et al. (2013) and contrary to Borah et al. (2011), we find reductions in

health care cost growth beyond the first year of CDHP offer. Contrary to Wharam et al. (2011,

2013), Kozhimannil et al. (2013), and Reddy et al. (2014), we do not detect any reductions in

emergency department spending over three years12. Our findings on inpatient spending are

consistent with Wharam et al. (2011, 2013). We find reduced spending in the first two of three

years post offer and they detect reductions in inpatient utilization for the first of two years. In

contrast, in their Harvard case study, Kozhimannil et al. (2013) and Reddy et al. (2014), find

increases in inpatient use in the second year. The differences between our study and these

particular prior studies may be due to their use of HMO rather than low deductible PPO enrollees

as the comparison group, individual level selection in the Harvard studies or the difference in

firm sizes for the Wharam studies.


           Our final contribution is methodological, the novel application of a machine learning

technique to mitigate potential violations of the identification assumption (that treatment units

would have had the same trend in outcomes over time as controls if they had not offered the

treatment). This procedure reduces sensitivity of results to the regression specification for

covariates in outcome models, strengthens the effectiveness of fixed effects (such as firm fixed




     Although several of these studies are on ED use, not costs.
12
                                                                                                   28


effects) in reducing potential bias in difference in difference designs, and is relatively accessible

for economists without a background in machine learning.


   The results presented here are limited to large employers and therefore may not extend to

Medicaid beneficiaries, the individual or small group market, or to the health insurance

exchanges where, on average, deductibles and out of pocket maximums are higher and/or

enrollees have fewer financial resources. While the firms in this study were specifically selected

to have lower income employees, all families had at least one adult working full time with

benefits so they are typically better off than families not offered employer sponsored insurance.


   In summary, in the first large multi-employer study to investigate long term CDHP spending

impacts we find reductions in health care cost growth in all three years post CDHP offer and do

not detect increases in any component of health care spending. These findings do not support

either the concern that decreases in spending will be a one-time occurrence or that short-term

decreases in spending with a CDHP will result in increases in spending in the long term due to

complications of forgone care. We cannot rule out either of these concerns developing over an

even longer time frame.
                                                                                           29


References


Americas Health Insurance Plans. 2014. “An Analysis of Health Savings Account Balances,
Contributions, and Withdrawals in 2012.” Center for Policy and Research.

Borah, Bj., ME Burns, and N. D. Shah. 2011. “Assessing the Impact of High Deductible Health
Plans on Health-Care Utilization and Cons: A Changes-in-Changes Approach.” Health
Economics 20(9): 1025-42

Bundorf, K., 2012. “Consumer Directed Health Plans: Do They Deliver.” The Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation Research Synthesis Report No. 24

Buntin, M., A. Haviland, R. McDevitt, and N. Sood. 2011. “Health Care Spending and
Preventive Care in High-Deductible and Consumer-Directed Health Plans.” American Journal of
Managed Care 17(3): 222-30

Chandra, A., J. Gruber, and R. McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization
Offsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review 100(1): 193-213.

Charlton, M.E., T. Levy, R.R. High, J.E. Schneider, and J.M. Brooks 2011. “Effects of Health
Savings Account Eligible Plans on Utilization and Expenditures.’ American Journal of Managed
Care 17(1): 79-86.

Chen, S., RA. Levin, and JA. Gartner. 2010. “Medication Adherence and Enrollment in a
Consumer-Driven Health Plan.” American Journal of Managed Care 16(2) 43-50.

CMS. 2013. “Table 1 National Health Expenditures; Aggregate and Per Capita Amounts, Annual
Change and Percent Distribution: Selected Calendar Years 1960-2012.” Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/tables.pdf

Cutler, D. and N.R. Sahni 2013. “If Slow Rate of Health Care Spending Growth Persists.”
Health Affairs 32(5): 841-50.

Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. Newhouse, H. Allen, K.
Baicker, and The Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1057-1106.

Fronstin, P. (2014). “Health Savings Accounts and Health Reimbursement Arrangements:
Assets, Account Balances, and Rollovers, 2006-2013.” EBRI Issue Brief no. 395.

Fronstin, P., M.-J. Sepulveda, and M.C. Robebuck. 2013. “Medical Utilization and Adherence in
a Health Savings Account-Eligible Plan.” American Journal of Managed Care 19(2): 400-07.
                                                                                             30


Haviland, A., M.S. Marquis, R.D. McDevitt, and N. Sood. 2012. “Growth of Consumer Directed
Health Plans to One-Half of All Employer-Sponsored Insurance Could Save $57 billion
Annually.” Health Affairs 31(5): 1009-15.

Haviland, A., N. Sood, R. McDevitt, and S.M. Marquis 2011. “How Do Consumer Directed
Health Plans Affect Vulnerable Populations.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy. 14(2)
(Online): 1558-9544.

Huckfeldt, P., A. Haviland, A. Mehrotra, Z. Wagner, and N. Sood, 2015. “Patient Responses to
Incentives in Consumer-Directed Health Plans: Evidence from Pharmaceuticals. Working Paper.

Kang, J., Schafer, J. 2007. “Demystifying Double Robustness: A Comparison of Alternative
Strategies for Estimating a Population Mean From Incomplete Data.” Statistical Science. 22(4):
523-39.

KFF, HRET. 2014. “Employer Health Benefits: 2013 Summary of Findings.” The Kaiser Family
Foundation and Health Research and Education Trust

Kozhimannil, K. B., M. R. Law, C. Baluer-Patterson, F. Zhang, J.F. Wharam. 2013. “The Impact
of High Deductible Health Plans on Men and Women: An Analysis of Emergency Department
Care.” Medical Care 51(8): 639-45.

Lee, B.K., J. Lessler, and E.A. Stuart. 2011. “Weight Trimming and Propensity Score
Weighting.” PLos ONE 6(3): e18174 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018174.

Lo Sasso, A., L.A. Helmchen, and R.Kaestner. 2010. “The Effects of Consumer-Directed Health
Plans on Health Care Spending.” The Journal of Risk and Insurance 77(1): 85-103.

Manning, W. G., J. P. Newhouse., N. Duan, E. Keeler, B. Benjamin, A. Leibowitz, M.S.
Marquis, J. Zwanziger. 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care.” The
American Economic Review 77(3): 251-77.

McCaffrey, D.F., G. Ridgeway, and A.R. Morral. 2004. “Propensity Score Estimation With
Boosted Regression for Evaluating Causal Effects in Observational Studies.” Psychological
Methods 9(4) 403-25.

McDevitt, R., A. Haviland, L. Laudenberger, R. Lore, M. Eisenberg, N. Sood. 2014. “Risk
Selection into Consumer-Directed Health Plans: An Analysis of Family Choices within Large
Employers.” Health Services Research. 49(2): 609-27.

Newhouse, JP. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.

Parente, S., Feldman R. 2008. “Effects of a Consumer-Driven Health Plan on Pharmaceutical
Spending and Utilization.” Health Services Research. 43(5).
                                                                                             31


Reddy, S., D. Ross-Degnan, A. Zalaysky, S.B. Soumerai, and J.F. Wharam. 2014. “Impact of a
High-deductible Health Plan on Outpatient Visits and Associated Diagnostic Tests.” Medical
Care 52(1): 86-92.

Reed, M., V. Fung, M. Price, R. Brand, N. Benedetti, S.F. Derose, J.P. Newhouse, and J. Hsu.
2009. “High-Deductible Health Insurance Plans: Efforst to Sharpen a Blunt Instrument.” Health
Affairs 28(4): 1145-1154. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.4.1145

Reed, M.E., I. Graetz, V. Fung, J.P. Newhouse, and J. Hsu. 2012. “In Consumer-Directed Health
Plans, A Majority of Patients were Unaware of Free or Low-Cost Preventive Care.” Health
Affairs 31(12): 2641-2648. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2012.0059

Whaley, C., J. S. Chafen, S. Pinkard, G. Kellerman, D. Bravata, R. Kocher, N. Sood. 2014.
“Accociation Between Availability of Health Service Prices and Payments for These Services.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 312(16) 1670-76.

Wharam, J.F., B.E. Landon, F. Zhang, S.B. Soumerai, D. Ross-Degnan. 2011. “High-Deductible
Insurance: Two-Year Emergency Department and Hospital Use.”

Wharam, J. F., F. Zhang, B E. Landon, S. B. Soumerai, and D. Ross-Degnan. 2013. “ Low-
Socioeconomic-Status Enrollees In High-Deductible Plans Reduced High-Severity Emergency
Care.” Health Affairs 32(8): 1398-1406.
                                                                                                                      32


Figures


Figure 1: Control Firm Cost Trends Compared to National Data for Private Insurance

                                      Comparison of Spending per Person from CMS, and Control Firms 2003
                                                                   to 2007
                              4,000
                              3,500
        Spending Per Person




                              3,000
                              2,500
                              2,000                                                         CMS Private Insurance
                              1,500
                              1,000                                                         RAND  Weighted
                                                                                            Weighted ControlControl
                                                                                                             Firms
                                                                                            Firms
                               500
                                 0
                                  2003          2004       2005      2006       2007
                                                           Year


Notes: Source for CMS data is available at http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/tables.pdf. This is the NHE Tables PDF. The specific
table is Table 21 Medicare and Private Health Insurance; Per Enrollee Expenditures and Annual Percent Change,
Calendar Years 1969-2011.
                                                                                                                   33


Figure 2: Comparison of Cost Trends Prior to CDHP Offer

  4000
  3500
  3000
  2500
  2000                                                                         Control

  1500                                                                         Treatment

  1000
   500
      0
                  2nd Pre Year                   1st Pre Year


Notes for 2a: The treatment line is mean total costs across the subset of treatment firms with 2 pre CDHP offer years
available. The control line is the weighted average of average annual control firm costs, weighted by the distribution
of calendar years within a CDHP offer year for the corresponding treatment firms. For example, the 1 st Pre Year for
the treatment firms is a combination of calendar years: 8% 2003, 68% 2004, and 24% 2005. To obtain the control
mean for this ‘1st Pre Year’, we take a weighted average of the control firm costs in 2003, 2004, and 2005 with
weights of 0.08, 0.68, and 0.24, respectively.
                                                                                                                     34


Figure 3: Average Individual Deductible by Treatment Year

  700
             Pre-         Post-                                  ***
  600
            Period        Period
                                                 ***
  500
                                ***
  400
                                                                                Control
  300                                                                           Treament

  200

  100

    0
             1st pre         1st post        2nd post        3rd post


Notes: The treatment bars are the mean individual deductible for all employees at treatment firms. For those enrolled
in CDHPs at treatment firms, the mean deductibles are $1426, $1492, and $1396 for the first, second, and third post
year, respectively. Take up rates were 19.4%, 21.4%, and 34.6% in the first, second, and third post years. The
control bars are the weighted average of average annual control firm individual deductibles, weighted by the
distribution of calendar years within a CDHP offer year for the corresponding treatment firms (for example of
weighted average calculation, see notes to figure 2). In a model including calendar year fixed effects and with
standard errors clustered by firm, differences in deductibles between the treatment and control firms were
statistically insignificant in the first pre-offer year (p = 0.20) and statistically significant in all three years post
CHDP offer (p < 0.001).
                                                                                                                    35


Tables

Table 1: Description of the sample at the person-year level

                                                      Controls                    Treatment
                                                   (N=10,100,357)               (N=4,908,955)

              VARIABLES                           Mean             SD          Mean           SD

              Demographics
                                  Age              30.70          17.50        32.69        17.98
                               Female              0.504          0.500        0.501        0.500
                          Single Adult             0.133          0.340        0.135        0.341
                     Married, No Kids              0.137          0.344        0.146        0.353
                Adult Male with Kids              0.0466          0.211       0.0498        0.217
               Adult Female with Kids             0.0642          0.245       0.0516        0.221
                   Married, with Kids              0.617          0.486       0.6023        0.490
                  Median HH Income                52,120         18,915       51,373       17,249
                       % Unemployed               0.0470         0.0278       0.0471       0.0286
                            % College              0.282          0.162        0.255        0.148
                       % High School               0.565          0.112        0.588        0.101
                           % Hispanic             0.0793          0.132       0.0670        0.119
                              % Black             0.0950          0.156        0.102        0.182
                             % White               0.776          0.216        0.787        0.227
                         New England              0.0544          0.227       0.0228        0.149
                      Middle Atlantic              0.109          0.311       0.0515        0.221
                    East North Central             0.285          0.451        0.428        0.495
                  West North Central              0.0535          0.225       0.0890        0.285
                        South Atlantic             0.187          0.390        0.106        0.307
                    East South Central            0.0651          0.247       0.0526        0.223
                  West South Central               0.130          0.336        0.127        0.333
                             Mountain             0.0525          0.223       0.0223        0.148
                               Pacific            0.0620          0.241       0.0416        0.200
                   Unknown Location              0.00285         0.0533       0.0602        0.238
                              d(MSA)               0.875          0.331        0.819        0.385
Notes: Weighted means and standard deviations for the entire sample, all years (2003-2007) pooled. Statistics are
calculated based on the weights described in section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                36


Table 2: Summary of Take-Up and Benefit Design Features of CDHPs Offered by Treatment Firms

                       All Treatment Firm                             Treatment Firm Individuals
                           Individuals                                    Enrolled in CDHPs
                                                                                 Account          Effective
                           N
                                      Take-up         HRA           HSA        Contribution      Deductible
  1st Post Year       1,269,190        0.194          0.592         0.408          157.2            991.8
                                                                                  (267.7)          (359.9)
 2nd Post Year        1,002,859         0.214         0.426         0.574          154.2            988.6
                                                                                  (290.2)          (414.2)
 3rd Post Year         480,535          0.346         0.724         0.276          262.2            821.7
                                                                                  (318.5)          (306.9)
Notes: Summary for all available treatment firm years. Effective deductible is actual individual deductible minus the account
contribution for an individual.
                                                                                                                                                                     37


    Table 3: GLM Models of CDHP Offer on Costs

                                          (1)                             (2)                          (3)                           (4)                        (5)
   VARIABLES                          Total Costs                   Outpatient Costs                Drug Costs                 Inpatient Costs                ED Costs

Treat*(2nd Pre Year)                  -0.000640                          -0.00726                      0.0128                      0.00945                     -0.0369
                                       (0.0160)                          (0.0144)                     (0.0192)                     (0.0236)                   (0.0421)

Treat*(1st Post Year)                  -0.0655**                        -0.0675**                   -0.0612***                     -0.0638*                    -0.0337
                                        (0.0256)                         (0.0264)                     (0.0173)                     (0.0331)                   (0.0833)
Treat*(2nd Post Year)                 -0.0434***                        -0.0405**                   -0.0536***                     -0.0536*                    0.0620
                                        (0.0145)                         (0.0204)                     (0.0151)                     (0.0322)                    (0.115)
Treat*(3rd Post Year)                  -0.0339**                          -0.0303                   -0.0949***                      0.00197                    0.0412
                                        (0.0142)                         (0.0194)                     (0.0236)                     (0.0322)                   (0.0673)

Proportion of Total                       1.00                              0.53                        0.23                         0.20                        0.04
      Costs
   Observations                       13,553,830                        13,553,830                  13,553,830                   13,553,830                  13,553,830
 Number of Firms                          54                                54                          54                           54                          54
    Notes: Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional assumption
    and log-link. We include a full set of firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. Controls include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household
    income (zip), % unemployed (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls
    include full interactions between 9 census region dummies and an indicator for being in an MSA.
                                                                                                                                                              38




Table 4: Intent-to-treat and Treatment on the Treated Results (Assuming No Spillovers) for Total Costs

                                                                  (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)

                                                                          All Firms                        High Take-up Firms

                                                                  ITT                 LATE                 ITT               LATE


                                Treat*(1st Post Year)         -0.0655**            -0.2226**           -0.1300***         -0.1452***
                                                               (0.0256)              (0.087)             (0.0236)           (0.0264)
                                          nd
                                Treat*(2 Post Year)          -0.0434***           -0.1353***            -0.119***         -0.1300***
                                                               (0.0145)             (0.0452)             (0.0200)           (0.0219)
                                Treat*(3rd Post Year)         -0.0339**            -0.0691**           -0.0852***         -0.0899***
                                                               (0.0142)             (0.0289)             (0.0208)           (0.0220)
Notes: Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Local average treatment estimates (LATE) are calculated by
taking the coefficient given in table 2a and dividing by average CDHP take up in that treatment year. Standard errors were derived using the delta method and the
Stata command nlcom. Five firms met the high takeup criteria of being above the 75%tile of take-up in all available post years. The mean take-up rates in these
firms were 90%, 92%, and 95% in the first, second, and third post years, respectively.
                                                                                                                              39


Table 5: Treatment Effects, Stratified by CDHP Account Features

                                                                           Account Type
                                                          HRA                                         HSA
                      st
                     1 Post                           -0.0517***                                   -0.0705**
                                                        (0.0177)                                    (0.0337)
                     2nd Post                          -0.0287*                                    -0.0504**
                                                        (0.0169)                                    (0.0197)
                     3rd Post                            -0.0217                                  -0.0508***
                                                        (0.0152)                                    (0.0183)
                                                                Account Contribution
                                               At <Median Account                 At > Median Account
                     1st Post                       -0.0958*                           -0.0343**
                                                    (0.0507)                            (0.0157)
                     2nd Post                      -0.0544**                             -0.0353
                                                    (0.0268)                            (0.0251)
                     3rd Post                        -0.0411                             -0.0239
                                                    (0.0347)                            (0.0149)
                                                                 Effective Deductible
                                             At <Median Effective Ded          At > Median Effection Ded
                     1st Post                       -0.0317*                           -0.0949**
                                                    (0.0169)                            (0.0477)
                     2nd Post                        -0.0364                           -0.0522**
                                                    (0.0255)                            (0.0233)
                     3rd Post                        -0.0230                             -0.0463
                                                    (0.0146)                            (0.0301)

                    Notes: Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Median
                    account contribution is $500. Median effective deductible is $1,250. Full model estimates available in
                    appendix table A2-4 and A2-5. Estimated using the STATA command margins, eydx(*). While different,
                    none of the CDHP effects are significantly different from each other across account type.
                                                                                           40


Appendices


Appendix A1: Documentation of Preliminary Analysis Steps

Table A1-1: Sample Restrictions

 Restriction Type                         Restriction                         % of the Sample
                                                                                 Dropped

Analysis Criteria    Person-years with less than one plan year of             34%
                     continuous enrollment

Analysis Criteria    Person-years in a control firm and enrolled in a         0.4%
                     CDHP; in a treatment year, enrolled in a CDHP
                     before firm offered; in a control firm with a high
                     deductible; in a treatment firm with a high deductible
                     before firm offered

Data Anomalies       Person-years with missing plan information, irregular    7.8%
                     family structures

Data Anomalies       Person-years with very high costs                        .00117%

Data Anomalies       Firms for which we were unable to achieve adequate       4.4%
                     within firm balance on covariates over time
                                                                                                   41


Table A1-2: Fit Statistics From Candidate GLM Models



                                        (1)                     (2)                (3)
                                     Gamma-Log             Poisson-Log          Normal-Log
           Pre + Control†
                         AIC             17.99                 7191                 21.52
                         BIC           -1.49e+08             7.46e+10             1.07e+15
           Full Sample
                         AIC             17.40                 7096                  20.80
                         BIC          -1.980e+08            9.590e+10             1.380e+15
          † Model selection was carried out using model runs including data for all years for
          control firms and data only for pre-CDHP offer years for treatment firms. We provide
          the full sample results for completeness.
          Notes: These fit statistics come from the full total cost model from table 3 estimated
          with different GLM assumptions.
                                                                                                                                    42


           Figure A1-3: Histogram of KS Statistics, Control Firms, Before and After Weighting
               .8




                                                                 .8
               .6




                                                                 .6
Fraction




                                                 Fraction
               .4




                                                                 .4
               .2




                                                                 .2
                 0




                                                                  0




                     0     .05      .1     .15              .2            0     .05    .1    .15        .2
                                   Pre                                                Post




           Notes: This figure presents the distribution of KS statistics across all control firms, all years, and all covariates. Pre
           weighting, the 99%tile was 0.16 and post weighting it was 0.1.

           Figure A1-4: Histogram of Standardized Effect Size Differences, Control Firms, Before and
           After Weighting
               .8




                                                                 .8
               .6




                                                                 .6
Fraction




                                                 Fraction
               .4




                                                                 .4
               .2




                                                                 .2
                 0




                                                                      0




                     -.4   -.2     0      .2         .4                   -.4   -.2   0      .2    .4
                                   Pre                                                Post




           Notes: This figure presents the distribution of KS statistics across all control firms, all years, and all covariates. Pre
           weighting, the 99%tile was 0.24 and post weighting it was 0.14.
                                                                                                                                      43


           Figure A1-5: Histogram of KS Statistics, Treatment Firms, Before and After Weighting
               .8




                                                                             .8
               .6




                                                                             .6
Fraction




                                                           Fraction
               .4




                                                                             .4
               .2




                                                                             .2
                 0




                                                                                 0




                      0    .05   .1         .15   .2                  .25                  0   .05   .1          .15   .2    .25
                                      Pre                                                                 Post




           Notes: This figure presents the distribution of KS statistics across all treatment firms, all years, and all covariates.
           Pre weighting, the 99%tile was 0.26 and post weighting it was 0.06.

           Figure A1-6: Histogram of Standardized Effect Size Differences, Treatment Firms, Before and
           After Weighting
               .6




                                                                            .6
               .4




                                                                            .4
Fraction




                                                       Fraction
               .2




                                                                            .2
                0




                                                                             0




                     -.5               0                              .5             -.5              0                     .5
                                      Pre                                                            Post




           Notes: This figure presents the distribution of KS statistics across all treatment firms, all years, and all covariates.
           Pre weighting, the 99%tile was 0.46 and post weighting it was 0.10.
                                                                       44


Appendix A2: Additional Results Related to Tables 3 and 4

Table A2-1: Full Model Results from Table 3

                                                            (1)
                        VARIABLES                       Total Costs

                          Treat*(2nd Pre Year)            -0.000640
                                                           (0.0160)
                         Treat*(1st Post Year)            -0.0655**
                                                           (0.0256)
                         Treat*(2nd Post Year)           -0.0434***
                                                           (0.0145)
                         Treat*(3rd Post Year)            -0.0339**
                                                           (0.0142)
                           Female                          0.281***
                                                           (0.0126)
                            Age                          0.00880***
                                                          (0.00162)
                        Age Squared                     0.000316***
                                                          (2.47e-05)
                      Married, No Kids                     0.120***
                                                           (0.0184)
                    Adult Male with Kids                 -0.0866***
                                                           (0.0231)
                   Adult Female with Kids                  0.0427**
                                                           (0.0167)
                     Married with Kids                     0.155***
                                                           (0.0372)
                  Median HH. Income (Zip)                  4.22e-07
                                                          (3.08e-07)
                    % Unemployed (Zip)                       0.165
                                                            (0.135)
                       % College (Zip)                    -0.183***
                                                           (0.0507)
                    % High School (Zip)                   -0.226***
                                                           (0.0733)
                      % Hispanic (Zip)                      -0.0638
                                                           (0.0748)
                       % Black (Zip)                        -0.0135
                                                           (0.0681)
                       % White (Zip)                        0.159**
                                                           (0.0677)
                       Middle Atlantic                    -0.124***
                                                           (0.0414)
                     East North Central                     -0.0457
                                                           (0.0355)
                                         45


    West North Central        -0.0485
                             (0.0396)
      South Atlantic         -0.00888
                             (0.0380)
    East South Central        0.00494
                             (0.0427)
    West South Central         0.0118
                             (0.0448)
        Mountain             -0.00627
                             (0.0505)
         Pacific             -0.139**
                             (0.0602)
    Unknown Location         -0.144**
                             (0.0729)
         d(MSA)             -0.127***
                             (0.0321)
 Middle Atlantic*d(MSA)      0.171***
                             (0.0444)
East North Central*d(MSA)    0.138***
                             (0.0331)
West North Central*d(MSA)    0.130***
                             (0.0395)
  South Atlantic*d(MSA)      0.0936**
                             (0.0381)
East South Central*d(MSA)     0.101**
                             (0.0414)
West South Central*d(MSA)    0.179***
                             (0.0423)
    Mountain*d(MSA)            0.0455
                             (0.0570)
     Pacific*d(MSA)          0.233***
                             (0.0466)
          2004              0.0688***
                             (0.0135)
          2005               0.144***
                             (0.0118)
          2006               0.182***
                             (0.0140)
          2007               0.256***
                             (0.0129)

      Observations          13,553,830
                                                                                                                                                     46


    Table A2-2: Marginal Effects (in $ Terms)

                                      (1)                           (2)                       (3)                     (4)                      (5)
   VARIABLES                      Total Costs                 Outpatient Costs          Inpatient Costs             ED Costs                Drug Costs

Treat*(2nd Pre Year)                 -2.034                         -12.27                   6.129                    -4.521                   9.309
                                    (50.80)                        (24.25)                  (15.30)                  (5.164)                  (13.93)
Treat*(1st Post Year)              -208.2**                       -114.0**                 -41.35*                    -4.129                -44.50***
                                    (81.55)                        (44.61)                  (21.48)                  (10.21)                  (12.59)
Treat*(2nd Post Year)             -138.1***                       -68.47**                 -34.73*                    7.590                 -38.93***
                                    (46.19)                        (34.52)                  (20.90)                  (14.06)                  (10.97)
Treat*(3rd Post Year)              -107.7**                         -51.21                   1.279                    5.051                 -68.96***
                                    (45.31)                        (32.76)                  (20.86)                  (8.252)                  (17.23)
   Observations                   13,553,830                     13,553,830               13,553,830               13,553,830               13,553,830
    Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Calculated from the estimates in Table 3. Marginal effects
    estimated using the Stata command margins, dydx(*) where these are dollar differences between the reported row and the omitted baseline (1st pre
    year).
                                                                                                     47




A2-3: Fraction Enrolled in CDHP by Account Feature Groups each Treatment Year

                                                    1st post Year    2nd post Year   3rd post Year
                      Account Type
                                            HRA        0.238             0.230          0.307
                                            HSA        0.176             0.202          0.562

                      Account Contribution
                            At <Median Account         0.188             0.247          0.759
                            At >Median Account         0.202             0.181          0.239

                      Effective Deductible
                       At <Median Effective Ded        0.248             0.223          0.357
                       At > Median Effective Ded       0.143             0.203          0.279
                                                                                                                                                    48


     Table A2-4: Cost Models with Account Type Interactions

                                      (1)                          (2)                      (3)                    (4)                     (5)
   VARIABLES                      Total Costs                Outpatient Costs         Inpatient Costs            ED Costs               Drug Costs

 Treat*(2nd Pre Year)              -0.00318                       -0.0102                  0.00433                 -0.0321                  0.0150
                                    (0.0164)                     (0.0152)                 (0.0245)                (0.0396)                (0.0195)
 Treat*(1st Post Year)            -0.0517***                    -0.0473**                -0.0811**                0.00628                 -0.0501*
                                    (0.0177)                     (0.0209)                 (0.0406)                (0.0535)                (0.0262)
Treat*(2nd Post Year)              -0.0287*                       -0.0229                 -0.00948                 -0.0187              -0.0743***
                                    (0.0169)                     (0.0202)                 (0.0385)                (0.0827)                (0.0260)
 Treat*(3rd Post Year)               -0.0217                      -0.0169                   0.0214                 0.0543                -0.104***
                                    (0.0152)                     (0.0208)                 (0.0258)                (0.0788)                (0.0261)
Treat*HSA*(1st Post)                 -0.0188                      -0.0272                   0.0201                 -0.0481                 -0.0135
                                    (0.0264)                     (0.0415)                 (0.0574)                (0.1203)                (0.0321)
Treat*HSA*(2nd Post)                 -0.0218                      -0.0258                  -0.0677                  0.124                   0.0319
                                    (0.0264)                     (0.0366)                 (0.0518)                 (0.180)                (0.0333)
Treat*HSA*(3rd Post)                 -0.0291                      -0.0252                  -0.0609                  -0.123                  0.0305
                                    (0.0223)                     (0.0375)                 (0.0468)                 (0.107)                (0.0391)
   Demographics                        Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
   Year Dummies                        Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
     Location                          Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Firm Fixed Effects                    Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes

   Observations                   13,553,830                    13,553,830              13,553,830              13,553,830              13,553,830
  Number of Firms                     54                            54                      54                      54                      54
     Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional
     assumption and log-link. Demographics include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
     (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls include full
     interactions between 9 census region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
                                                                                                                                                  49


   Table A2-5: Cost Models with Account Contribution Interactions

                                                                    (1)                (2)                   (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                                Total Costs      Outpatient Costs      Inpatient Costs    ED Costs       Drug Costs

                                        Treat*(2nd Pre Year)      -0.00271           -0.00809             0.00314          -0.0353           0.0118
                                                                  (0.0180)           (0.0164)             (0.0277)        (0.0445)         (0.0200)
                                        Treat*(1st Post Year)     -0.0958*            -0.0844               -0.103        -0.167**       -0.0878***
                                                                  (0.0507)           (0.0523)             (0.0635)        (0.0764)         (0.0297)
                                      Treat*(2nd Post Year)      -0.0544**            -0.0420              -0.112*          0.137        -0.0514***
                                                                  (0.0268)           (0.0385)             (0.0610)         (0.213)         (0.0141)
                                        Treat*(3rd Post Year)      -0.0411            -0.0437              0.0169          0.0752         -0.114***
                                                                  (0.0347)           (0.0375)             (0.0795)         (0.123)         (0.0397)
Treat*1st Post Year*Above Median Account Contribution              0.0615             0.0350               0.0728          0.289*           0.0556*
                                                                  (0.0530)           (0.0531)             (0.0725)         (0.156)         (0.0327)
Treat*2nd Post Year*Above Median Account Contribution              0.0191            0.00121                0.110           -0.145         -0.00659
                                                                  (0.0390)           (0.0449)             (0.0745)         (0.226)         (0.0298)
Treat*3rd Post Year*Above Median Account Contribution              0.0173             0.0201             -0.000876         -0.0143           0.0283
                                                                  (0.0389)           (0.0414)             (0.0864)         (0.148)         (0.0469)
                     Demographics                                    Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
                     Year Dummies                                    Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
                       Location                                      Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
                   Firm Fixed Effects                                Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes

               Proportion of Total Costs                           1.00               0.53                  0.20            0.04            0.23
                    Observations                                13,553,830         13,553,830            13,553,830       13,553,8       13,553,830
                                                                                                                             30
                    Number of Firms                                  54                 54                    54             54              54
   Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional
   assumption and log-link. Demographics include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
   (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls include full
   interactions between 9 census region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
                                                                                                                                                 50


  Table A2-6: Cost Models with Effective Deductible Contribution Interactions

                                                                   (1)                (2)                   (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                               Total Costs      Outpatient Costs      Inpatient Costs    ED Costs       Drug Costs

                                       Treat*(2nd Pre Year)     -0.00198           -0.00806              0.00651          -0.0371          0.0120
                                                                (0.0171)            (0.0157)             (0.0255)        (0.0433)         (0.0198)
                                       Treat*(1st Post Year)    -0.0317*          -0.0503***              -0.0215          0.143         -0.0274**
                                                                (0.0169)            (0.0141)             (0.0401)         (0.128)         (0.0138)
                                     Treat*(2nd Post Year)       -0.0364             -0.0353              -0.0296         0.0208         -0.0551**
                                                                (0.0255)            (0.0250)             (0.0370)        (0.0723)         (0.0247)
                                       Treat*(3rd Post Year)     -0.0230             -0.0250              0.0327          0.0688        -0.0955***
                                                                (0.0146)            (0.0202)             (0.0265)        (0.0820)         (0.0227)
Treat*1st Post Year*Above Median Effective Deductible            -0.0632             -0.0323              -0.0807        -0.322**        -0.0625**
                                                                (0.0505)            (0.0506)             (0.0699)         (0.160)         (0.0317)
Treat*2nd Post Year*Above Median Effective Deductible            -0.0158             -0.0114              -0.0507         0.0797          0.00142
                                                                (0.0359)            (0.0447)             (0.0621)         (0.211)         (0.0303)
Treat*3rd Post Year*Above Median Effective Deductible            -0.0232           -0.00848                -0.115         -0.0505          0.0332
                                                                (0.0312)            (0.0343)             (0.0747)         (0.104)         (0.0596)
                    Demographics                                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                    Year Dummies                                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                      Location                                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                  Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes                 Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes

              Proportion of Total Costs                           1.00               0.53                  0.20            0.04            0.23
                   Observations                                13,553,830         13,553,830            13,553,830       13,553,8       13,553,830
                                                                                                                            30
                   Number of Firms                                  54                 54                    54             54              54
  Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional
  assumption and log-link. Demographics include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
  (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls include full
  interactions between 9 census region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
                                                                              51


Appendix A3: Models to Check Firm Composition Over Time

Table A3-1: Plan Descriptives by Treatment Cohort

All                                                             Account
                           N
Firms                               Takeup    HRA      HSA     Contribution
        1st post Year 1,269,190      0.194    0.141   0.0792      157.2
                                                                 (267.7)
          2nd Post
                        1,002,859   0.214     0.091   0.122       154.2
            Year
                                                                 (290.2)
           3rd Post
                        480,535     0.346     0.251   0.0954      262.2
             Year
                                                                 (318.5)
Firms with at least 2
Post Years
       1st post Year    980,554     0.185     0.105   0.0795      126.3
                                                                 (264.9)
          2nd Post
                        1,002,859   0.214     0.091   0.122       154.2
            Year
                                                                 (290.2)
           3rd Post
                        480,535     0.346     0.251   0.0954      262.2
             Year
                                                                 (318.5)
Firms with 3 Post
Years
       1st post Year    412,142     0.253      0.24   0.0127      290.2
                                                                 (337.8)
          2nd Post
                        453,573     0.270     0.191   0.0786      290.7
            Year
                                                                 (350.6)
           3rd Post
                        480,535     0.346     0.251   0.0954      262.2
             Year
                                                                 (318.5)
                                                                                                                                                   52


    Table A3-2: Cost Models Restricted to Treatment Firms That Offer at Least Two Years (20 Treatment Firms)

                                     (1)                          (2)                      (3)                    (4)                     (5)
   VARIABLES                     Total Costs                Outpatient Costs         Inpatient Costs            ED Costs               Drug Costs

Treat*(2nd Pre Year)                0.0162                      0.00412                    0.0242                 0.0268                 0.0333*
                                   (0.0144)                     (0.0155)                 (0.0222)                (0.0302)                (0.0197)
Treat*(1st Post Year)             -0.0770**                    -0.0759**                -0.0933**                 -0.0872              -0.0593***
                                   (0.0324)                     (0.0326)                 (0.0407)                (0.0655)                (0.0222)
Treat*(2nd Post Year)            -0.0428***                     -0.0399*                 -0.0587*                 0.0597               -0.0486***
                                   (0.0162)                     (0.0221)                 (0.0352)                 (0.109)                (0.0154)
Treat*(3rd Post Year)             -0.0359**                      -0.0317                  -0.0085                 0.0262               -0.0908***
                                   (0.0175)                     (0.0216)                 (0.0357)                (0.0612)                (0.0243)
  Demographics                       Yes                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
  Year Dummies                       Yes                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
    Location                         Yes                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                   Yes                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes

   Observations                  12,808,248                    12,808,248              12,808,248              12,808,248              12,808,248
    Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional
    assumption and log-link. Demographics include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
    (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls include full
    interactions between 9 census region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
                                                                                                                                                   53


    Table A3-3: Cost Models Restricted to Treatment Firms That Offer at Least Three Years (13 Treatment Firms)

                                     (1)                          (2)                      (3)                    (4)                     (5)
   VARIABLES                     Total Costs                Outpatient Costs         Inpatient Costs            ED Costs               Drug Costs

Treat*(1st Post Year)             -0.0369**                    -0.0357**                  -0.0520                 0.0201                  -0.0387
                                   (0.0176)                     (0.0169)                 (0.0452)                (0.0548)                (0.0242)
Treat*(2nd Post Year)               -0.0175                      -0.0156                   0.0207                 -0.0299               -0.0566**
                                   (0.0147)                     (0.0149)                 (0.0334)                (0.0799)                (0.0253)
Treat*(3rd Post Year)              -0.0218*                      -0.0189                   0.0308                 0.0208               -0.0926***
                                   (0.0126)                     (0.0162)                 (0.0285)                (0.0746)                (0.0237)
  Demographics                        Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
  Year Dummies                        Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
    Location                          Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                    Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes

   Observations                  10,851,860                    10,851,860              10,851,860              10,851,860              10,851,860
    Clustered (at firm level) standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GLM Models estimated with a Gamma distributional
    assumption and log-link. Demographics include gender, age, age squared, six level family type, median household income (zip), % unemployed
    (zip), % college degree (zip), % high school degree (zip), % Hispanic (zip) % Black (zip), and % White (zip). Location controls include full
    interactions between 9 census region dummies and a dummy for being in an MSA.
