                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AN EXTRAPOLATIVE MODEL OF HOUSE PRICE DYNAMICS

                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                        Charles G. Nathanson

                                        Working Paper 21037
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21037


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




We thank Ian Dew-Becker, David Levine, Giacomo Ponzetto and seminar participants at Kellogg,
UPF/CREI, and EUI for helpful comments, and Nina Tobio and Aidan McLoughlin for excellent research
assistance. Nathanson thanks the Guthrie Center for Real Estate Research for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21037.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Edward L. Glaeser and Charles G. Nathanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Extrapolative Model of House Price Dynamics
Edward L. Glaeser and Charles G. Nathanson
NBER Working Paper No. 21037
March 2015
JEL No. D03,G02,R21

                                              ABSTRACT

A modest approximation by homebuyers leads house prices to display three features that are present
in the data but usually missing from perfectly rational models: momentum at one-year horizons, mean
reversion at five-year horizons, and excess longer-term volatility relative to fundamentals. Valuing
a house involves forecasting the current and future demand to live in the surrounding area. Buyers
forecast using past transaction prices. Approximating buyers do not adjust for the expectations of past
buyers, and instead assume that past prices reflect only contemporaneous demand, as with a capitalization
rate formula. Consistent with survey evidence, this approximation leads buyers to expect increases
in the market value of their homes after recent house price increases, to fail to anticipate the price busts
that follow booms, and to be overconfident in their assessments of the housing market.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Charles G. Nathanson
Department of Finance
Kellogg School of Management
Andersen Hall, 4th Floor, Room 401
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
nathanson@kellogg.northwestern.edu
   Metropolitan area housing prices display significant momentum (Case and Shiller, 1989), mean
reversion (Cutler, Poterba and Summers, 1991), and excess variance relative to fundamentals
(Glaeser et al., 2014). These features were spectacularly on display during the great housing con-
vulsion that rocked the U.S., and the world, between 1996 and 2010. Yet these three phenomena
characterized house price dynamics even before this episode, and continue to do so afterward. Case
and Shiller’s seminal work on house price momentum was published in 1989, and Glaeser et al.
(2014) document mean reversion and excess volatility in house prices between 1980 and 2003. A
successful model of house price dynamics must therefore predict momentum, mean reversion, and
excess volatility in steady state, and not just during periods of extraordinary turbulence.
   A large literature has tried, with incomplete success, to accomplish this task with rational
models of the housing market. Rationality is difficult to square with the strong predictability of
house prices, as rational homebuyers should foresee predictable price changes and alter their bids
quickly to arbitrage predictability away. Search models such as Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun (2014)
and Guren (2014), in which prices fail to be Walrasian, introduce sluggish adjustment into the
housing market, which produces momentum in price changes. Yet these models typically have more
trouble explaining either excess volatility or longer-term mean reversion. Glaeser et al. (2014) show
that longer-term mean reversion in fundamentals can explain the mean reversion observed in prices,
but the momentum in fundamentals cannot explain the momentum in prices.
   In this paper, we present a simple model of housing price formation that can fit these facts in
which buyers use an approximation rather than fully fathoming the beliefs of past buyers. Valuing
a home involves forecasting future house prices, as buyers expect to resell at some future point. To
forecast prices, buyers look at past prices. This extrapolation, on its own, is perfectly rational and
reasonable. Demand to live in the city determines prices, so buyers may learn about the state of
housing demand by studying past prices. Both academics and real estate practitioners commonly
use house prices as a measure of demand for living in an area, and use past prices to forecast future
movements.
   This sequential inference is difficult to do correctly. An economy of rational homebuyers will
filter demand perfectly out of the history of prices (Proposition 1). But this filtering depends on
an immense amount of coordination among the buyers. They all must use the same unintuitive
formula to map the price history to current demand. Under some parameters, this formula puts
exponentially increasing weights on past prices (Proposition 3). This bizarre formula works as long

                                                  1
as all past buyers used it as well. It fails spectacularly when they did not. The cognitive difficulty
in calculating this formula, as well as its lack of robustness, leads to the consideration of alternate
inference rules.
       We follow Eyster and Rabin (2010) and assume that individuals are imperfect at inferring the
belief processes of others. Following their terminology, homebuyers are “naive,” meaning that while
they rationally calculate the correct price given their beliefs about demand and demand growth,
they do no rationally infer how past prices were formed. They neglect that past buyers, like
themselves, also used prices to update their beliefs. Instead, naive buyers simply think that past
prices provide direct estimates of housing demand. Our inference rule is also an application of
the cognitive hierarchy model of Camerer, Ho and Chong (2004); naive homebuyers are “level-1
thinkers.” Eyster, Rabin and Vayanos (2013) model similarly naive investors in financial markets.
In their case, traders ignore the information implied by current prices, and in our case, traders use
an approximation that leads to a misunderstanding of past prices.1
       One interpretation of naive inference is that buyers just make a mistake, but our preferred
interpretation is that they are making a convenient approximation. Buyers know that on average,
prices equal fundamentals divided by the interest rate. Naive buyers apply this approximation
to compute demand from past prices. The approximation is accurate for deducing the general
level of demand from house prices, but causes errors when used sequentially by buyers. As in
Gabaix (2014)’s sparse reasoning theory, buyers err by using an approximation well-suited to one
environment in a different setting.
       This approximation seems plausible to us, especially since like many housing economists, we
have been guilty of it ourselves. Somewhat surprisingly, it radically shifts the model’s predicted
house price dynamics, and generates extrapolation, as in Barberis et al. (2013). Naive homebuyers
infer the path of fundamentals from past price changes. If housing prices grew by five percent
annually over a five year period, they infer that this change represents the underlying growth rate
in fundamentals. The mistake is that this five year growth also reflects changes in beliefs about
fundamentals, which means that the actual level of demand is much smaller. As a result, a positive
demand shock leads to a wave of sequential upward revisions in beliefs, causing momentum in prices
and eventual overshooting. During a boom, naive homebuyers overestimate housing demand, and
   1
    Adam, Beutel and Marcet (2014) study stock price dynamics when traders have extrapolative expectations of
future stock prices. These extrapolative expectations are similar to those that result from naive inference, but they
are motivated in a different way.


                                                         2
during a bust, they underestimate it.
   We incorporate naive inference into a continuous time model of house prices. In this model,
growth rates mean revert and the current growth rate is not directly observable. Importantly, while
individuals observe their own level of demand, they do not observe the current level of market
demand directly and must also infer that through transaction prices. We demonstrate analytically
that if buyers only have limited access to past transactions (two periods) then a sinusoidal relation-
ship between price changes results (Proposition 5). Prices load positively on the most recent lag,
as naive buyers infer the level of demand from this lag, and negatively on the second lag, as a lower
second lag signals a higher growth rate. Precisely this time series relationship leads to short-term
momentum and long-term mean reversion (Lemma 4).
   We then calibrate the model to see if the quantitative predictions match the data. Many of
our parameters come from existing literature, and in some cases, we estimate parameters ourselves.
When buyers are all rational, even a strong persistence of demand growth rates generates little
positive momentum in housing price changes. With naive homebuyers, the model closely matches
the empirical value of one- and two-period auto-correlations in housing prices. At lower frequencies,
our model also matches mean reversion when buyers are naive, but fails if buyers are rational. The
naive model generates over-shooting in response to an impulse response, and variance in excess of
fundamentals, especially over longer time periods. We conduct sensitivity analysis to understand
which parameter values are needed to generate these results. Growth rate persistence is most
important, and the necessary value can be calibrated from data on metropolitan area income and
rents.
   We ask whether the naive inference can explain the patterns in home buyer beliefs documented
by Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012). Homeowners appear to forecast significant increases in
market values after recent price growth. This type of extrapolation is at odds with full rationality,
as an economy of rational homeowners should realize that demand shocks are fully reflected in house
prices almost immediately. Naive buyers, in contrast, do extrapolate, as they fail to understand the
evolving beliefs of future buyers. Significantly, this failure leads naive buyers to under -extrapolate
future price increases from past ones, a result that Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012) document.
Our simulations match the quantitative extent of extrapolation that appears in survey data.
   We find that reasonable parameter estimates yield predictions about momentum, mean reversion
and volatility of prices that match the data reasonably well. The model also shows how these

                                                  3
predictions change as we change different parameter values. One of the more interesting findings is
that the bubble-like features of markets disappear when information is either too good or too bad.
If buyers have highly accurate direct signals about the state of demand, then momentum, mean
reversion and excess volatility disappear. But these features also disappear if buyers have access to
relatively limited data on the number of past housing transactions. The most extreme fluctuations
occur when buyers have relatively good data about past prices, but limited data on the underlying
fundamentals.
       Our approach builds on a number of non-rational theories of momentum and mean reversion in
housing, such as Piazzesi and Schneider (2009). Their work follows a long established “noise trader”
tradition in finance of perturbing rational models by assuming irrationality for a small number of
agents and then examining how those small number of agents shape prices (De Long et al., 1990).
Barberis et al. (2013), for example, continue this tradition by examining the impact of modest
numbers of extrapolators in formal asset markets. Hong and Stein (1999) present a model in which
momentum caused by inattentive investors leads to mean reversion resulting from arbitrageurs.
       Yet we think that it is easier to understand housing markets as being driven by small irra-
tionality from the many rather than major irrationality from the few. It seems incorrect to view
housing markets in 2004-2006 as being dominated by a small number of highly irrational investors.
Millions of Americans bought homes during that time period. Polls of homebuyers during booms
(Case, Shiller and Thompson, 2012) suggest that beliefs about perpetually high rates of future price
appreciation were quite widespread. Furthermore, arbitrage by outside investors is notoriously dif-
ficult in the housing market (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2009), limiting the applicability of standard
finance models to this context.
       A voluminous literature in finance has argued that movements in discount rates can explain the
excess volatility of asset prices relative to fundamentals. This literature is surveyed by Cochrane
(2011). Discount rate variation provides a fully rational explanation of why high price-dividend
ratios predict low returns.2 This paper explains how homeowners may consistently overestimate
returns when prices are high and underestimate them when prices are low. Consistent errors seem
   2
     In our model, housing prices are driven by beliefs about fundamentals, rather than an independent (near) rational
bubble. We made this choice because with endogenous supply, rational bubbles predict a positive probability of
extreme long-run prices, which would generate extreme long-run investment and city size. Giglio, Maggiori and
Stroebel (2014) compare long-run leases and prices to provide significant evidence that the transversality condition
really does hold for housing, making rational bubbles impossible. Yet Adam, Kuang and Marcet (2011) have shown
how almost-rational bubbles can generate impressive swings in prices and strongly link prices and interest rates.


                                                          4
more likely in the housing market than in other asset markets where arbitrage is easier and trade
is more frequent.
        All work on semi-rationality is troubled by Tolstoy’s corollary: there is only one way to make
correct inferences but an uncountable number of ways to get things wrong. Naive extrapolation is
one possible model of semi-rationality in housing markets. Many other forms of irrationality may
exist, and it may be possible to discover a rational model that can reconcile all the facts. Yet it is
remarkable that this relatively modest deviation from rationality predicts outcomes so much closer
to reality than the standard rational model.



1         A Model of House Price Determination

1.1        Housing Market Fundamentals

We consider the choice of an individual who is deciding whether or not to purchase a home. This
person is matched with one house, and if she purchases the house, she receives a flow of utility
improvement of Di,t relative to her next best alternative. This flow utility can be interpreted as
the overall benefit of living in the city relative to a reservation locale, but in that case, we must
also assume that the opportunity to buy in the city is a once-in-a-lifetime chance. Alternatively,
the reservation utility could include the opportunity of buying again in the city, but this makes
interpretation slightly more difficult. The supply of housing is fixed.3
        This overall utility combines an idiosyncratic element ai with a city-specific component Dt :


                                                Di,t = Dt + ai .                                               (1)


These elements include both the labor market returns and utility-related benefits from living in
the city. The idiosyncratic component is drawn independently for each individual from a normal
    3
    The interaction between uncertainty and housing supply has been explored elsewhere. Glaeser, Gyourko and
Saiz (2008) examine the link between belief-based bubbles and housing supply. Nathanson and Zwick (2014) go
further and show that in land markets, which can be dominated by small numbers of professional buyers, bubbles
can appear more readily than in housing markets, in which ownership is far more dispersed. Gao, Sockin and Xiong
(2014) is similar to this paper as they also focus on the process of learning about housing demand from prices, but
their model is fully rational and they focus on the interaction between housing supply and belief aggregation.




                                                        5
distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation σa . The city-specific component of utility follows


                                        dD = gdt + σD dW D ,                                     (2)


where W D is a standard Wiener process and g is a stochastic process we define shortly.
   In this specification, changes to city-level demand persist over time. Such persistence has
some empirical basis in the fact that Gibrat’s law seems to hold for metropolitan areas (Glaeser,
Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1995; Eaton and Eckstein, 1997; Gabaix, 1999). There is correlation be-
tween past success and the future population or employment growth of the city. Typically, there
has been mean reversion of incomes at the city level, but even that fact has declined over time
(Berry and Glaeser, 2005; Ganong and Shoag, 2013). The absence of city-level mean reversion is for
convenience, and the model could easily encompass this feature while leaving the results unchanged.
The critical assumption is that growth rates shift over time and mean revert, so that


                                       dg = −λgdt + σg dW g ,                                    (3)


where W g is a standard Weiner process that is independent from W D . If growth rates were constant,
then they would eventually be known, and the learning about growth that is a crucial element in
the model would disappear. If growth rates did not mean revert, but instead followed a random
walk, then the price dynamics would become too explosive and yield none of the mean reversion
that we see in the data.
   The persistence of growth rates is empirically debatable, and depends on how demand at the
city level is measured. Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun (2014) find a correlation of 0.27 between annual
income growth and lagged income growth at the city level. In our empirical work below, we find a
larger correlation of 0.7 using metropolitan area rents as the proxy for demand. This persistence
is certainly a necessary feature of our model, and we will show what the model implies when the
persistence of growth rates is quite small.
   The market assumption is that each transaction involves exactly one buyer and one seller, and
the buyer pays a price that makes her indifferent between owning the house or not. The seller’s
willingness to accept is irrelevant. We do not mean to suggest that this is a realistic model of
housing markets, in which most homes have multiple prospective buyers and most buyers consider



                                                 6
a number of homes. The role that the bargaining process can play in shaping housing dynamics
has been examined elsewhere (Anenberg and Bayer, 2013; Guren, 2014) and we are interested in
particularly examining the role of non-standard beliefs. As such, we have chosen a particularly
simple market structure in order to focus how the inference process can shape demand volatility
and the persistence of price movements.
   Individuals remain in their homes unless they receive a shock that forces them to move. These
exogenous mobility shocks are Poisson and arrive at a rate µ. Mobility shocks are the easiest way
to generate resale and an interest by buyers in future prices. We agree strongly that an endogenous
resale model would be more realistic. Moreover, the fixed sale assumption is compatible with the
earlier assumption that prices are determined by the willingness to pay of the buyer, not any aspect
of the seller.
   We define pi,t to be the price of a house transacted at t to buyer i, and pt to be the average
price of all houses sold at t. The discounted value of owning the house and the willingness to pay
therefore equal
                                Z   T                                                          
                                         −r(τ −t)             −r(T −t)
                  pi,t = Ei,t            e          Di,τ dτ + e          pT   T − t ∼ Poisson(µ) ,   (4)
                                 t


where r is the discount rate. Price formation depends on each buyer’s expectations about future
prices, and therefore on each buyer’s expectations of future buyers’ expectations. When this ex-
pectation forecasting takes a specific form, which is general enough to encompass both the rational
and naive rules we specify later, prices follow a simple linear structure:

Lemma 1. Suppose that for all T ≥ t, Ei,t ET DT = Ei,t DT and Ei,t ET gT = φg (T − t)Ei,t gt for
some function φg , where ET denotes the average expectation among buyers at T . An equilibrium
for the average price of the houses transacted at t is given by
                                                             
                                          1        r  a  µ c
                                     pt =            D +    Dt + Ag gbt ,                            (5)
                                          r       r+µ t r+µ

where Dta equals the average flow utility Di,t among buyers at t, D
                                                                  ct and gbt are their average beliefs

about the current values of city demand D and its growth rate g, and Ag is a constant.

To determine the expectations in the pricing formula, we now discuss each buyer’s information set.



                                                              7
1.2     Information Available to Buyers

At time t, the buyer knows the current flow utility Di,t she receives from the house to which she is
matched. She also observes a history of transaction prices of houses in the city. In particular, she
learns the average price pt0 every δ units of time before her purchase, that is, for t0 = t − δ, t − 2δ,
and so forth. The number of sales in each average equals N . This transaction history corresponds
to a price index in the case N is large, or to simply a list of all transactions when N = 1. We derive
some analytic results in the limit as N → ∞, but allow for finite N in the quantitative exercises.
We denote the set of observed prices by Ωpt = {pt−mδ | m ∈ N}, where N is the set of positive
integers.
   It is natural that the buyer would know her own flow utility Di,t at t. After all, this is the
utility the buyer currently receives from living in the city. Knowing past prices is also reasonable,
as house prices are readily available from a number of sources. Homebuyers frequently examine the
sale prices of similar homes before making a purchase. This practice, called “comparable analysis”
or “comps,” is the foundation for property appraisals.
   The buyer cannot directly observe the city demand Dt or its growth rate gt . City-wide demand
Dt is an aggregation of private information Di,t . Less obvious is why the buyer cannot observe gt ,
given that this growth rate directly affects the flow utility the buyer will receive. The intuition
here is that the buyer’s utility rises and falls with the quality of the city, either though amenities
or the labor market. As these fluctuations involve city-wide forces beyond the buyer’s control, it
is reasonable to suppose that the buyer possesses no private information about the current growth
rate.
   In principle, a buyer could obtain information on Dt from looking at various economic indicators
about the city. To permit this possibility, we allow buyers to observe noisy signals Dts of demand,
where Dts = Dt + st and st is an independently drawn normal error with standard deviation σs .
Buyers have access to this information at the same frequency with which they observe prices: the
set of signals known at t equals Ωst = {Dt−mδ
                                         s
                                              | m ∈ N}.
   In addition to {Di,t }, Ωpt , and Ωst , the buyer at t also observes stochastically revealed direct
observations of the true state of demand. These observations occur at a set of times T that are
realizations of a continuous-time Poisson process with parameter ρ > 0, where ρ is small. That is,
given realizations on T up to some time, the cumulative distribution function for the time ∆t until


                                                   8
the next realization is 1 − e−ρ∆t . We denote xt = (Dt , gt )0 to be the state of demand at t. The
buyer at t observes Ωxt = {xt0 | t0 ∈ T and t0 ≤ t}. This rare revelation of the true state of the
world has important consequences for the uniqueness of equilibrium when buyers are rational. As
long as ρ > 0, with probability 1 there exists some time in the past when the state of demand was
revealed. Rational buyers begin at that state and then infer all of the demand shocks since then.
This process of rational inference occurs anytime history has a beginning.
   The complete information set for the buyer is


                                     Ωi,t = {Di,t } ∪ Ωpt ∪ Ωat ∪ Ωxt .                              (6)


1.3     Inference about Demand

The buyer’s inference problem is to use the data in Ωi,t to infer the value of market demand Dt
and its growth rate gt . The best a buyer can do is to extract all the data that has been directly
observed by buyers before t. In addition to the signals in Ωst , this information includes all individual
flow utility Di0 ,t0 . Due to the normality assumptions, a sufficient statistic for the distribution of
buyer flow utility at t0 is Dta0 , the average flow utility across the N buyers at that time. We denote
        a
Ωat = {Dt−mδ | m ∈ N}.
   When buyers are rational and the rationality of all buyers is common knowledge, observing the
infinite history of prices allows the buyers to know the history Ωat :

Proposition 1. Suppose it is common knowledge among buyers at all times that information sets
take the form given in (6). Then each buyer can perfectly deduce the history Ωat of average buyer
flow utility.

Given this proposition, inference for the rational buyers involves a standard signal extraction prob-
lem where Dt and gt are inferred from the series of past noisy observations of D in Ωat and Ωst , as
well as the noisy observation of Dt given by private utility Di,t .
   The proof of Proposition 1 goes as follows. Let t0 < t be a time at which buyers at t observe
house sales. Conditional on all house prices and demand signals before t0 , the price at t0 is a strictly
increasing function of average flow utility Dta0 , as higher flow utility directly increases the pricing
equation (5) and also increases the posterior means D
                                                    ct0 and gbt0 . Because the buyer at t observes all

prices and demand signals before t0 , she exactly infers Dta0 from observing the transacted price pt0 .

                                                     9
   As this proof makes clear, deducing Ωat requires a fairly hefty cognitive load on the part of the
buyers, as they need to infer everything about beliefs in the past. As such, we introduce a second
possibility: buyers believe that past buyers used the pricing formula pi,t0 = Di,t0 /r, which makes
inference quite straightforward. Simply multiplying the price pt0 by the constant r yields Dta0 , and
then the inference proceeds as in the rational case. We call this procedure naive inference.
   Naive inference can be motivated as an approximation that results from inattention. Consider
the pricing formula delivered by Lemma 1 evaluated at some past time t0 . The long-run average of
g is 0, so if the expectation gbt0 is unbiased, it equals 0 on average. Similarly, if D
                                                                                      ct0 is unbiased it

equals Dta0 on average. Therefore, as long as the conditions of Lemma 1 hold, the past price can be
written as pt0 = Dta0 /r + ξt0 , where ξt0 is mean 0 measurement error. The quantity rpt0 is an unbiased
estimate for Dta0 , and this is the estimate naive buyers use.
   The problem with using rpt0 to estimate Dta0 is that the measurement error ξt0 is correlated across
time. This serial correlation arises from the non-independence of demand forecasts. If buyers believe
that the level or growth rate of demand is higher than its true value or long-run average today,
they are likely to believe this tomorrow as well. Proper Bayesians would recognize the dependence
across time in the measurement error, but naive buyers do not. Naive inference is quite good for
estimating demand from a single observation of house prices, but fails when estimating demand
using a series of prices. Ignoring the serial correlation in ξt0 is a form of inattention that results
from a procedure that is rational in a different context. This sort of inattention is studied in Gabaix
(2014).
   A complementary interpretation for naive inference is as the result of a simplified problem for
individuals who lack the cognitive ability to make inferences about inferences. Buyers avoid this
                                                                                  ct0 with Da0 and
recursion by replacing each prior buyer’s expectation by its expected value, i.e. D         t

gbt0 with 0. In so doing, naive buyers assume that past buyers were “simple,” and used just their
private information {Di,t0 } to draw inferences rather than the full information set Ωi,t0 . The idea
that economic agents might assign this type of simplicity to others with whom they interact has
been extensively explored by Eyster and Rabin (2005, 2010, 2014), and naive inference can be seen
as an application of their work to financial markets. Throughout the paper, we focus on the two
cases of hyper-rational homebuyers and naive homebuyers. In theory, it may be desirable to create
a mixture of the two, and consider markets in which there are both types of buyers.
   We now solve for the posteriors on Dt and gt of rational and naive buyers. The state of demand

                                                  10
for the city at t0 can be summarized by a 2 × 1 vector xt0 = (Dt0 , gt0 )0 . Given the laws of motion
in (2) and (3), this state vector evolves linearly with normal noise. Over δ, the discrete length of
time in between sales, this state vector changes according to the rule xt0 +δ = Fxt0 + wt0 , where
           −δλ
                   
F = 01 (1−ee−δλ )/λ and wt0 is identically distributed mean zero normal noise with covariance matrix
Q that is independent across time and from xt0 . The news at t0 consists of Dta0 and Dts0 . We write
this news as H0 xt0 + vt0 , where H0 = ( 11 00 ) and vt0 is normal mean zero noise with covariance
       2     
R0 = σa0/N σ02 . At t, the news consists of just Di,t , which we write as Hxt + vt , where H = (1, 0).
              s

The variance of vt is R = σa2 .
   The linear evolution of state variables as well as the normal structure of all noise allows the
buyers to use a Kalman filter to derive the optimal posterior xt | Ωi,t . The resulting average of
                                               ct , gbt )0 , the belief terms that appear in the pricing
the posteriors across buyers at t gives xbt = (D
function in (5). Lemma 2 solves for these posterior averages, as well as the covariance of each
buyer’s posterior.

Lemma 2. Let xt = (Dt , gt )0 denote the state of housing demand at t. For both rational and naive
buyers, the posterior xt | Ωi,t is a multivariate normal with the same covariance. As ρ → 0, the
mean of this posterior for rational buyers converges almost surely to

                                               ∞
                                               X
                  xbt =   KDta   + (I − KH)F         [(I − K0 H0 )F]m−1 K0 (Dt−mδ
                                                                             a       s
                                                                                  , Dt−mδ )0 ,
                                               m=1


and for naive buyers, the mean converges almost surely to

                                               ∞
                                               X
                  xbt =   KDta   + (I − KH)F       [(I − K0 H0 )F]m−1 K0 (rpt−mδ , Dt−mδ
                                                                                    s
                                                                                         )0 ,
                                               m=1


where K and K0 are matrices that depend on F, Q, R, R0 , H, and H0 . The covariance of these
posteriors converges almost surely to a time-independent matrix P.

   The two types of buyers use the same filters, but naive buyers use rpt0 in place of the true value
of Dta0 that rational buyers use. A corollary is that naive buyers are overconfident in their estimates
of housing demand. The naive posterior xt | Ωi,t is a multivariate normal with covariance P. This
matrix P is the optimal covariance that results from the correct application of the Kalman filter.
However, naive buyers do not apply the Kalman filter correctly. They use rpt0 in place of Dta0 , and
as a result, they use some alternate linear filter without realizing it. Because the Kalman filter is

                                                        11
optimal among all linear filters, the resulting error covariance is larger than P, and hence larger
than what naive buyers think it is. This following proposition sums up this argument.

Proposition 2. Naive homebuyers are overconfident in their estimates of housing demand. Let Pn
denote the covariance matrix of the naive forecast error xt − E(xt | Ωi,t ). Then Pn > P, where P is
the covariance matrix of the naive posterior xt | Ωi,t . The inequality means that Pn − P is positive
definite.

The relationship Pn > P means that naive buyers overestimate the precision of their estimates
of the level of demand Dt and its growth rate gt . Furthermore, naive buyers underestimate the
forecast error of any linear combinations of these quantities. In particular, they are overconfident
in the valuations of their homes, as the pricing equation (5) is linear in D
                                                                           ct and gbt .

   Overconfidence limits naive buyers’ attention to noisy signals about market demand. They do
not appreciate the imprecision of their inferences from prices, so they demand less information, as
the marginal value of information decreases with additional certainty. As a clear example, consider
the inference problem when N , the number of house transactions underlying each price, goes to
infinity. In this case, Dta0 → Dt0 by the law of large numbers, so the history of buyer flow utility Ωat
perfectly reveals the history of market demand. As a result, buyers ignore the noisy demand signals
Ωst . They believe all such information is already factored into house prices, which they directly
observe. This response is optimal for the rational buyers, but it is a mistake for the naive buyers.
Their overconfidence leads them to ignore valuable information.
   Unlike naive buyers, rational buyers correctly understand the precision of their forecasts, and
their posterior has the optimal covariance matrix P. They are able to achieve this optimal forecast
by inferring the true value of Dta0 from past prices. As described in the proof of Proposition 1,
extracting Ωat from Ωpt involves knowing exactly how previous buyers form their own expectations
of market demand. One of our motivations for introducing naive inference was the complexity of
this procedure. To illustrate this claim, we solve directly for the rational posterior on Dt as a
function of past prices, which is what buyers directly observe. In general, this expression is quite
complicated. The following proposition gives an intuitive form that holds in a special case.

Proposition 3. Let t0 be the last time demand was directly observed, and suppose n ≡ b(t − t0 )/δc >
1. When the number N of transactions observed each period goes to infinity, naive buyers ignore


                                                  12
information about demand and extrapolate lagged demand from the most recent price:


                                               E(Dt−δ |Ωpt ∪ Ωst ∪ Ωxt ) = rpt−δ .


When N → ∞ and growth rates do not persist (λ → ∞), the rational buyer’s posterior on the level
of demand is a telescoping sum of past prices:

                                                   n−1                  n−1       m−1
                                                 α       rpt−nδ − α0 Dt0 X        α       rpt−mδ
        E(Dt−δ |Ωpt   ∪   Ωst   ∪   Ωxt )   = −                         +      −                 ,
                                                1−α          1 − α0       m=1
                                                                                 1−α      1−α

where
                                                            µ       σa2
                                                     α=                 2
                                                          r + µ σa2 + δσD
is a constant between 0 and 1, and α0 = µ[r + µ]−1 σa2 [σa2 + (t − nδ − t0 )σD
                                                                             2 −1
                                                                               ] .

   When λ → ∞, the growth rate is irrelevant and buyers must only infer the level of demand from
past prices. Even in this simple case, the rational filter takes a starkly unintuitive form. Every other
past price counts negatively towards the rational estimate of current demand. Furthermore, when
α > 1/2 the weights on past prices grow exponentially. The parameter α captures the dependence
of current prices on past prices. A larger µ/(r + µ) leads buyers to care more about resale, and
            ct , and a larger σa2 /(σa2 + δσ 2 ) makes prices better signals about Dt than the buyer’s
hence about D                               D

idiosyncratic utility Di,t . In contrast, naive buyers simply estimate demand using the most recent
price, and in fact use this rule even when they are inferring the growth rate as well.
   Eyster and Rabin (2014) study settings in which people extract information from observing
the sequential actions of others. The correct action is positively correlated with the state of the
world, which is only partially known. They show that hyper-rationality commonly leads to “anti-
imitation.” The optimal action depends negatively on the actions of some previous people, even
though all people have the same objectives. Proposition 3 provides an example of this phenomenon
in the housing market. In this case, the action is the price paid for the house, and the information
is the level and growth rate of housing demand.
   Their work, and Proposition 3, call into question the robustness of rational updating in sequential
settings. The divergent nature of the rational filter suggests that it will not work very well if previous
prices were not formed by rational filters. If the rational filter indeed lacks this robustness property,


                                                               13
then a rational person should not use these rules if there is even a small chance that previous actors
are not hyper-rational as well. Evaluating the robustness of rational filters is difficult, as all possible
inference rules used by others must be considered. This paper stakes a small step in this direction
by investigating the performance of the rational filter when previous buyers are actually naive. We
perform this exercise in Section 3.


1.4    Price Change Forecasts

To close the model, we specify what buyers believe about the expectations of future buyers. The
weight Ag on growth expectations in the pricing formula in Lemma 1 is determined by equation (4),
and in turn by the buyer’s expectation Ei,t pT of future prices. This expectation, in turn, depends
on the forecasts of forecasts Ei,t D
                                   cT and Ei,t gc
                                                T.

   A natural way to resolve these forecasts is to impose the law of iterated expectations, so that
the first equals Ei,t DT and the second Ei,t gT . Iterated expectations are consistent with the hyper-
rationality we attributed to rational buyers in the inference problem. If common knowledge of
rationality continues into the future, then future buyers, who have at least as much information as
current buyers, should hold beliefs consistent on average with that of present buyers.
   Iterated expectations are less consistent with naive inference. Naive buyers believe that past
prices are given by Dta0 /r, and they reached this conclusion by assuming that other buyers’ expec-
tations equal their ex ante averages. A consistent forecast rule would assume that future prices are
also given by pT = DTa 0 /r, which is equivalent to setting Ei,t D
                                                                 cT = Ei,t DT and Ei,t gbt = 0.

   We model buyer forecasts to allow for consistency with both types of inference. A buyer believes
that with probability 1 − φ, future buyers are as sophisticated as herself, leading the law of iterated
expectations to hold. With probability φ, future buyers are simple and base their expectations solely
on private demand. This latter case results from buyers thinking that future buyers will be less
sophisticated, or from our preferred explanation that current buyers choose a simple model of the
behavior of others in order to lessen the cognitive load on themselves. The current buyer’s forecasts
                                                                     −λ(T −t)
hence equal Ei,t D                      T = (1 − φ)Ei,t gT = (1 − φ)e
                 cT = Ei,t Dt and Ei,t gc                                     Ei,t gt . This forecasting
rule satisfies the conditions of Lemma 1. Applying it and solving for Ag yields the following lemma.

Lemma 3. The weight Ag on the growth rate expectation in the pricing formula in Lemma 1 is
given by Ag = [r(r + λ + φµ)]−1 , where φ denotes the perceived probability that future buyers are


                                                     14
simple and do not use prices to draw inference, and 1 − φ is the probability that future buyers are
sophisticated enough for the law of iterated expectations to hold.

   One goal of this paper is to make sense of survey evidence concerning expectations about the
housing market. Much of the survey evidence on this topic is framed in terms of expectations of
price growth. For instance, the Michigan Survey of Consumers asks whether the present is a “good
time to buy [housing] for investment” (Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo, 2014). A significant
portion of respondents, around 30%, explicitly mention house prices to justify their view (Piazzesi
and Schneider, 2009). Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012) elicit quantitative estimates of house
price growth. They ask “How much of a change do you expect there to be in the value of your home
over the next 12 months?” and “On average over the next ten years how much do you expect the
value of your property to change each year?”
   To match these surveys, we calculate buyers’ expectations of the market value of their house
at current and future dates. The market value VT of a house at time T is the expected price from
selling the house at that time to a randomly selected buyer. Using the pricing function in Lemma
1, we calculate the expected market value as

                                             Et DT    (1 − φ)Et gT
                                  E t VT =         +               .                            (7)
                                               r     r(r + λ + φµ)

   Larger values of φ, the naivety of buyer forecasts, lead to stronger expectations about house
value growth. When the law of iterated expectations holds (φ = 0), buyers today believe their
information is immediately incorporated into market values. As a result, they forecast very little
changes in market values, even when they believe the growth rate is high. In contrast, buyers for
whom φ = 1 believe that growth rate news is never anticipated in market values. They therefore
predict continued increases in the market value of their homes when the growth rate is high. The
following proposition makes these results clear by solving for the expected change in market values
as a function of the growth rate belief.

Proposition 4. For a given belief about the growth rate, buyers expect greater increases in the
market values of their home when they are more naive. The expected growth in the market value of
a house equals
                                               r + φλ + φµ 1 − e−λ(T −t) gbt
                             Et (VT − Vt ) =                                 .
                                                r + λ + φµ      λ         r

                                                    15
Holding gbt constant, this expression increases in φ, the perceived probability of selling to a simple
buyer in the future.

    Rational buyers are much more conservative than naive buyers in forecasting the growth in the
market value of their homes. Indeed, the expected change when φ = 0 equals the change when
φ = 1 times r/(r + λ), and this fraction is always less than 1. The empirical value of this fraction
falls significantly below 1. For instance, if the annual persistence of growth shocks is 0.3 (the value
of income growth persistence at the metro-area level), then λ = 1.2; a value of r = 0.04 then leads
to r/(r + λ) = 0.03. Under the parameters we use in Section 3, which assume more persistence in
demand growth, the fraction rises to 0.07. This ratio falls well below 1 unless demand growth is
very persistent.
    Rational buyers believe public information gets priced into housing immediately. They therefore
do not expect much growth in the market value of their homes. In contrast, naive buyers mistakenly
believe that information about the growth rate never affects the market value of homes. This belief
allows naive buyers to expect significant increases in market values when they perceive the growth
rate of fundamentals to be high. According to the survey evidence mentioned above, expectations
of changes to the market value of one’s home are large and significant. A model in which all buyers
use rational filtering is at odds with this empirical fact.



2     Autocorrelations of Naive House Price Changes

2.1    Requisite Time Series Properties

The goal of this paper is to explain the predictable booms and busts in house prices. These dynamics
are described by the autocorrelation pattern of house price changes. In the data, annual house price
changes are positively correlated at short lags (1 to 2 years), and negatively correlated at longer
lags, with the autocorrelations decreasing over time. This pattern is fit by a dampened sinusoid: the
autocorrelations gradually oscillate between positive and negative as their amplitude diminishes.
We now show that house prices exhibit this feature when current prices depend positively on recent
lags of prices, but negatively on further lags.
    A time series displays sinusoidal autocorrelations when its characteristic polynomial has complex
roots with absolute value exceeding 1. In this case, one of the factors of its characteristic polynomial

                                                   16
must be of the form I − β1 L + β2 L2 , where (β1 /2)2 < β2 < 1. If ∆pt has this property, we may
write b(L)(I − β1 L + β2 L2 )∆pt = c(L)zt , where zt is independent and identically distributed across
time (and possibly vectorial). Annual price changes then obey the equation


                                     ∆pt = β1 ∆pt−δ − β2 ∆pt−2δ + ζt ,                              (8)


where ζt = b(L)−1 c(L)zt .
   If the behavior of ζt is unrestricted, then we cannot say much about the autocorrelations of ∆pt .
However, when ζt is an AR(1) plus noise, β1 measures the short-run autocorrelations of ∆pt while
β2 captures the cyclicality of price changes. The innovation ζt follows this form when it can be
written ζt = γt + t , with γt = e−δλγ γt−δ + ηt , with each of t and ηt independent and identically
distributed over time and Cov(t , ηt ) ≥ 0. This case is of particular interest. As we show below,
naive prices obey (8) with ζt an AR(1) plus noise. The following lemma, which is proved in the
Appendix, describes the autocorrelations of ∆pt in this case.

Lemma 4. Suppose house price changes are stationary and follow (8) with ζt an AR(1) plus noise.
Then the correlation of price changes on once-lagged changes, given by Corr(∆pt , ∆pt−δ ), is positive
if β1 > 0 and is strictly increasing in β1 . If (β1 /2)2 < β2 < 1, then autocorrelations are given by

                                                                m/2
                         Corr(∆pt , ∆pt−mδ ) = Aζ e−mδλζ + Aβ β2      cos(mθ + ω),

                                                                    √
where Aζ , Aβ , and ω are constants, and θ satisfies cos(θ) = β1 /(2 β2 ).

   Momentum, as measured by the autocorrelation of once-lagged price changes, is positive if β1 > 0
and also increases with β1 . Larger values of β1 decrease the periodicity of further autocorrelations
by lowering θ. In all three senses, β1 captures the momentum in price changes. In contrast, β2
measures the cyclical nature of house prices. When β2 is high, specifically higher than (β1 /2)2 , the
autocorrelations cycle, obeying the sinusoidal pattern given in the lemma. Furthermore, the higher
is β2 , the greater the amplitude of these cycles and the longer they last. The correlations dampen
             m/2
at the rate β2     , so a larger β2 amplifies the sinusoidal nature of the autocorrelations.




                                                    17
2.2     Autoregressive Structure of Naive Prices

We show naive inference leads prices to obey (8) in a specific case of the model. The particular
case we study imposes a number of simplifications. First, the number of home sales is large enough
                                                  √
that prices aggregate information completely (σa / N → 0). Second, the individual utility noise is
so large that buyers ignore their own utility and use only prices when inferring demand (σa → ∞).
Finally, buyers have access only to the two most recent lags of prices. This specification represents
a scenario in which buyers learn about demand entirely from recent observations of a housing price
index. The restricted information set in this special case is denoted Ω0i,t = {Di,t } ∪ {pt−δ } ∪ {pt−2δ }.
A naive buyer’s posterior on the lagged level of demand is E(Dt−δ | Ω0i,t ) = rpt−δ , and her estimate
of the lagged growth rate equals E(gt−δ | Ω0i,t ) = r(pt−δ − pt−2δ )λe−δλ /(1 − e−δλ ). The naive buyer
simply extrapolates the level of demand from the level of prices, and the growth rate from the
change in prices.
   These simple formulas lead current prices to depend positively on the first lag of prices and
negatively on the second lag. Higher values of pt−δ increase the buyer’s estimate of the level and
growth rate of demand, and both of these estimates increase today’s price pt . Conversely, a higher
value of pt−2δ lowers the estimate of the growth rate, thereby negatively impacting pt . As shown
in Lemma 4, these relationships lead house price changes to exhibit sinusoidal autocorrelations, as
long as certain additional technical conditions hold. The following proposition writes price changes
in the form given by (8), and the Appendix proves that for certain parameters, the conditions in
Lemma 4 are met.

Proposition 5. Suppose naive buyers observe only the two most recent house prices. Then there
exist parameters such that the autocorrelations of price changes obey the sinusoidal formula in
                                 √
Lemma 4. When σa → ∞ and σa / N → 0, one-period house price changes obey the autoregressive
equation

                                                                                                       D
            (1 + e−δλ )µ λe−2δλ rAg               e−δλ µ λe−2δλ rAg                  (1 − e−δλ )gt−δ wt−δ
                                                                   
∆pt =                   +                 ∆pt−δ −       +                 ∆pt−2δ +                  +     .
               r+µ        1 − e−δλ                r+µ     1 − e−δλ                      λ(r + µ)      r+µ

The g and w terms constitute an AR(1) plus noise.

   Proposition 5 shows that house prices fit the structure analyzed in Lemma 4 when buyers
are naive. Therefore, house prices display momentum and a cyclical autocorrelation structure.

                                                    18
The momentum comes from the coefficient on ∆pt−δ . Buyers’ estimates of Dt and gt positively
influence their valuations of their homes, and both of these estimates depend positively on pt−δ .
The cyclicality comes from the coefficient on ∆pt−2δ . This coefficient is negative because buyers’
estimate of gt depends negatively on pt−2δ . The lower this price, the higher buyers’ estimate of the
growth rate.
    Naive inference succeeds at conceptually explaining the autocorrelation structure of house prices.
To investigate whether naive updating can match these autocorrelations quantitatively, we simulate
the richer model exposited in Section 1 using parameters calibrated from housing data.



3       Dynamics of Price Changes: Quantitative Results

3.1     Parameter Choices

This section calibrates the model using reasonable values of the parameters estimated from housing
market data. Substantial uncertainty exists about the true values of the parameters, and they likely
vary across space as well. Our approach, therefore, is to show that the model matches empirical
house price dynamics using parameters within the range offered by the data. We perform sensitivity
analysis with respect to the parameters of which we are most uncertain in Section 3.7.
    Table 1 lists the parameters we estimate, which fall into two groups. The first are identified from
data on city-wide demand. The second are identified from data on individual housing transactions.
At no point do we use data on the time series of house price changes, which are the data we are
trying to explain with our model.


3.1.1    Demand Parameters

The evolution of city-wide demand D is described by (2) and (3) and is governed by three pa-
rameters: the persistence λ of growth shocks, their volatility σg , and the volatility σD of non-
growth demand shocks. These parameters are uniquely determined by the first three autocovari-
ances of annual changes in D, which we denote γ0 = Var(∆Dt ), γ1 = Cov(∆Dt , ∆Dt−1 ), and
γ2 = Cov(∆Dt , ∆Dt−2 ); ∆ denotes the difference over one year. As we show in the Appendix, the
ratio γ2 /γ1 uniquely determines λ. The autocorrelation γ1 /γ0 then determines the ratio σg /σD , and
finally γ0 determines the level of these volatilities.


                                                    19
      The literature has used two empirical proxies for housing fundamentals: rents (e.g. Campbell
et al., 2009) and local incomes (e.g. Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun, 2014). Unfortunately, the autoco-
variances of these series differ significantly from each other, leaving us in the position of choosing
between them. We choose intermediate values of these estimates and show that they work fairly
well in allowing the model to capture house price dynamics.
      The data on rents come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which compiles rental price
indices for 23 metropolitan areas. Campbell et al. (2009) describe these data further, and provide
the dataset we use. Using these data, we compute the standard deviation of annual changes to be
√
  γ0 = $250, and the first and second autocorrelations to be γ1 /γ0 = 0.73 and γ2 /γ0 = 0.44.4
      The BEA provides income data at the metropolitan area level. An alternate source of income
data comes from HMDA, which gives the median income of new homebuyers in a metrpolitan area.
To the extent that flow utility D corresponds to that of the marginal homebuyer, HMDA may be
                                                                                  √
more appropriate. Glaeser et al. (2014) describe both datasets. In the BEA data, γ0 = $1900,
with autocorrelations γ1 /γ0 = 0.30 and γ2 /γ0 = 0.11.5 The HMDA data provide a higher standard
                                √
deviation of annual changes at γ0 = $2700, with autocorrelations γ1 /γ0 = 0.29 and γ2 /γ0 = 0.09.
      The rent data display much more persistence than the income data. The ratio γ2 /γ1 , which de-
termines the growth persistence λ, equals 0.60 in rents but only about 0.34 in income. Furthermore,
γ1 /γ0 , which determines the relative importance of growth shocks, is much higher in the rent data.
We combine features from both datasets by setting γ1 /γ0 = 0.3 and γ2 /γ1 = 0.6 as our baseline
figures. Although this selection is somewhat arbitrary, it falls within the numbers suggested by the
data, and allows the model to match the dynamics of price changes quite well.
                       √
   We adopt the value γ0 = $325, which is much closer to the volatility implied by rents. This
value is largely unimportant for the results, as it simply scales the variances in the model and does
not affect the autocorrelations of price changes. It allows the model to match the volatility of price
changes, but as we discuss shortly, the model can compare the predicted volatility of prices and
                                                                        √
fundamentals, and this comparison is independent of the assumed value of γ0 .
      Finally, we set the discount rate r = 0.04, following Glaeser et al. (2014).
  4
     To arrive at γ0 , we convert the rent index provided by the BLS to levels. The standard deviation of annual
changes in the index equals 3.2, and the mean of the index is 140. Therefore, the rent index change standard
deviation equals 2.3% of the mean level. Median annual rent in the US is $10,884, so the standard deviation of
annual changes equals $250.
   5
     These figures use BEA income data adjusted for state taxes. Without the tax adjustment, the numbers are
√
  γ0 = $2100, γ1 /γ0 = 0.14, and γ2 /γ0 = 0.08.


                                                      20
3.1.2   Transaction Parameters

The remaining parameters are the flow probability µ of moving, the number N of observed sales
each period, the standard deviation σa of individual flow utility around the city-wide average, and
the standard deviation σs of direct signals about demand. We also must determine the length δ of
each period.
   We identify µ using data on the probability that an owner-occupant sells a house in a given
year. The Census, accessed at https://www.census.gov/prod/2000pubs/p23-200.pdf, reports
that the 5-year mobility rate for owners is 31.2%. Therefore 1 − e−5µ = 31.2%, and µ = 7.5%. This
figure corresponds to an expected tenancy of 13 years.
   To compute σa , we use the standard deviation of rents, controlling for location and housing
characteristic fixed effects. Rent data at the housing unit level come from the 2000 Census; the rent
data provide a snapshot at a given time (2000). In the model, all houses are identical, whereas in
the data they possess different characteristics. We therefore augment (1) with unit characteristics
to arrive at the estimating equation


                                        Dic = Dc + hi β + ai ,


where c denotes the location, and hi is a vector of unit characteristics (rooms, bedrooms, plumbing,
kitchen, age of the building, number of units in the building, and an indicator for whether the
building sits on more than 10 acres of land). We observe Dic and hi , so we estimate this equation
as a fixed effects regression, and identify σa2 as the variance of the residual. This procedure assumes
that actual buyers also observe hi and know β. The location identifiers we use are public use
microdata areas (PUMAs), the standard location entity used by the Census. Each PUMA contains
at least 100,000 people. The value of σa we estimate equals $3,120.
   We set the length of each period at half of a year (δ = 0.5). This time represents the frequency
at which buyers observe home sales and news about demand. As many house price series, such as
Case-Shiller and FHFA, are published at quarterly frequencies, and because this information may
take some time to disseminate, δ = 0.5 seems like a natural starting point. To compute the number
of observed sales each period, we take the number of owner-occupied homes in the average PUMA,
which is 30,800, and multiply it times 1 − e−δµ , the probability of sale within a unit δ of time. The
result is N = 1,130.

                                                  21
       The final parameter to choose is σs , the noise in the news about fundamentals. We set this value
to σs = $1,000. As the median annual rent in the United States is $10,884, this noise equals about
10% of the level. Although this error seems low, it is high enough to make the fundamental news
irrelevant in the simulation. Buyers believe they observe Dta , the average flow utility of buyers in a
                                                                                                  √
given period. This average is also a noisy signal of fundamentals, with standard deviation σa / N .
                                  √
Given our parameter choices, σa / N = $93. Buyers ignore the news as it is an order of magnitude
more noisy than prices. For news to be relevant, it must have an error rate on the order of 1%. We
explore this possibility in Section 3.7.


3.2       Simulation Methodology

We simulate the model in the limit as ρ → 0 and measure various statistics about the resulting
prices. Each simulation begins with a choice of the initial state vector (D0 , g0 )0 and the mean of the
priors. Because D is non-stationary, without loss of generality we set the initial value to $10,000.
We pick the initial value of g0 ∼ N(0, σg2 /(2λ)), its stationary distribution. As we showed in Lemma
2, in the ρ → 0 limit the covariance of the buyer posterior after observing any price and news
history does not depend on t; we denote it P0 . Motivated by this stationarity, we draw the mean of
the prior from a mutivariate normal with covariance P0 and mean (D0 , g0 )0 , and set the covariance
of the prior to P0 .6 After seeding the initial values, we iteratively update the prices, states, and
beliefs using the formulas in Section 1.3. For the same evolution of fundamentals, we separately
keep track of the markets in which all buyers are naive and in which they are all rational. We
produce 1,000 simulations and analyze the pooled results. In addition to the naive and rational
prices, we calculate the prices that would hold were city-wide demand directly observable. In this
“Observable” specification, prices are given by (5) with Dt and gt replacing D
                                                                             ct and gbt .

       We compare the simulated prices to empirical house price data. Our dataset is comprised of the
annual FHFA house price indices for a panel of the largest 115 metropolitan areas in the United
States between 1980 and 2011. To convert the indices into levels, we multiply each city’s index by
the median house price in the 2000 Census, following Glaeser et al. (2014). We run each simulation
for 31 years to align the time horizon in the data and the simulation.
   6
    We give the naive buyers the same initial mean as the rational buyers. As shown in Proposition 2, the covariance of
the naive forecast error exceeds the covariance of their stationary posterior. To account for this fact, we experimented
with “burning in” the simulations by discarding the first five years. Doing so did not materially affect the results.



                                                          22
                                                 TABLE 1
                                        Calibrated Parameter Values



                                             Demand Parameters

                               λ      0.51     Demand growth reversion

                               σg    $180      Volatility of growth shocks

                              σD     $190      Volatility of demand shocks

                               r      0.04     Discount rate

                                         Transaction Parameters

                               σa   $3,120     Volatility of idiosyncratic utility

                               µ     0.075     Probability of forced sale

                               δ      0.5      Length of period (years)

                               N     1,130     Sales observed per period

                               σs   $1,000     Noise in observations of demand


Notes: We estimate these parameters from data on house prices and rents. As the Appendix shows, the first three
autocovariances of annual city-level demand changes uniquely identify λ, σg , and σD . We take these autocovariances
from time series on rents and incomes at the metropolitan area level. The discount rate r comes from Glaeser et al.
(2014). The resale probability µ comes from Census data on mobility of owner-occupants. The volatility σa is
identified from the residual of a hedonic regression of rents on property characteristics and location (PUMA) fixed
effects. We choose δ to roughly capture the frequency at which housing price and other economic data is released,
and σs to describe the accuracy of local economic indicators (about 10%). Finally, N is determined using the number
of owner-occupied houses in a PUMA, together with µ and δ.




                                                        23
3.3       Price Autocorrelations

We calculate the autocorrelation of annual price changes in the resulting house prices. Let C denote
the number of simulations (or cities) and let T denote the number of years of data. We focus on
the sample autocorrelations of annual price changes, which we calculate as

                                          PC P(T −k)/δ
                                               c=1    τ =1/δ (∆pc,δτ − ν0 )(∆pc,δτ +k − νk )
          Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+k ) = qP P                                qP P                               ,
                                 C  (T −k)/δ                           C     (T −k)/δ
                                    c=1   τ =1/δ     (∆pc,δτ − ν0 )    c=1   τ =1/δ (∆pc,δτ +k − νk )


                            PC P(T −k)/δ
where νk = [C(T − k)/δ]−1     c=1     τ =1/δ    ∆pc,δτ +k is the sample mean of each annual price change.
We use δ = 0.5 for the simulated data, and δ = 1 for the empirical data which exist at an annual
frequency. These autocorrelations summarize the serial correlation of price changes over time, and
have been the focus on the literature on the predictability of house prices, starting with Case and
Shiller (1989) and appearing most recently in Glaeser et al. (2014) and Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun
(2014).
   Table 2 reports the autocorrelations, both in the FHFA housing data and in the simulations. The
Naive specification of the model matches the data quite well, whereas the Rational and Observable
specifications do not even come close. Empirically, house prices display strong momentum at 1-
and 2-year horizons, followed by mean reversion at longer horizons. These results appear in Table
2 under the “Data” column. The Rational and Observable specifications fail to capture these
dynamics. Information is observed with a one-period lag by rational buyers, leading to the modest
autocorrelation at a one-year horizon of 0.11. This figure is substantially below the empirical
momentum of 0.67, and the remainder of the empirical autocorrelation structure fails to appear in
any way in the Observable and Rational specifications.
   In contrast, the “Naive” specification well matches the general dynamics in empirical housing
prices. It predicts strong momentum over a 1-year horizon, with a value of 0.75. At longer horizons
it predicts mean reversion. Mean reversion begins around 3 years, similar to in the data. The
magnitude of the mean reversion is similar to the data, although it is higher in the Naive model
and ends faster.
   In the Observable and Rational models, prices are close to a random walk. This result is
unsurprising in the Observable model, as news gets incorporated into prices immediately. More
noteworthy is that this result holds in the Rational model as well. This similarity between the two


                                                        24
                                              TABLE 2
                     Autocorrelations in House Price Changes, Annual Frequencies


                                                                        Model
                                               Data          Naive   Rational Observable

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+1 )          0.67         0.75        0.11           0.01

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+2 )          0.26         0.20        0.00           0.01

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+3 )       −0.10          −0.37      −0.00          −0.00

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+4 )       −0.26          −0.71        0.01           0.01

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+5 )       −0.28          −0.67        0.01           0.01

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+6 )       −0.31          −0.33        0.00           0.00

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+7 )       −0.35           0.13        0.01           0.00

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+8 )       −0.39           0.59        0.01           0.00

                     Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+9 )       −0.34           0.58        0.01           0.02

                    Corr(∆pt , ∆pt+10 )       −0.26           0.39        0.01           0.01


Notes: The ∆ denotes an annual difference, so that ∆pt+k = pt+k −pt+k−1 . “Observable” denotes the model in which
buyers can observe the current state of demand, “Rational” denotes the model in which demand is unobservable
but the buyers apply a rational filter, and “Naive” denotes the model in which buyers apply a naive filter. The
correlations are estimated in both the data and the model by computing the correlation of all pairwise realizations
of each pair of price changes in a panel of 100 cities over 30 years. Data come from the FHFA house price indices.




                                                        25
                                                            FIGURE 1
                                        Cumulative Autocorrelations in Annual Price Changes


                                         Average Cumulative House Price Increase After 1−Year Increase
                                  1



                                 0.5
      Relative Price Increase




                                  0



                                −0.5


                                        Observable
                                 −1     Rational
                                        Naive
                                        Data

                                −1.5
                                    0         2               4               6               8          10
                                                                    Years


Notes: This figure plots the cumulative autocorrelations for each column in Table 2. “Observable” denotes the
model in which buyers can observe the current state of demand, “Rational” denotes the model in which demand is
unobservable but the buyers apply a rational filter, and “Naive” denotes the model in which buyers apply a naive
filter. The correlations are estimated in both the data and the model by computing the correlation of all pairwise
realizations of each pair of price changes over 31 years. Data come from the FHFA house price indices.




                                                                   26
models suggests that the rational buyers are extremely good at quickly filtering underlying demand
from past prices, leading Rational prices to behave similarly to Observable prices. We explore this
hypothesis below.
   Figure 1 plots the cumulative autocorrelations for each specification in Table 2. The result
equals the average movement in house prices after they initially rise for 1 year, relative to the initial
increase. Only the Naive specification is able to capture the boom and bust profile of house prices
that appears in the data.


3.4    Belief Dynamics

To explore the boom and bust profile documented in Figure 1, we study the evolution of prices after
an exogenous demand shock. We decompose the resulting impulse response into three components:
the idiosyncratic utility of the buyer, the buyer’s belief about the level of city demand, and the
buyer’s belief about the growth rate. Explicitly,

                                          1           µ
                                 pt =       Dta +          D
                                                           ct + Ag gbt .                             (9)
                                        r+µ       r(r + µ)      |{z}
                                        | {z } |       {z   } growth
                                        idiosyncratic        level    belief
                                            utility          belief


To calculate the impulse response, we simulate the model with and without a one-time, one standard
deviation shock to the demand increments dW D and dW g . We report the average difference between
the impulsed and non-impulsed simulations.
   Figure 2 plots the impulse responses for prices, as well as for the “level belief” and “growth
belief” components in (9). The axes are the same for each subfigure so that the relative importance
of the belief components can be easily compared. Relative to Observable and Rational prices, the
Naive prices substantially overshoot after a demand shock. Almost all of this overshooting comes
from buyers overestimating the level of demand after the shock. They overestimate the demand level
because they neglect the “growth belief” component of prices. Naive buyers erroneously believe
that gbt0 , the growth belief of past buyers, never moves around. As they filter demand from past
prices, naive buyers overestimate the level of demand when growth rates are high.
   The profile of prices in Figure 2 captures the common accounts of “bubbles” found in a number
of sources, such as Kindleberger and Aliber (2005), Shiller (2005), Pástor and Veronesi (2009),
and Glaeser (2013). In this narrative, some fundamentally good shock, such as the discovery of

                                                        27
                                                  FIGURE 2
                            Evolution of Prices and Beliefs After a Demand Shock

                                                                     a) Prices

                  $30,000
                                                                                                              Observable
                                                                                                              Rational
                                                                                                              Naive




                  $15,000




                       0


                       −5                  0             5                 10          15             20                   25
                                                                     Years After Shock


                      b) Level Beliefs                                                          c) Growth Beliefs
   $30,000                                                                    $30,000
                                                        Observable                                                                     Observable
                                                        Rational                                                                       Rational
                                                        Naive                                                                          Naive




   $15,000                                                                    $15,000




        0                                                                          0


        −5    0         5         10          15   20          25                  −5       0     5              10          15   20          25
                            Years After Shock                                                              Years After Shock




Notes: We plot impulse responses from a one standard deviation shock to demand. The figures plot the average
difference between the simulated model with and without the shock. Panel (a) displays transaction prices, and (b) is
the component of prices related to beliefs about the level of demand Dt and (c) is the price component corresponding
to beliefs about the growth rate of demand gt . This decomposition appears in (9). “Observable” denotes the model in
which buyers can observe the current state of demand, “Rational” denotes the model in which demand is unobservable
but the buyers apply a rational filter, and “Naive” denotes the model in which buyers apply a naive filter.




                                                                         28
a new technology, leads to increases in asset prices. Then, for some reason, this boom in asset
values goes beyond what is justified by fundamentals, leading to an eventual bust. What causes
the overshooting is a matter of debate, for which the sources above, as well as many other papers,
offer competing explanations. Our explanation of this phenomenon is that buyers think the initial
asset price boom conveys better information than it actually does, because the buyers neglect that
part of this boom involves revisions to other buyers’ beliefs about the growth rate. This filtering
error leads to overestimates of fundamentals, which cause an overshooting of prices and an eventual
“bust” as prices return to fundamentals.


3.5    Expected Price Changes

As discussed in Section 1, homebuyers empirically extrapolate expected increases in the market
value of their homes from past price increases. To explore this phenomenon in our model, we
regress the expected annual gain in market value, as given by Proposition 4, on lagged annual price
changes. Using our simulated data, we estimate the coefficients βk in the equation

                                                     9
                                                     X
                                 Et (Vt+1 − Vt ) =         βk ∆pt−k + ξt
                                                     k=0


using ordinary least squares for each of the three model specifications.
   Table 3 displays the results. The Naive buyers strongly extrapolate future increases in the market
values of their houses from past price increases. The Rational buyers, and those who can observe
demand directly, do not. We can put these numbers in perspective using empirical survey evidence
of homebuyer expectations. Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012) regress the reported expected one-
year change in home prices on one-year lagged price changes, and find a coefficient of 0.23. They
have 40 observations from four metropolitan areas between 2003 and 2012. Their simple regression
has an R2 of 0.73.
   The naive buyers in our model match this empirical behavior quantitatively. When we regress
the expected market value change on only the most recent annual price change, the coefficient
equals 0.20. Naive buyers think news about growth rates does not get incorporated into prices.
Therefore, when they see recent price increases, they infer a high growth rate, which leads them
to expect increases in flow utility and hence prices in the future. According to Table 3, they draw



                                                 29
                                             TABLE 3
                       Impact of Past Price Changes on Expected Appreciation


                                                        Model
                                           Naive    Rational Observable
                                                    Et (Vt+1 − Vt )

                                   ∆pt       0.09          0.01          0.02

                                  ∆pt−1      0.15          0.01          0.01

                                  ∆pt−2      0.04          0.00          0.01

                                  ∆pt−3      0.01          0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−4      0.00          0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−5      0.00          0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−6    −0.00           0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−7      0.00          0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−8    −0.00           0.00          0.00

                                  ∆pt−9    −0.00           0.00          0.00


                                                                          P9
Notes: This table reports the result from the regression Et (Vt+1 − Vt ) = k=0 βk ∆pt−k + ξt estimated using OLS
with the simulated data from each model. The ∆ denotes an annual difference, so that ∆pt+k = pt+k − pt+k−1 .
“Observable” denotes the model in which buyers can observe the current state of demand, “Rational” denotes the
model in which demand is unobservable but the buyers apply a rational filter, and “Naive” denotes the model in
which buyers apply a naive filter.




                                                      30
these inferences from price changes using several years of data.
   In contrast, the rational buyers hardly extrapolate any increases in the market values of their
homes. They (rightly) believe that all available information about growth rates already appears in
the current market value of their home. Past price increases fail to convince them of any future
appreciation in their house values. Although this behavior is perfectly rational, it is strongly at
odds with the survey evidence on expectations.
   Rational beliefs about future prices must be correct on average, by definition. Naive beliefs do
not have this restriction. To explore the forecasting ability of naive buyers, we plot the expected
change in market values and the empirical change after a 1-year price increase. The realized change
in market values exactly equals the price response in Figure 1. To compute the expected change, we
use Proposition 4 to extend the expected one-year change conditional on a lagged one-year change
(which is 0.20) to further years.
   Figure 3 plots the results. After a 1-year increase in house prices, naive buyers underestimate the
subsequent increase in their home values over the short-run. This result may at first seem surprising.
Naive buyers extrapolate from prices much more strongly than rational buyers, and rational buyers
extrapolate perfectly. One might guess, therefore, that naive buyers over-extrapolate. The reason
they do not is that they fail to anticipate that future buyers will also revise their beliefs upwards after
a price increase. This result—that naive buyers under-extrapolate in the short-run—is essential to
the workings of this model. Momentum can exist in price increases only if buyers are continually
being surprised by the extent of price increases. If naive buyers fully anticipated price increases,
then these anticipations would become priced immediately, negating their realization.
   Over longer horizons, naive buyers do over-extrapolate. As Figure 3 shows, these buyers com-
pletely fail to anticipate the eventual mean reversion in prices. Naive buyers believe market values
follow the path of Dt , the city-wide demand. This demand exhibits no mean reversion, as it is a
random walk with persistent drift. Actual prices, however, do exhibit mean reversion because naive
buyers overestimate fundamentals after recent price increases.
   Our model therefore microfounds the result that homebuyers fail to forecast busts. This phe-
nomenon has recently been explored in a number of papers on “Natural Expectations” (Fuster,
Laibson and Mendel, 2010; Fuster, Hebert and Laibson, 2010, 2011). This line of research studies
consumers who, due to cognitive limitations, forecast macroeconomic variables as an AR(1) instead
of an AR(2). This forecast restriction prohibits consumers from forecasting mean reversion in vari-

                                                    31
                                                                     FIGURE 3
                                                    Price and Belief Evolution for Naive Buyers


                                                    Prices and Beliefs After 1−Year Price Increase
                                              1
                                                                                                      Market Values
                                                                                                      Expectations
       Relative Increase in Market Values




                                             0.5



                                              0



                                            −0.5



                                             −1



                                            −1.5
                                                0   2              4               6              8                   10
                                                                         Years


Notes: This figure plots the naive price changes from Figure 1 along with naive buyers’ expected change in market
values after a one-year price increase. This expectation is calculated using Proposition 4 and a regression of gbt on a
one-year price increase.




                                                                        32
ables such as house prices where it exists, while allowing them to forecast momentum. In contrast to
consumers with natural expectations, naive buyers perfectly understand the underlying process for
fundamentals. Their naive view that house prices reflect just fundamentals and not beliefs prohibits
them from forecasting busts.


3.6    Volatility

Empirically, house prices exhibit excess volatility relative to the movements of underlying funda-
mentals (Glaeser et al., 2014; Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun, 2014). We compare the volatility of price
changes to that of movements in flow utility in the three specifications of our model. The fun-
damental in our model is Dt , the city-wide flow utility at time t. We must scale Dt so that it is
comparable to house prices p. On average, gt = 0, so house prices on average are pt = Dt /r. This
result leads us to use Dt /r as our measure of fundamentals at t.
   We estimate the volatility of a price change over a horizon of k years using the sample standard
deviation of k-year price changes over all simulations and k-year price intervals. Specifically,
                                    v
                                    u                  T /δ
                                                     C X
                                    u                X
                       Vol(∆k pt ) = [C(T − k)/δ]
                                    t             −1        (∆k pc,δτ − νk )2 ,
                                                          c=1 τ =k/δ


                            PC Pk/δ
where νk = [C(T − k)/δ]−1      c=1   τ =1/δ   ∆k pc,δτ and ∆k is the k-year difference operator.
   Two broad patterns emerge from the results, which appear in Table 4. First, all three simulated
price paths display excess volatility relative to fundamentals. This feature has a simple explanation.
Because growth is persistent, a rise in fundamentals today coveys news about future fundamentals.
Because prices are forward-looking, they move more strongly than current fundamentals, and hence
exhibit more volatility.
   The second pattern is that naive prices are more volatile than rational and observable prices.
This relationship holds because naive buyers over-extrapolate fundamentals from demand shocks.
This added volatility in naive prices explains the majority of excess volatility at longer horizons.
Over 5 years, the volatility in rational price changes is only 17% higher than fundamentals, whereas
the naive volatility is 2.1 times fundamental volatility. Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun (2014) calculate
that empirical house prices display volatility 2.2 times higher than fundamentals.




                                                     33
                                                  TABLE 4
                             Volatility of Price Changes at Different Horizons


                                                                 Horizon
                                                          1 Year 3 Years 5 Years

                                     Data                 $16,000     $40,000    $50,000

                              Simulated Prices

                                     Naive                $16,000     $41,000    $51,000

                                   Rational               $11,000     $21,000    $28,000

                                  Observable              $12,000     $22,000    $28,000

                          Simulated Fundamentals

                                      Dt /r                $8,000     $17,000    $24,000


Notes: We calculate volatility as the sample standard deviation of changes over the given time horizon, for all
realizations over this horizon and over all simulations we run. “Observable” denotes the model in which buyers can
observe the current state of demand, “Rational” denotes the model in which demand is unobservable but the buyers
apply a rational filter, and “Naive” denotes the model in which buyers apply a naive filter. The fundamental Dt /r
denotes the present value of the current city-wide level of flow utility. Empirical volatility is computed using FHFA
house price data for 115 metropolitan areas from 1980-2011.




                                                         34
3.7       Predictions for Alternate Parameters

Table 5 explores how the key house price moments change under different parameter values. We
focus on three moments: the autocorrelation of annual price changes over a one-year horizon, the
autocorrelation over a five-year horizon, and the standard deviation of five-year price changes. These
moments encompass the three stylized facts of house prices that motivate this paper—momentum,
mean reversion, and excess volatility. To explore the sensitivity of these moments to the parameters,
we change a single parameter at a time, holding the ones used in the main analysis constant.7
       We first adjust λ, the persistence of demand growth. As mentioned earlier, the autocovariance
ratio γ2 /γ1 determines this parameter. The empirical value of this ratio depends on how one
measures demand at the city level. Using income yields a ratio of 0.3, smaller than the 0.6 we
estimate from BLS rents. In Table 5, we report the ratio γ2 /γ1 corresponding to the values of λ
                                                                        √
used; we adjust σD for each λ to keep the volatility of demand changes ( γ0 ) constant. According
to Table 5, smaller values for the persistence significantly attenuate the mean reversion and excess
volatility of naive prices, yet leave the momentum largely unchanged. Overshooting occurs in
the model when buyers incorrectly attribute price growth from revisions about gb to increases in
fundamentals. When growth persistence is small, growth shocks are not of much quantitative
importance, and growth rate expectations enter into prices only slightly. In terms of (5), Ag is
small. Momentum persists because shocks to dW D slowly incorporate into prices when buyers are
naive.
       The next parameter we consider is tenancy length. This input determines µ, as the expected
tenancy equals 1/µ. When tenancy length is shorter, buyers expect to resell their houses more
quickly and therefore care more about market demand. This change enhances momentum in naive
prices, but has a non-monotonic affect on mean reversion and volatility.
       More precise information about demand moves naive prices closer to rational ones. This result is
unsurprising, as with perfect news, demand is known and buyers no longer rely on house prices for
inference, rendering the two types of buyers identical. News must be extremely precise to dampen
the effects of naive inference. Momentum persists even when the error is on the order of $100.
The reason is that prices already aggregate information about demand quite well due to the central
limit theorem and the large number of observed sales, so news must be extremely precise to make
   7
   In some cases, extreme values of the parameters lead to non-stationarity of naive price changes, causing explosive
behavior of the price paths. We do not analyze any such cases in Table 5.


                                                         35
                                              TABLE 5
                                 Simulated Moments for a Range of Inputs


                                         1-Year                     5-Year              5-Year
                                       Momentum                    Reversion           Volatility
                                    Naive Rational             Naive Rational      Naive Rational
             Annual Growth
              Persistence
                   0                  0.50         0.17         0.03      0.00    $16,000      $18,000
                  0.3                 0.56         0.15         0.00      0.00    $18,000      $19,000
                  0.6                 0.75         0.11        −0.67      0.01    $51,000      $28,000
            Expected Tenancy
                (Years)
                   2                  0.94         0.04        −0.07    −0.00     $46,000      $28,000
                   10                 0.80         0.11        −0.80     0.00     $62,000      $28,000
                   30                 0.60         0.16        −0.14    −0.01     $35,000      $28,000
             News Noise (σs )
                   $10                0.12         0.10         0.01      0.00    $28,000      $28,000
                  $100                0.44         0.11         0.00      0.00    $29,000      $28,000
                 $1,000               0.75         0.11        −0.67      0.01    $51,000      $28,000
                $10,000               0.76         0.12        −0.71      0.00    $54,000      $28,000
                 Houses in
                 the Area
                   1,000              0.21         0.12        −0.03     0.00     $28,000      $28,000
                  10,000              0.76         0.14        −0.47     0.00     $39,000      $28,000
                  50,000              0.75         0.11        −0.72    −0.01     $59,000      $28,000
            Utility Noise (σa )
                   $100               0.05         0.10         0.01     0.00     $27,000      $28,000
                  $1,000              0.69         0.11        −0.51     0.01     $59,000      $28,000
                 $10,000              0.61         0.16        −0.17    −0.00     $31,000      $28,000

Notes: “Annual Growth Persistence” is the ratio of the second and first autocorrelations of annual changes in city-
wide demand D. This input uniquely determines λ; as we change λ we alter σD to maintain the volatility of annual
demand changes. “Expected Tenancy” equals the average time spent in a house before a forced sale; its inverse equals
the moving probability µ. ”News Noise” gives the standard deviation of error in direct signals about demand. “Houses
in the Area” determines the number N of sales observed each period. “Utility Noise” is the standard deviation of
idiosyncratic utility for each buyer. In each row, we simulate the model with naive and rational homebuyers using
the parameters of our main analysis (shown in Table 1) with the exception of the parameter of interest studied in
that row. “1-Year Momentum” is the correlation of annual price changes on lagged changes, “5-Year Reversion” is
the correlation on a 5-year lag, and “5-Year Volatility” is the standard deviation of 5-year house price changes.




                                                          36
a difference.
   By the same token, naive inference produces stronger mean reversion and volatility when there
are more houses in the area. The number of houses in the area determines how much weight naive
buyers place on past housing prices. When the number of houses is very low, they do not weight
the past much and the momentum attenuates. In a sense, this result suggests a non-monotonic
relationship between information flows and housing fluctuations. With no information, momentum
and mean reversion disappear. With good information about fundamentals, the same effect occurs.
It is only when there is good information about past market behavior but not about fundamentals
that momentum, mean reversion and volatility become most pronounced.
   Finally, the standard deviation of idiosyncratic utility has a non-monotonic affect on the mo-
ments of interest. Low values of σa mean that buyers know much about the city-wide demand from
observing their own demand. Hence in this case they do not rely on market prices for inference very
much, dampening the volatility, momentum, and mean reversion of naive prices. At high values of
σa , house prices are again not of much use. House prices average away the noise in idiosyncratic
utility, but for a given N , this average is less precise when σa is larger. However, momentum and
mean reversion exist to some degree even at σa = $10,000, three times higher than the baseline
value in Table 1 that is implied by rent data.


3.8    Forecast Accuracy

This section evaluates the relative accuracy of the naive and rational filters. Each buyer’s goal is to
infer Dt and gt to minimize the error in valuing her home. The error in this forecast is the difference
between the price in (5) under D
                               ct and gbt and that under the true values Dt and gt :


                                           µ Db t − Dt
                                error =                + Ag (gbt − gt ).                           (10)
                                          r+µ     r

The accuracy of the filter is the standard deviation of this error. We calculate this standard deviation
as the square-root of the pooled variance across all simulations and time periods of the above error.
   We additionally use this error to evaluate the robustness of the rational and naive filters. As
Proposition 3 suggests, the rational filter is quite sensitive. It performs poorly when applied to price
paths produced by buyers using non-rational filters. We document this phenomenon quantitatively
here. We calculate the estimates of D
                                    ct and gbt obtained using the rational filter applied to naive

                                                   37
                                                       TABLE 6
                                                   Forecast Accuracy


                                                       Market
                                        Rational                       Naive

                                        $11,000    $600,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
                Individual




                             Rational


                              Naive     $12,000                      $22,000


Notes: This table reports the standard deviation of the forecast error in (10), calculated as the square-root of the
variance pooled over all simulations and time periods. The column denotes the filtering used by buyers to determine
the price path, and the row specifies the filtering used by an individual, the error of whose forecasts is evaluated.
The parameters used in the simulations are given by Table 1.




                                                           38
prices.8 We also compute the forecast accuracy for the naive filter applied to rational prices.

        Table 6 presents the results. The row chooses the filter used by the buyer we are studying, and
the column specifies the filter used to obtain market prices. The rational equilibrium is twice as
accurate as the naive one. When all buyers are rational, the forecast error has standard deviation
$11,000; it rises to $22,000 when all buyers are naive. When the market uses the rational filter,
the marginal cost of using the naive filter is very small in terms of lost accuracy. The standard
deviation of the error rises only to $12,000 from $11,000. The largest error comes from employing
the rational filter when other buyers are in fact naive. In this case, the standard deviation of the
error equals essentially an infinite number ($(6)1032 ).
        These results suggest that the naive filter is much more robust to uncertainty about previous
buyers. The equilibrium in which all buyers are rational is extraordinarily fragile. If there is even
a small probability all other buyers are naive, an individual buyer is much better of being naive as
well. Furthermore, the cost of naivety is quite small when others are rational, as the naive buyer
essentially free-rides off the information aggregation provided by others.



4         Conclusion
Many salient features of house prices—excess volatility, momentum, and mean reversion—can be
explained by a model in which homebuyers make a small error in filtering information out of past
prices. These naive buyers expect the market value of their home to rise after recent house price
increases, and they fail to forecast busts after booms. They are overconfident in their assessments
of the housing market.
        Several promising avenues for future research arise from this paper’s results. One is to investigate
robust filtering rules buyers could use to reduce house price volatility. The rational filter in this
paper has two flaws: it is very complicated, and it works only if all other buyers use it. Perhaps
there exists a simple filtering rule whose use would reduce house price volatility and whose accuracy
is independent of the actions of other homebuyers. It is also possible that the naive filter already
is optimal for reducing volatility among simple filters.
        A second direction for future research is to explore the implications of naive filtering for con-
    8
     The rational buyer begins with a prior on x0 which we seed randomly, as explained above. At each step, the
rational buyer at t extracts Dta0 out of pt0 by assuming that E(xt0 | Ωpt0 ∪ Ωat0 ∪ Ωxt0 ) is the same for buyers at t0 as it
is for herself. Then, using this extracted value for Dta0 , the buyer updates her posterior using Lemma 2.


                                                             39
sumption. Several recent papers have documented the explosion of consumption financed by home
equity during the 2000-2006 boom. Because naive buyers do not forecast the bust that follows
booms, they may over-consume out of house price increases relative to rational buyers. This over-
consumption may be important for understanding the extent of leverage homeowners took on during
the boom.
   Finally, incorporating construction into the model is of first-order importance. Supply responses
have the potential to temper price increases caused by naive homebuyers. However, if the home-
builders are also using naive filters, it is unclear whether housing supply would attenuate or even
amplify the effects documented in this paper.




                                                40
References
Adam, Klaus, Johannes Beutel, and Albert Marcet. 2014. “Stock Price Booms and Expected
 Capital Gains.” Working paper.

Adam, Klaus, Pei Kuang, and Albert Marcet. 2011. “House price booms and the current
 account.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Volume 26. 77–122. University of Chicago
 Press.

Anenberg, Elliot, and Patrick J. Bayer. 2013. “Endogenous Sources of Volatility in Housing
 Markets: The Joint Buyer-Seller Problem.” Working paper.

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “X-
 CAPM: An extrapolative capital asset pricing model.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berry, Christopher R, and Edward L Glaeser. 2005. “The divergence of human capital levels
 across cities.” Papers in regional science, 84(3): 407–444.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2014. “Understanding booms
 and busts in housing markets.” Working Paper.

Camerer, Colin F, Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong. 2004. “A cognitive hierarchy model
 of games.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 861–898.

Campbell, Sean D, Morris A Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert F Martin. 2009. “What
 moves housing markets: A variance decomposition of the rent–price ratio.” Journal of Urban
 Economics, 66(2): 90–102.

Case, Karl E, and Robert J Shiller. 1989. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family
 Homes.” The American Economic Review, 125–137.

Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson. 2012. “What Have They Been
 Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 265–315.

Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Presidential address: Discount rates.” The Journal of Finance,
 66(4): 1047–1108.

Cutler, David M, James M Poterba, and Lawrence H Summers. 1991. “Speculative dy-
 namics.” The Review of Economic Studies, 58(3): 529–546.

De Long, J Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H Summers, and Robert J Waldmann.
 1990. “Noise trader risk in financial markets.” Journal of political Economy, 703–738.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Zvi Eckstein. 1997. “Cities and growth: Theory and evidence from
 France and Japan.” Regional science and urban Economics, 27(4): 443–474.

Eyster, Erik, and Matthew Rabin. 2005. “Cursed equilibrium.” Econometrica, 73(5): 1623–
 1672.



                                            41
Eyster, Erik, and Matthew Rabin. 2010. “Naive herding in rich-information settings.” Ameri-
 can Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(4): 221–243.

Eyster, Erik, and Matthew Rabin. 2014. “Extensive Imitation is Irrational and Harmful.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Eyster, Erik, Matthew Rabin, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2013. “Financial Markets where Traders
 Neglect the Informational Content of Prices.” Working paper.

Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson. 2010. “Investment dynamics with
  natural expectations.” International journal of central banking/Bank of Canada, 8(81): 243.

Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson. 2011. “Natural Expectations,
  Macroeconomic Dynamics, and Asset Pricing.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Vol-
  ume 26. 1–48. University of Chicago Press.

Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel. 2010. “Natural expectations and
  macroeconomic fluctuations.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(4): 67–84.

Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf’s law for cities: an explanation.” Quarterly journal of Economics,
 739–767.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 129(4): 1661–1710.

Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag. 2013. “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
 Declined?” Working paper.

Gao, Zhenyu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. 2014. “Learning about the Neighborhood:
 The Role of Supply Elasticity for Housing Cycles.” Working paper.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. 2014. “No-Bubble Condition:
 Model-Free Tests in Housing Markets.” Working paper.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2013. “A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American His-
 tory.” American Economic Review, 103(3): 1–42.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2009. “Arbitrage in Housing Markets.” In Housing
 Markets and the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and Policy. Chapter 5, 113–146. Lincoln Institute
 of Land Policy.

Glaeser, Edward L, JoséA Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1995. “Economic growth in a
 cross-section of cities.” Journal of monetary economics, 36(1): 117–143.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. 2008. “Housing Supply and Housing
 Bubbles.” Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2): 198–217.

Glaeser, Edward L, Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G Nathanson.
 2014. “Housing dynamics: An urban approach.” Journal of Urban Economics, 81: 45–56.

Guren, Adam. 2014. “The Causes and Consequences of House Price Momentum.” Working paper.

                                             42
Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press.

Head, Allen, Huw Lloyd-Ellis, and Hongfei Sun. 2014. “Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics
 of House Prices and Construction.” The American Economic Review, 104(4): 1172–1210.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C Stein. 1999. “A unified theory of underreaction, momentum
 trading, and overreaction in asset markets.” The Journal of Finance, 54(6): 2143–2184.

Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Aliber. 2005. “Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History
 of Financial Crises.” Wiley, 5th Edition.

Nathanson, Charles G., and Eric Zwick. 2014. “Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence
 of Supply-Side Speculation in the Housing Market.” Working paper.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi. 2009. “Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices.”
  American Economic Review, 99(4): 1451–1483.

Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider. 2009. “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
  Survey Evidence and a Search Model.” The American Economic Review, 406–411.

Shiller, Robert J. 2005. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press.




                                              43
Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1. We posit a pricing function of the form pt = A0 Dt + Ac D    ct + Ag gbt and show
that this type of function is an equilibrium. If the random sale happens at T > t, then the realized
value to the buyer equals
  Z    T
           e−r(τ −t) Di,τ dτ + e−r(T −t) pT =
   t
                                    Z T                     Z                               τ                     
                                            −r(τ −t)                                                           0
                                          e           Di,t +                                         gτ 0 dτ           dτ + e−r(T −t) (A0 DTa + Ac D
                                                                                                                                                   cT + Ag gc
                                                                                                                                                            T ).
                                                        t                                t

We first solve for the expected value Ei,t of the above quantity. It is a standard result from stochastic
calculus that Ei,t gτ = e−λ(τ −t) Ei,t gt for all τ > t, given the specification in (3). It follows that
                               Z    T   Z       τ                             Z      T   Z       τ
                                                    −r(τ −t)        0                                                       0 −t)
                       Ei,t                         e          gτ 0 dτ dτ =                          e−r(τ −t) e−λ(τ                Ei,t gt dτ 0 dτ
                                t           t                                    t           t
                                                                                     T
                                                                                        1 − e−λ(τ −t)
                                                                              Z
                                                                        =                e−r(τ −t)    dτ Ei,t gt
                                                                           t                 λ
                                                                             1 − e−r(T −t) 1 − e−(r+λ)(T −t)
                                                                                                                
                                                                        =                  −                       Ei,t gt .
                                                                                  rλ             λ(r + λ)
                      RT
We have Ei,t           t
                             e−r(τ −t) Di,t dτ = (1 − e−r(T −t) )Di,t /r, and Ei,t DTa = Ei,t DT by (1). This expectation
equals
                                                                             T
                                                                                                                          1 − e−λ(T −t)
                                                                        Z
                                Ei,t DT = Ei,t Dt + Ei,t                         gτ dτ = Ei,t Dt +                                      Ei,t gt .
                                                                         t                                                     λ
Next note that Ei,t D                                            T = φg (T − t)Ei,t gt . The price pi,t is
                    cT = Ei,t DT by assumption, and that Ei,t gc
the expected value of the realized value to the buyer, given that T − t is distributed with probability
distribution function µe−µ(T −t) :
                  T
                                    1 − e−r(T −t)          1 − e−r(T −t) 1 − e−(r+λ)(T −t)
            Z                                                                              
                           −µ(T −t)
  pi,t =              µe                          Di,t +                −                       Ei,t gt +
              t                            r                    rλ               λ(r + λ)
                                                             1 − e−λ(T −t)
                                                                                                                  
                              −r(T −t)                                                 −r(T −t)
                             e         (A0 + Ac ) Ei,t Dt +                Ei,t gt + e          Ag φg (T − t)Ei,t gt dT
                                                                   λ

Evaluating this integral and collecting terms yields
                                                                               
                  r Di,t      µ                          1 + (A0 + Ac )µ     ∗
          pi,t =         +       (A0 + Ac )Ei,t Dt +                      + φ Ag Ei,t gt ,
                 r+µ r      r+µ                        (r + µ)(r + λ + µ)
               R∞
where φ∗ = t µe−(µ+r)(T −t) φg (T − t)dT . Taking the average over all buyers i at t and then
using the method of undetermined coefficients yields A0 = (r/(r + µ))/r, Ac = (µ/(r + µ))/r, and
Ag = 1/(r(r + λ + µ)(1 − φ∗ )). These formulas exactly match (5).

Proof of Proposition 1. For any two times τ1 and τ2 , we say a buyer at τ1 observes τ2 if
(τ1 − τ2 )/δ ∈ N, the set of positive integers. Let t0 be any time that buyers at t observe. Let t0

                                                                                         44
denote the maximal member of T such that t0 ≤ t0 . The time t0 exists because arbitrarily negative
values of T exist, as ρ > 0. We denote T 0 to be the set of times at least t0 that the buyer at t0
observes. This set is clearly finite.
    We claim that the buyer at t0 forms her posterior on xt0 conditional only on the finite set
Ωi,t0 = {Di,t0 } ∪ {pτ | τ ∈ T 0 } ∪ {Dτs | τ ∈ T 0 } ∪ {xt0 }. It is clear from (2) and (3) that x is a Markov
  0

process (this statement is proved formally in the proof of Lemma 2). Thus, a rational inference on
xt1 will not use any information from times before t0 , as xt0 is observed. The totality of Ωi,t0 that
occurs no earlier than t0 is Ω0i,t0 .
    The state x evolves linearly with normal noise, and the elements of Ω0i,t0 are all observations of
some linear function of a lag of x with normal noise, or they are linear combinations of posteriors
on lags of x and such noisy observations (in the case of prices). Hence, standard Kalman filtering
(which we make explicit in the proof of Lemma 2) leads the posterior xt0 | Ω0i,t0 to be linear in the
observations in Ω0i,t0 . The linear weights are common knowledge to all buyers, as they depend only
on the parameters governing the noise and evolution of the state. The average posterior x              bt0 across
            0                                       a               0                              0
buyers at t is thus a linear function of Dt0 and xt | Ωi,t0 \ {Di,t }. As the price at t follows (5)
                                                              0                0

in Lemma 1, pt0 is a linear combination of Dta0 and xt0 | Ω0i,t0 \ {Di,t0 } whose weights are common
knowledge. The buyer at t observes Ω0i,t0 \ {Di,t0 } and pt0 , and therefore can perfectly deduce Dta0 .

Proof of Lemma 2. First, we prove that the state variable evolves as described in the text.
Consider the evolution of Dt between times t = 0 and t = δ. We will prove that we can write
Dδ = D0 + βg0 + wD and gδ = e−δλ g0 + wg , where wD and wg are independent from D0 and g0 and
have mean 0 conditional on data at t = 0. We also calculate the covariance matrix of w = (wD , wg )0 .
                                        Rδ          Rδ                               Rδ
From (2) and (3), we have Dδ = D0 + 0 gt dt + σD 0 dWtD and gδ = e−δλ g0 + σg 0 e−λ(δ−t) dWtg .
We find β as the coefficient from regressing Dδ − D0 on g0 . This coefficient equals
                  R                                R          
                        δ          Rδ                     δ
             Cov g0 , 0 gt dt + σD 0 dWtD       Cov g0 , 0 gt dt     Z δ
                                                                                   1 − e−λδ
        β=                                    =                    =     e−λt dt =          ,
                          Var(g0 )                  Var(g0 )          0               λ

where we have used the fact that for stochastic processes of the form specified in (3), Cov(g0 , gt ) =
e−λt Var(g0 ) for                            D
               R all t. The Rvariance of w equals the variance
                                                               R       of this regression’s forecast error,
                  δ              δ                                 δ
which is Var 0 gt dt + σD 0 dWtD − β 2 Var(g0 ) = Var 0 gt dt + δσD             2
                                                                                  − β 2 Var(g0 ). We solve for
the first variance on the right as

                                                                         2 e−δλ − 1 + δλ
               Z δ        Z δ       Z δZ δ                                               
                                                 −λ|t−s|
          Cov       gt dt,     gs ds =         e         Var(g0 )dtds =                      Var(g0 ).
                  0         0           0  0                                      λ2

Another standard fact about the stochastic process specified in (3) is that Var(g0 ) = σg2 /(2λ). We
substitute this expression into the above equations to conclude that

                                                σg2
                           Var(wD ) = δσD
                                        2
                                                     −3 + 2δλ + 4e−δλ − e−2δλ .
                                                                             
                                          +        3
                                                2λ
We turn now to proving the equation gδ = e−λδ g0 +    g
                                                  R tw . −λ(t−τ
                                                          Another standard fact about the process
                                             −λt                )
in (3) is that for all t, we may write gt = e g0 + 0 σg e         dWτg . Substituting δ = t yields the




                                                       45
                                                        Rδ
equation we desire. The variance of wg equals σg2          0
                                                               e−2λ(δ−t) dt, so that

                                                      σg2
                                        Var(wg ) =        (1 − e−2λδ ).
                                                      2λ
                                                                                              Rδ
The last task is to calculate the covariance of wD and wg , which equals Cov(gδ −e−δλ g0 , σD 0 dWtD +
Rδ
   g dt − βg0 ). The dW D term drops out because W D is independent
 0 t                                                                   Rfrom W
                                                                                   g
                                                                                  . The      remainder
                                                                            δ           σg2 R δ −tλ
can be written as the sum of four covariances. The first is Cov gδ , 0 gt dt = 2λ 0 e dt =
σg2                                                            σ2
      e−δλ ), the next
    (1 −
2λ2                   one is Cov   (gδ , −βg0 ) = − 2λg2 (e−δλ − e−2δλ ), the third covariance equals
                               σ 2                 σ2
                δ                    δ
Cov −e−δλ g0 , 0 gt dt = −e−δλ 2λg 0 e−tλ dt = − 2λg2 (e−δλ − e−2δλ ), and the fourth and final covari-
              R                    R

                                  σg2
ance is Cov(−e−δλ g0 , −βg0 ) =   2λ2
                                      (e−δλ   − e−2δλ ). The total covariance equals the sum of these four
terms:
                                                  σg2          2
                                  Cov(w , w ) = 2 1 − e−δλ .
                                              g   D
                                                 2λ
                           0        c    0
We conclude that (Dδ , gδ ) = F(D0 , g0 ) + w, where F is the matrix given in the text, and the
covariance matrix of w equals

                           2  σg2                 −δλ    −2δλ
                                                               σg2             !
                                                                            −δλ 2
                       δσD + 2λ3 −3 + 2δλ + 4e        −e         2λ2
                                                                       1−e
                 Q=                  σg2                          σg2              .
                                             −δλ 2
                                                                      (1 − e−2δλ )
                                                
                                    2λ2
                                         1−e                      2λ

   The formulas in Lemma 2 result from applying a Kalman filter to the problem specified. For
an exposition of Kalman filtering, see, for instance, Hamilton (1994). We solve for the posterior
conditional on observing {Di,t } ∪ Ωat ∪ Ωst ∪ Ωxt ; the naive buyers substitute rpt0 for Dta0 . As in the
Proof of Proposition 1, we let t0 denote the time of the most recent observation of x; the buyer
ignores all data that occurs before t0 . Let t1 be the first time not before t0 that the buyer at t
observes. The buyer forms a posterior on xt1 from observing just xt0 as well as Dta1 and Dts1 ; this
posterior is a normal distribution with mean x   b1 and covariance P1 . As we show below, we do not
need to solve for this posterior directly. At each subsequent period, the buyer learns Dtak and Dtsk
and iteratively applies the Kalman filter using the formulas x   bk = Kk (Dtak , Dtsk )0 + (I − Kk H0 )Fb
                                                                                                        xk−1
and Pk = (I − Kk H0 )(FPk−1 F + Q), where Kk = (FPk−1 F + Q)H0 (H0 (FPk−1 F + Q)H0 + R0 )−1 .
                                0                               0      0                   0       0

Let n be such that tn = t − δ. Then the posterior xt−δ | Ωi,t \ {Di,t } is a normal with mean x       bn and
covariance Pn . The final posterior xt | Ωi,t updates this posterior based on the information in {Di,t }
and the evolution of time between t − δ and δ. The mean of this posterior equals E(xt | Ωi,t ) =
KDi,t + (I − KH)FE(xt−δ | Ωi,t \ {Di,t }), where K = (FPn F0 + Q)H0 (H(FPn F0 + Q)H0 + R)−1 .
The covariance of the posterior equals P = (I − KH)(FP0 F0 + Q). Averaging the posterior mean
across i gives
                              " n−1   m−1
                                                                    !
                               X      Y
  x
  bt =   KDta   + (I − KH)F                                            a
                                            (I − Kn−k+1 H0 )F Kn−m+1 (Dt−mδ    s
                                                                            , Dt−mδ )0 +
                               m=1    k=1
                                                                                        n−1
                                                                                                              #
                                                                                        Y
                                                                                   x
                                                                                   b1         (I − Kn−k+1 H0 )F .
                                                                                        k=1

   We now show that as ρ → 0, this expression converges almost surely to the formula in the


                                                      46
lemma. We demonstrate pointwise convergence, and hence show convergence of the coefficients on
the dividend terms. According to Proposition 13.2 of Hamilton (1994), limn→∞ Pn = P0 , where P0
is the unique solution to
                                                                                −1
             P0 = (I − (FP0 F0 + Q)H00 (H0 (FP0 F0 + Q)H00 + R0 )                    H0 )(FP0 F0 + Q).

We may apply this proposition because Q is strictly positive definite (as it is the covariance matrix
variables that are not linear combinations of each other). As written in Hamilton (1994), the
proposition requires the eigenvalues of F to lie inside the unit circle (which they do not, as 1 is an
eigenvalue), but the proof shows that the strict positive definiteness of Q is sufficient. We define
K0 = (FP0 F0 + Q)H00 (H0 (FP0Q   F0 + Q)H00 + R0 )−1 ; note that limn→∞ Kn = K0 .
    We also claim that limn→∞ nk=1 (I − Kn−k+1 H0 )F = 0. A direct computation shows that F has
an eigenvalue less than 1 in magnitude and an eigenvalue of 1 with eigenvector (1, 0)0 . Similarly, for
any Kk , I − Kk H0 has an eigenvalue less than 1 in magnitude (and that is independent of k) and
an eigenvalue of 1 with eigenvector (0, 1)0 . As the eigenvectors with eigenvalue 1 are not collinear,
and the other eigenvalues are less than 1 in magnitude, the limit is 0 as claimed.
    It follows that given an error tolerance  for the coefficients, we can choose n large enough so
that the coefficients in the equation for x
                                          bt are within Q  of those in the formula in the lemma. We
first choose n1 large enough so that |((I − K0 H0 )F) − m
                                                      m
                                                              k=1 (I − Kk H0 )F| <  for m ≥ n1 and any
valid Kk ; as these products
                     Qm       both converge  to 0, n1 exists.  Then we choose n0 such that for n ≥ n0 ,
                 m
|((I − K0 H0 )F) − k=1 (I − Kn−k+1 H0 )F| <  for m ≤ n − n1 ; n0 exists because limn→∞ Kn = K0 .
Thus convergence occurs as long as n ≥ n0 , which happens with probability at most 1 − e−ρ(1+n0 )δ .
This probability converges to 0 as ρ → 0.

Proof of Proposition 3. In the limit as N → ∞, the noise in Dta0 , which is σa2 /N , goes to 0.
Naive buyers believe that rpt−δ = Dt−δa
                                          = Dt−δ , so they neglect all information in Ωpt ∪ Ωst ∪ Ωxt
                                                               s                   s
before t − δ, which is all information other than pt−δ and Dt−δ   ; they ignore Dt−δ   as it provides a
noisy signal of Dt−δ . This argument proves the naive formula.
     We now prove the rational formula. Note that from Lemma 1, rpt0 = Dt0 r/(r +µ)+ D    ct0 µ/(r +µ).
      0
At t = t − nδ, the expectation is formed using only xt0 and Di,t−nδ , as older data is obviated by
                                                                     2
xt0 . The noise in using Dt0 as a measure of Dt−nδ is (t − nδ − t0 )σD , and the noise in using Di,t−nδ
     2
is σa . Therefore
                                                2
                                 (t − nδ − t0 )σD                     σa2
                  D
                  b t−nδ =
                                                  2
                                                    Dt−nδ +                      2
                                                                                   Dt0 .
                             σa2 + (t − nδ − t0 )σD         σa2 + (t − nδ − t0 )σD

Prices therefore are given by rpt−nδ = (1 − α0 )Dt−nδ + α0 Dt0 , where α0 is as defined in the text.
    At all other times t0 , from Proposition 1, we know that the rational buyer can infer all observed
demand. Therefore E(Dt0 −δ | Ωpt0 ∪ Ωat0 ∪ Ωxt0 ) = Dt0 −δ and there is no noise in this estimate. It
follows that the posterior on Dt0 combines this estimate and Di,t0 , with weights equal to the relative
                                                              2
variance. The variance of the lagged demand estimate is δσD      and the variance of the idiosyncratic
                                                              p
estimate is σa . Therefore rpt0 = (1 − α)Dt0 + αE(Dt0 −δ | Ωt0 ∪ Ωst0 ∪ Ωxt0 ), where α is as defined in
              2

the proposition. Hence

                                                   rpt0 −δ − αE(Dt0 −2δ | Ωpt0 −δ ∪ Ωst0 −δ ∪ Ωxt0 −δ )
               E(Dt0 −δ | Ωpt0 ∪ Ωst0 ∪ Ωxt0 ) =
                                                                      1−α


                                                          47
for t0 > t − (n − 1)δ. At t0 = t − (n − 1)δ,

                                                                               rpt−nδ − α0 Dt0
                   E(Dt−nδ | Ωpt−(n−1)δ ∪ Ωst−(n−1)δ ∪ Ωxt−(n−1)δ ) =                          .
                                                                                   1 − α0
Iterating the first equation until the second is employed yields the formula in the proposition.
                                                                         R∞
Proof of Lemma 3. Using the terminology from the proof of Lemma 1, φ∗ = 0 µe−(r+µ)τ (1 −
φ)e−λτ dτ = (1 − φ)µ/(r + µ + λ). We then use the formula from that same proof that Ag =
[r(r + λ + µ)(1 − φ∗ )]−1 to arrive at the result.

Proof of Proposition 4. Using (7) and the forecasting rules in the text, we write Et (VT − Vt ) as
                                                              T
           Et (DT − Dt ) (1 − φ)(Et gT − gbt )                                 (1 − φ)(1 − e−λ(T −t) )gbt
                                                          Z
                                                 1
                        +                      =                  Et gτ dτ −                              ,
                 r          r(r + λ + φµ)        r        t                        r(r + λ + φµ)

which reduces to the formula in the Proposition. This expression increases in φ. The derivative
of the first fraction is positive when (r + λ + φµ)(λ + µ) > (r + φλ + φµ)µ, which is true because
r + λ + φµ > r + φλ + φµ and λ + µ > µ, as λ > 0.

Proof of Lemma 4. We write ∆pt = β1 ∆pt−δ −β2 ∆pt−2δ +γt +t . We let ρm = Corr(∆pt , ∆pt−mδ ).
By taking the covariance with respect to ∆pt−1 of the above equation and simplifying, we obtain

                                            β1     ξCov(∆pt , γt )
                                   ρ1 =         +                   ,
                                          1 + β2 (1 + β2 )Var(∆pt )

where ξ = e−δλγ and we have used Cov(γt , ∆pt−δ ) = Cov(ξγt−δ + ηt , ∆pt−δ ) = ξCov(γt−δ , ∆pt−δ ).
Similarly, note that Cov(γt , ∆pt−2δ ) = ξ 2 Cov(γt , ∆pt ). Therefore, by taking the covariance of the
first equation with respect to γt and simplifying, we obtain

                                                    Var(γt ) + Cov(ηt , t )
                                 Cov(∆pt , γt ) =                            ,
                                                      1 − β1 ξ + β2 ξ 2

where we have used Cov(γt , t ) = Cov(ηt + ξγt−δ , t ) = Cov(ηt , t ). This expression is nonnegative:
by assumption, Cov(ηt , t ) ≥ 0, and the polynomial 1 − β1 L + β2 L2 has no roots between 0 and 1, as
it is a factor of the characteristic polynomial of the stationary time series ∆pt (stationarity forces the
roots to have magnitude exceeding 1). Therefore ρ1 > 0 if β1 > 0, and both terms in the expression
for ρ1 are increasing in β1 . We turn now to the general expression for the autocorrelations ρm . We
may write (I − ξL)(I − β1 L + β2 L2 )∆pt = ηt + t − ξt−1 . By taking the covariance of this equation
with respect to ∆pt−mδ for m > 2, and then dividing by the variance of ∆pt , we uncover that the
autocorrelations satisfy the recursion (I − ξL)(I − β1 L + β2 L2 )ρm = 0. Let r1 and r2 be such that
                                           2
(I − r1 L)(I − r2 L) =  p I − β1 L + β2 L . These roots satisfy r1 + r2 = β1 and r1 r2 = β2 , and are
given by rj = (β1 ± β12 − 4β2 )/2 for p      j ∈ {1, 2}. These roots are complex when β12 < 4β2 . In this
                                                                      √
case, their absolute value is given by (β12 − (β12 − 4β2 ))/4 = β2 . The autocorrelations satisfy
(I − ξL)(I − r1 L)(I − r2 L)ρm = 0, so ρm = Aγ ξ m + A1 r1m + A2 r2m for some constants Aγ , A1 , and
A2 . As long as β2 < 1, then |r1 |, |r2 | < 1 and the autocorrelations are well-defined. When β12 < 4β2 ,
r1m and r2m are complex conjugates. As ρm is real, A1 and A2 must be conjugates as well. We write


                                                     48
                                                                    √ ±iθ                        √
A1 = Aβ eiω /2 and A2 = Aβ e−iω /2 with Aβ real, and r =             β2 e , where cos(θ) = β1 /(2 β2 ). Then
                          m/2 imθ+iω                 m/2 −imθ−iω                        m/2
     ρ m = Aγ ξ m + A β β 2   e         /2 + Aβ β2      e          /2 = Aγ e−mδλγ + Aβ β2     cos(mθ + ω).

We proved this formula for m ≥ 3, but it holds for m = 1 and m = 2 as well, as the first three
autocorrelations determine the constants Aγ , Aβ , and ω.

Proof of Proposition 5. We know from Proposition 3 that the posterior on Dt−δ equals rpt−δ .
For gt−δ , note that Di,t is too noisy to provide information, and from the equation xt = Fxt−δ +
wt , we have ∆Dt−δ = gt−2δ (1 − e−δλ )/λ + wt−2δ   D
                                                       . Therefore, as the naive buyer sets rpt0 = Dt0 ,
her posterior on the growth rate is E(gt−δ | Ωi,t ) = r∆pt−δ λe−δλ /(1 − e−δλ ). To arrive at the
                                                     0

contemporaneous estimates, we again use the law of motion for x and get E(Dt | Ω0i,t ) = rpt−δ +
e−δλ r∆pt−δ and E(gt | Ω0i,t ) = r∆pt−δ λe−2δλ /(1 − e−δλ ). Substituting these expressions into (5)
and differencing yields the equation in the Proposition. The growth rate is an AR(1) as gt =
e−δλ gt−δ + wtg , and Cov(wtg , wtD ) > 0 by the formula for Q, so the innovation constitutes an AR(1)
plus noise under the definition in Lemma 4. Finally, to show that the condition (β1 /2)2 < β2 < 1
holds for some parameters, use δ = 1, λ = 1, r = 0.04, µ = 0.075, and φ = 1, which yields β1 = 1.08
and β2 = 0.43.

Identification of Demand Parameters. We observe the following three covariances from the
data: γ0 = Var(∆Dt ), γ1 = Cov(∆Dt , ∆Dt−1 ), and γ2 = Cov(∆Dt , ∆Dt−2 ). These identify σD , σg ,
and λ as follows. First, note that Dt+1 = Dt + gt (1 − e−λ )/λ + wtD , where wD is the error defined
in the proof of Lemma 2. This equation comes from applying the law of motion for xt , which is
xt+1 = Fxt + wt , where wt and xt are independent and the covariance matrix of w is Q . As a
result, ∆Dt = gt (1 − e−λ )/λ + wtD . It follows that the variance of the yearly price change equals
                                            2
                                  1 − e−λ        σg2                   σg2
                              
                      γ0 =                           + Var(wtD ) = σD
                                                                    2
                                                                      + 3 (e−λ − 1 + λ).
                                     λ           2λ                    λ

The first covariance of price changes equals

                         1 − e−λ               −λ                       (1 − e−λ )2 σg2
                                                                    
                                       D 1−e        −λ     g      D
             γ1 = Cov            gt + wt ,        (e gt + wt ) + wt+1 =                 .
                            λ                λ                              2λ3

The second covariance equals

               1 − e−λ              −λ                                   e−λ (1 − e−λ )2 σg2
                                                                     
                              D 1−e      −λ −λ     g      g        D
    γ2 = Cov           gt + w t ,      (e (e gt + wt ) + wt+1 ) + wt+2 =                     .
                  λ               λ                                             2λ3

These three equations identify the parameters. Note that γ2 /γ1 = e−λ , so this ratio determines λ.
Conditional on λ, γ1 /γ0 uniquely determines the ratio σg /σD . Finally, γ0 pins down the level of
these volatilities.




                                                            49
