NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR PREGNANT WOMEN AFFECT PRENATAL
HEALTH BEHAVIORS?
Dhaval M. Dave
Robert Kaestner
George L. Wehby
Working Paper 21049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21049

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

The authors are grateful to Tina Marsh, Joshua Pinkston, Jennifer Trudeau, Wen You and Joshua Graff
Zivin for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors have no conflicts of interest
with this work.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Dhaval M. Dave, Robert Kaestner, and George L. Wehby. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Medicaid Coverage for Pregnant Women Affect Prenatal Health Behaviors?
Dhaval M. Dave, Robert Kaestner, and George L. Wehby
NBER Working Paper No. 21049
March 2015
JEL No. D1,D9,I12,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Despite plausible mechanisms, little research has evaluated potential changes in health behaviors as
a result of the Medicaid expansions of the 1980s and 1990s for pregnant women. Accordingly, we
provide the first national study of the effects of Medicaid on health behaviors for pregnant women.
We exploit exogenous variation from the Medicaid income eligibility expansions for pregnant women
and children during late-1980s through mid-1990s to examine effects on several prenatal health behaviors
and health outcomes using U.S. vital statistics data. We find that increases in Medicaid eligibility
were associated with increases in smoking and decreases in weight gain during pregnancy. Raising
Medicaid eligibility by 12 percentage-points increased rates of any prenatal smoking and smokingmore
than five cigarettes daily by 0.7-0.8 percentage point. Medicaid expansions were associated witha
reduction in pregnancy weight-gain by about 0.6%. These effects diminish at higher levels of eligibility,
which is consistent with crowd-out from private to public insurance. Importantly, our evidence is
consistent with ex-ante moral hazard although income effects are also at play. The worsening of health
behaviors may partly explain why Medicaid expansions have not been associated with substantial
improvement in infant health.

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner.robert@gmail.com

George L. Wehby
Department of Health Management and Policy
College of Public Health
University of Iowa
145 N. Riverside Dr.
100 College of Public Health Bldg.
Room N248
Iowa City, IA 52242
and NBER
george-wehby@uiowa.edu

I.

Introduction
Between 1990 and 2010, the share of births in the U.S. covered by Medicaid increased

from 28% to 44% (Curtin et al, 2013). Much of this increase is due to the expansion of Medicaid
income eligibility thresholds for pregnant women that started in the late 1980s and continued
through the early part of the 1990s. The purpose of expanding Medicaid coverage was to
reduce the rate of uninsured pregnant women, increase use of timely medical care (e.g.,
prenatal care), and improve infant health and narrow socioeconomic disparities in infant health
(National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality 1988). While the logic of the argument
underlying the expansion of Medicaid coverage for pregnant women is intuitive, the evidence
to support its validity is not as strong. Generally, there is evidence that expanded Medicaid
coverage increased the use of prenatal care, but evidence that Medicaid has improved infant
health is less robust (Currie and Gruber 1996; Howell 2001; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 2002; Hadley 2003; Levy and Meltzer 2004).
One possible explanation for this somewhat counterintuitive finding is that health
insurance creates incentives to change health behaviors along with lowering the price of
medical care. Insurance lowers the price of treating an illness, for example, an adverse medical
outcome for either the mother or child, which may cause a reduction in maternal efforts to
prevent the occurrence of such events (ex-ante moral hazard). In addition, Medicaid coverage
entails an income effect from the saved out-of-pocket expenditures and from spending on
health insurance premiums (in the case of substitution of private for public insurance). This
income effect may be used to purchase goods that improve infant health, but also goods that
may harm infant health (e.g., cigarettes).
3

Relatively little research has examined potential consequences of expanded Medicaid
coverage on health behaviors of pregnant eligible women. Understanding these effects is of
paramount importance given the large number of births covered under Medicaid and the longterm consequences of prenatal inputs for child health (Almond and Currie 2011). In this study,
we examine the impact of Medicaid eligibility expansions on the prenatal behaviors and health
indicators of pregnant women. The Medicaid income eligibility expansions for pregnant women
and for children that occurred during the late 1980s through the mid-1990s provide plausibly
exogenous variation in insurance coverage. We assess whether the expansion of Medicaid
eligibility and its associated increase in Medicaid coverage changed pregnant women’s health
behaviors such as smoking and nutrition, as approximated by weight gain during pregnancy. We
also examine other pregnancy-related health indicators that may reflect behavioral
mechanisms such as gestational diabetes and anemia that are related to weight gain, diet and
exercise.
Understanding whether the expansion of Medicaid affected health behaviors of
pregnant women is particularly important given the documented links between prenatal (in
utero) health and adult outcomes (Almond and Currie, 2011; Currie, 2009). The focus on
Medicaid is especially salient because of relative disadvantage in terms of socioeconomic status
and health of the Medicaid population. For instance, in the sample of women we study, the
prevalence of prenatal smoking among low-educated unmarried mothers was 33% compared
to 3% among higher-educated married mothers.
Our research also adds to the sparse literature on ex ante moral hazard and extends the
analysis of the effects of Medicaid coverage on health behaviors. While ex ante moral hazard is
4

nearly always mentioned as a theoretical consequence of health insurance (Cutler and
Zeckhauser 2000; Kenkel 2000), relatively few empirical studies have assessed its importance
and these few studies have not produced a consensus finding. Similarly, while there have been
many studies of the effects of the Medicaid expansions on insurance coverage, health care use
and health, there are only two studies that we are aware of that assess whether the expansions
adversely affected health behaviors: the Oregon Medicaid Experiment (Baicker et al. 2013) and
Bhattacharya et al (2011). Neither of these studies included pregnant women and neither
addressed the potential problems in identifying the ex ante moral hazard effect from an income
effect, or accounted for the indirect effect of health insurance on behaviors that works through
greater contact with health care providers who provide health information and counseling. We
provide the first national study of the effects of Medicaid on health behaviors, and the first
such study for pregnant women.
Estimates from this study indicate that expansions in Medicaid eligibility were
significantly associated with increases in smoking and decreases in weight gain during
pregnancy. We also find some suggestive evidence of an increase in gestational diabetes,
which may partly reflect behavioral pathways. Effects are stronger with eligibility expansions at
lower income levels, consistent with the crowd-out effects from private to public coverage at
higher income levels. Our effect sizes are relatively large, but are plausible given the size of the
potential income and moral hazard effects that are likely mechanisms. However, income effects
are not large enough to explain the entire effect and thus it is likely that there were insurance
induced changes in behavior (i.e., ex ante moral hazard). Finally, we find no evidence that
increased contact with health care providers affected health behaviors.
5

2.

Relevant Literature
While the theory underlying ex ante moral hazard is well developed, the empirical

literature is relatively thin, particularly with respect to health insurance, as there is a somewhat
more developed literatures for other types of insurance. 1 There are no studies that we are
aware of that address the issue of ex ante moral hazard in the context of pregnant women.
Courbage and Coulon (2004) examined the effect of having private health insurance
coverage on smoking and exercise among British Households using both classical and
instrumental variables regression approaches. The authors reported that there were no
differences in health behaviors between the privately insured and those without such
insurance. Card et al. (2008) used a regression discontinuity research approach to study the
effects of obtaining Medicare at age 65 on various health behaviors and preventive healthcare
utilization. They found no significant effects of Medicare on smoking, exercise, or obesity, nor
did they find strong effects on preventive services such as a mammogram. In contrast, Klick
and Stratmann (2007) evaluated whether state mandated private health insurance coverage for
the treatment of diabetes was associated with body mass index among diabetics. Results from
this state-level difference-in-differences study indicated that state mandates, which
presumably lower the price of treating diabetes, was associated with higher body mass index.
Kelly and Markowitz (2009) and Bhattacharya et al. (2011) assessed whether health
insurance coverage among working adults was associated with body weight. The two studies
reached different conclusions: Kelly and Markowitz (2009) reported a small, positive, but not
statistically significant effect of insurance on body mass index (BMI) and the probability of being
1

See, for instance, studies relating prevention and accidents to automobile insurance (Chiappori 2000;
Cohen and Dehejia 2004) and studies relating workplace injuries to workers’ compensation benefits
(Ruser 1985, 1991; Kaestner and Carroll 1997; Fortin and Lanoie 2000).

6

overweight whereas Bhattacharya et al. (2011) reported relatively large effects of insurance on
bodyweight and obesity. Both of these studies used an instrumental variables (IV) approach to
address the non-random selection into insurance coverage.2 Stanciole (2008) also studied the
association between insurance and behaviors and reported that insurance was significantly
associated with greater smoking, less exercise, and more obesity.
Randomized experiments have also failed to find conclusive evidence. Findings from the
Rand Health Insurance Experiment (RHIE), for instance, indicated that less generous health
insurance did not have any significant or practical effect on health behaviors such as smoking,
drinking, and exercise (Newhouse 1993). Less generous insurance was, however, associated
with decreased use of preventive medical services (secondary prevention). While this latter
finding contradicts the simple intuition that less insurance should cause an increase in
prevention (Lilliard et al. 1986), it is consistent with less generous coverage (i.e., more costsharing) leading to a higher price of preventive medical care relative to primary prevention and
self-protection.
The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Baicker et al. 2013), which enrolled a group of
uninsured low-income adults into Oregon’s Medicaid program by lottery, found increased used
of many preventive medical services, which likely reflects the lower cost of these services as a
result of insurance. However, the study finds no statistically significant impacts on measures of
primary prevention including the probability of being a current smoker and of being obese. The
magnitude of the smoking effect is relatively large (6 percentage points, 13%), positive and

2

Kelly and Markowitz (2011) utilize firm size as IVs and also supplement their identification strategy with
internal heteroscedasticity-dependent IVs. Bhattacharya et al. (2011) use firm size, supplemented with
state expansions in the Medicaid eligibility between 1989 and 2004, as IVs.

7

suggestive of an increase in smoking prevalence subsequent to Medicaid coverage. The p-value
is relatively close to being marginally significant (p=0.18).3
Dave and Kaestner (2009) is the only study we are aware of that has tried to separate
out the direct ex ante moral hazard effect of insurance from the indirect effects of health
insurance on health behaviors operating through increased contact with healthcare
professionals and shifts in health information and knowledge. Dave and Kaestner (2009) study
the elderly and exploit the age eligibility of Medicare. The authors reported that after
accounting for the effects of greater physician contact, obtaining Medicare was associated with
a worsening of health behaviors, as measured by lower rates of smoking cessation, reduced
physical activity and increased alcohol use.
In this study, we add to the sparse literature on ex ante moral hazard, and extend the
analysis of the effect of health insurance on health behaviors by examining the impact of
Medicaid on the prenatal behaviors of pregnant women. In particular, we assess effects of
Medicaid on maternal smoking and weight gain during pregnancy, in addition to behaviorrelated health indicators during pregnancy such as gestational diabetes, pregnancy-associated
hypertension, and anemia. This represents the first national study of Medicaid effects on
health behaviors among pregnant women.
We exploit the plausibly exogenous variation over time and between states in the
Medicaid expansions in income-based eligibility for pregnant women and for children that
occurred during the late 1980s through the mid 1990s. Moreover, we account for the effect of

3

The confidence interval for the treatment effect on current smoking prevalence ranged from -2.5 to 13.7,
and that for obesity ranged from -7.9 to 8.7.

8

insurance on health behaviors that works through greater contact with health care providers,
and we assess heuristically whether an income effect can account for our findings.
3.

Conceptual Framework
The model we use to examine the effect of Medicaid on health behaviors is based on

the choices of a mother who cares about consumption, leisure, and child health. There are two
periods that span the pre- to post-birth period.4 In this model, child health in the post-birth
period is uncertain. With probability (π), the child may experience an adverse health shock (z)
that lowers child health and can be offset (repaired) with medical care (m1). Medical care in the
first period can also be used to alter the probability of an adverse health event in period two.5
First-period maternal consumption, for example, nutrition and smoking, may also affect the
probability of an adverse health shock in period two. Health insurance is particularly important
because it is used to buy medical care after the birth in the case of an adverse outcome..
A woman’s expected utility is a function of consumption, leisure and child health:
(1)

E(U )  u0 ( x0 , l0 )  {[1   (m0 , x0 )][u1( x1, l1, c)]   (m0 , x0 )[u1( x1, l1, c  z(m1))]}

Equation (1) reflects the fact that there are two periods: prior to birth (t=0) and after birth
(t=1). Utility is a function of consumption (x), leisure (l) and child health (c) in each period,

4

We assume that Medicaid has no effect on the pregnancy decision, which is consistent with some
previous literature. DeLeire et al. (2011) find no discernible effects on fertility from Medicaid expansions
using Natality data from 1985-1996. Zavodny and Bitler (2010) find little evidence that the expansions
had any effect on abortion or pregnancy rates examining state-level birth and abortion rates between
1982-1996. In contrast, Joyce et al. (1998), using pooled cross-sections of states, find that expansions in
the income thresholds for Medicaid eligibility between 1987-1991 are associated with a 5% increase in
the birthrate among white women but not among black women.
5
We do not treat medical care in the first period, for example maternal prenatal care, as uncertain and
affected by insurance because such care is preventive and its effects are assumed known—i.e., there is
no uncertainty. Including Medicaid coverage for maternal care prior to birth would not change any of the
predictions described below.

9

although in period 0 the child is not born and so child health does not enter the utility function.
The discount rate is denoted by (β).
The woman’s budget constraint is given by:
p ( )m1
x
w( )(1  l1 )
f 1
(2) x0  pm m0  1   (m0 ) m

 w( )(1  l0 ) 
W
1 r
1 r
 1 r
1 r

Lifetime income is spent on: consumption (x) in periods 0 and 1; medical care (m) in periods 0
and 1 with price of medical care denoted by pm; and the quantity of health insurance (α) in
period one. The interest rate is denoted by (r). Health insurance reduces the price of medical
care and is financed out of earnings (w). The cost of health insurance also includes a loading
charge (f/α) where f is a fixed cost of administering health insurance.
The constrained choice problem is given by:
L  u0 ( x0 , l0 )   {[1   (m0 , x0 )][u1 ( x1, l1, c)]   (m0 , x0 )[u1 ( x1, l1, c  z (m1 ))]}

(3)

 [ x0  pm m0 

p ( )m1 f 1
x1
w( )(1  l1 )
  (m0 ) m

 w(1  l0 ) 
1 r
1 r
 1 r
1 r

The first order condition for consumption in first period is given by:

(4)

L
 ~
 p m ( )m1
 U0  
(u1  u1 )  [
]0
x0
x0
x0 1  r
U0  

 ~
 p m ( )m1
(u1  u1 )  [
]
x0
x0 1  r

Equation (4) is the usual equilibrium condition. The left hand side is the benefit of first period
consumption and the right hand side is the cost, which includes the higher probability of lower
second period utility because of an adverse health shock to child caused by first period
consumption and the greater spending on second period medical care due to a higher
probability of an adverse health shock (u~1 denotes period 1 utility if sick).

10

Equation (4) also illustrates the problem of ex ante moral hazard. Health insurance (α)
lowers the price of medical care, and a lower price of medical care reduces the cost of first
period consumption that works through the probability of a child health shock. With insurance,
a mother has to incur less cost to treat an adverse event (for her or her child) associated with a
birth. Therefore, health insurance may influence first period consumption that may adversely
affect child health. Importantly, for Medicaid, there is no cost of insurance so the ex ante moral
hazard problem is not eliminated through changes in insurance premiums. Of course, there is
also an income effect associated with the lower price of health insurance and Medicaid that
may increase consumption.
The first order conditions for medical care are given by:
L
 ~
 pm ( )m1

(u1  u1 )  [ pm ( ) 
]0
m0
m0
m0 1  r
 ~
 pm ( )m1
(u1  u1 )  [ pm ( ) 
]

m0
m0 1  r

(5)
p ( )
u z
L
   1
  m
0
m1
c m1
1 r
p ( )
u z
  1
  m
c m1
1 r

First-period medical care is valued because it reduces the probability of an adverse event and
raises expected utility in the second period (u~1 denotes period 1 utility if sick). A lower
probability of an adverse event also reduces second-period medical expenditures. Both of these
marginal benefits are equated to the price of medical care. Second-period medical care raises
utility by improving child health and this marginal benefit is equated to the price of medical
care.

11

Dave and Kaestner (2009) raise another issue that is relevant, but not explicit in
equation (4), and that is the possibility that the greater use of medical care that comes with
insurance may affect the information available about the effect of consumption on the
probability of an adverse health shock to child. For example, Medicaid may be associated with
greater prenatal care, and during these visits the physician may discuss health behaviors and
the value of prevention that causes a mother to change behaviors.
Finally, we assume an insurance market that allows a woman to choose an optimal
amount of insurance:

p m
L
f 1
w (1  l1 )
 [ m 1 

]0

 1  r  2 1  r  1  r
(6)
p m
f 1
w (1  l1 )
 m 1 

 1  r  2 1  r  1  r
According to (6), a woman chooses insurance to equate the expected medical expenditures to
the cost of insurance, which is the wage offset plus loading cost. Again, the expansion of
Medicaid makes insurance free and there is an income effect associated with this change.6
Additionally, there are no changes in premiums to reflect the behavioral responses of Medicaid
beneficiaries to the price change of medical care.
The upshot of this theoretical discussion is that the net effect of Medicaid coverage for
pregnant women and their children on prenatal preventive activities is a priori ambiguous.
Gaining insurance is associated with: 1) the pure ex ante moral hazard effect, which will tend to
worsen health behaviors; 2) an income effect that is likely to increase behaviors that are a form
of consumption including unhealthy behaviors such as smoking; and 3) an “informational”
6

The income effect may also be driven by Medicaid-induced shifts in labor supply. Dave et al.
(forthcoming) find that Medicaid expansions for pregnant women led to a decrease in their employment
and labor force participation.

12

effect that comes from the greater contact with the medical system induced by the lower price
of medical care.
4.

Research Design
Our analysis is motivated by the incentives described above for pregnant women to

potentially change their primary prevention activities in response to Medicaid coverage. To
address this issue empirically, we exploit plausibly exogenous variation from the Medicaid
income eligibility expansions for pregnant women during the late-1980s through mid-1990s
taking advantage of the differences in expansions over time between states as a quasiexperiment. We use data from the vital statistics natality files for births occurring from 1989
through 1997, the period that spanned the largest expansions in Medicaid eligibility for
pregnant women and children.
The research design is a difference-in-differences approach focusing on the intention-totreat parameter associated with expanded Medicaid eligibility. For each type of health
behavior, we estimate the following regression specification:
(7)
In equation (7), H denotes a specific health behavior (smoking or weight gain) or outcome
(gestational diabetes, hypertension, and anemia) for pregnant woman i in state j and year t.
ELIG is the fraction of women in group k, which is defined by race and age (18-24, 25-29, 30-34,
35-39), in state j and year t that are eligible for Medicaid. The vector X represents individual
characteristics of the pregnant woman such as age, education, marital status, race/ethnicity,
and interactions between race and education; and Z represents a vector of time-varying statelevel confounding factors including the unemployment rate (contemporaneous and the one13

year lag and lead) to capture economic conditions., state excise tax on cigarettes (in models for
smoking), and the fraction of single males with incomes below 200% of the federal poverty line
(FPL) with private insurance in state j and year t to capture trends in private insurance among
the low-income population.7
All specifications control for state (α) and year (θ) fixed effects to capture unobserved
time-invariant area heterogeneity and national trends, and we allow these trends to vary by the
race and age categories used to define the fraction of eligible women (ELIG). In order to control
for other time-varying state-level unobservable variables, we also include in all models the
prevalence (or mean) of the specific health behavior in question for college-educated married
(denoted by the subscript m) pregnant women between the ages of 25-39 (Gm), who are
generally not Medicaid eligible and thus would not be impacted by the policy shift, for state j
and year t.8 Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells. The
parameter of interest is δ, which captures the reduced-form, marginal effect of the expansions
in Medicaid eligibility on prenatal behaviors, operating through the three channels described
earlier.
The use of the fraction of women eligible for Medicaid in each state and year to
measure Medicaid eligibility follows the innovation of Currie and Gruber (1996) and Cutler and
Gruber (1996). The key to this measure is that it records the fraction of a fixed sample of
7

The fraction of single males with income below 200% of the FPL who are privately insured in each
state/year is computed from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS).
8
Note that this does not amount to using college-educated married pregnant women as a direct
comparison group since we are not constraining the coefficient to be one, that is we are not assuming (as
would be the case in a difference-in-differences context) that for every one-percentage point change in
the outcome among higher-educated married pregnant women there would be, in the absence of any
changes in Medicaid eligibility, an equal change in the outcome for low-educated unmarried pregnant
women. Our models confirm that this assumption of one-to-one proportional trends is not justified as the
coefficient on the group mean for college-educated married pregnant women is significantly less than one
in all specifications.

14

women who would be eligible for Medicaid if they were pregnant and lived in each state in
each year and avoids the endogenous relationship between Medicaid eligibility of an individual
mother and her health and health behaviors. To form the measure, we selected a national
sample of women aged 18 to 39 from the 1989 to 1997 March Current Population Surveys (CPS)
(covering data from 1988-1996). We adjusted all financial variables for price changes such that
incomes are deflated (inflated) from the actual year (e.g., 1988,..,1996) to the policy year (e.g.,
1991) for which eligibility will be calculated. Using the “inflation-adjusted” sample and the
Medicaid eligibility rules in a state in a specific year, we assigned eligibility to the fixed national
sample so that eligibility is calculated using the same sample of women in each year for a given
state. We then calculated the proportion of women aged 18 to 39 within a race-age-state-year
cell that would be eligible for Medicaid if they became pregnant.9
The variation in both of these measures comes from program rules alone -- after
adjusting for inflation and state fixed effects, the only way the percent eligible in this fixed
sample changes is due to changes in the state eligibility rules. As documented in Currie and
Gruber (1996), federal mandates during the late 1980s and early 1990s resulted in substantial
increases for all states in the fraction of pregnant women and their children who would be
eligible for Medicaid, though the magnitude of the increase varied widely according to initial

9

We chose to define the group cells for Medicaid eligibility by race and age (in addition to state and year)
because of the large racial and age-related differences that exist in insurance coverage and health
behaviors. Furthermore, the race- and age-specific samples exploit differences in the income distribution
across these factors. If there is a different distribution of income by race, then that variation helps identify
the association between Medicaid eligibility and outcomes and results in more precise estimates. For
instance, a given shift in federal poverty line (FPL)-based eligibility in a specific state may lead to
differential shifts for different races due to differences in race-specific and age-specific income
distributions. Thus, Medicaid eligibility constructed for race- and age-specific samples provides a measure
of the policy instrument with greater and more accurate variation when matched to individual records,
which raises the precision of estimates.

15

eligibility limits and state options regarding whether to offer coverage beyond the federally
mandated minimum eligibility increases.
We modify the basic empirical model described above in several ways to address
specific issues. First, in supplementary models we include state-specific time trends to adjust
for the potentially less than perfect nature of the natural experiment. Inclusion of state-specific
time trends (set of state fixed effects that are interacted with a linear measure for time in
years) adjusts for the potential endogeneity of the Medicaid expansions if states with greater
expansions have correlated linear time trends in health behaviors for other reasons. Note that
these trends are in addition to other time-varying, state-specific controls in the model including
the unemployment rate and health behaviors of college-educated married women. As we show
later, adding state-specific trends has virtually no effect on estimates bolstering the plausibility
of our research design.
Second, we limit the main analyses low-educated single mothers since this subgroup of
the population is relatively more likely to be affected by the Medicaid eligibility expansions.
Low-educated, single mothers have far higher Medicaid take-up rates and experienced larger
shifts in insurance coverage relative to those with more education or those who are married
(Dave et al. 2011, 2014).10 In the same spirit, and as a placebo test, we estimate the model
using a sample of higher-educated married pregnant women since they are far less likely to be
affected by the expansions in Medicaid eligibility. Here too results suggest a valid research
design, as almost all estimates for this group are not statistically significant and small.

10

Medicaid participation among less-than-high-school educated pregnant women is 2.4 times greater
relative to higher educated pregnant women, and 6.1 times greater among unmarried pregnant women
relative to those who are married, based on the CPS.

16

Third, we allow the eligibility measure to have non-linear effects, which may be likely
given that higher levels of eligibility are affecting women and children at increasingly higher
income levels and with increasingly higher rates of private insurance and lower rates of being
uninsured. At higher levels of eligibility, part of the increase in public coverage reflects a
crowd-out of private coverage (see Dubay and Kenney 1997; Gruber and Simon 2008; Dave et
al. 2011). In this instance, we expect progressively smaller effects on health behaviors because
at higher levels of Medicaid eligibility, Medicaid take-up is associated greater shifts from private
to public insurance, in which case there should be minimal changes in individual incentives, and
smaller shifts from no insurance to insurance.
Fourth, we supplement the analyses and explicitly control for prenatal care visits and
the adequacy of prenatal care in order to disentangle the direct ex ante moral hazard effect,
which implies a reduction in healthy behaviors, from greater insurance-induced contact with
the medical care community, which implies an increase in healthy behaviors, as shown in the
theoretical framework above. In models that do not control for prenatal care, the estimated
effect would conflate both of these counteracting effects.
5.

Data
Our main analyses are based on individual birth records from the Vital Statistics Natality

Files (NF). Detailed information on all individual births occurring in the 50 states and D.C. are
submitted by hospitals to state vital registration offices, which is then reported to the National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). Information on each birth includes date and place of birth
along with the demographic characteristics of the mother such as age, race, education, marital
status, and parity. We employ NF data for the years 1989 through 1997, covering pregnancies
17

which started from 1988 through 1996, as this period enveloped some of the major Medicaid
income eligibility expansions that took place and because earlier years did not contain
information on certain prenatal behaviors. The primary sample is limited to women, with a
high-school degree or less, between the ages of 18 to 39. This yields up to 18.6 million births
for the main analytical sample. We employ additional checks in a sample of higher-educated
married women contributing up to 6.3 million births.
We specifically measure two sets of health behaviors: 1) two measures of prenatal
smoking (prenatal smoking participation, smoking more than 5 cigarettes daily on average); and
2) weight gain during pregnancy. The latter outcome captures decisions related to nutrition,
caloric intake, and physical activity. Between 1970 and 1990, guidelines recommended a
weight-gain of 20-25 pounds during pregnancy, for normal-weight mothers, to ensure adequate
caloric intake and a healthy normal-weight infant (Institute of Medicine 2009). Revised
guidelines in 1990 called for even greater weight-gain for some groups (25-35 pounds for
pregnant women with normal pre-pregnancy body mass index, for instance).11 Since we cannot
observe pre-pregnancy weight in the natality data over our sample period, we also employ the
two thresholds of weight gain that no one should fall outside regardless of their weight gain,
which would be 15-40 pounds.
We also study three maternal health indicators during pregnancy that are related to
health behaviors such as nutrition and physical activity. These are gestational diabetes 12,

11

These guidelines were revised in 2009, in reflection of the obesity epidemic, for pre-pregnancy obese
women, recommending their pregnancy-related weight gain to be limited to 11-20 pounds. They were in
recognition of the fact that heavier women could gain less weight and still deliver a normal-weight infant.
12
Prior to states using revised birth certificates starting in 2003, the data did not differentiate between
pre-pregnancy and gestational diabetes. However, based on disaggregated data, almost 90% of these
diabetes cases represent gestational diabetes.

18

anemia, and hypertension. While gestational diabetes is not explained by behaviors in many
cases, its risk increases with being overweight/obese and with poor management of prepregnancy and prenatal blood sugar levels (at prediabetic-levels), which are linked to diet and
physical activity. Furthermore, management of gestational diabetes involves modification of
diet (e.g. meal spacing), reduced sugar intake, monitoring blood sugar before meals, exercise,
and weight gain monitoring and control. Similarly, hypertension risk during pregnancy is
increased by unhealthy diets (e.g. consumption of salty/fatty foods and caffeine),
overweight/obesity, low/no exercise, smoking, and alcohol consumption. Anemia can be
prevented or treated by consuming iron and folate containing supplements and by eating iron
and folate rich foods such as spinach and meat.
We utilize two measures of prenatal care to account for insurance effects on health
information through doctor contacts. The first captures the total number of prenatal care visits
over the pregnancy period. The second is a measure of the adequacy of prenatal care based on
the Kotelchuck adequacy criteria, which combines the timing of prenatal care initiation with the
recommended number of visits adjusted for gestation. Specifically, a woman is considered to
receive adequate prenatal care if she initiated care by the end of the 4th month of her
pregnancy and received at least 80% of the recommended number of visits during the time
between initiation and delivery (Kotelchuck 1994).
Using the birth records from 1989-1997, we impute the year of pregnancy inception
based on birth year and gestation, thus yielding pregnancies which were started between 19881996. We match Medicaid eligibility to the birth records by state, age group, race, and year of

19

pregnancy.13 All other time-varying state variables are matched based on state and year of
pregnancy.
Table 1 presents means for all years and for the baseline period (1989), for all births and
for subgroups based on maternal marital status and education. The prevalence of prenatal
smoking is 33.2% among low-educated (below high school) unmarried mothers, compared to
2.9% among college-educated married mothers. On average, weight gain among highereducated married mothers is about two pounds higher (31.1 pounds) compared with the lowereducated sample (29.2 pounds), supporting our premise that a decline in weight gain on
average in response to Medicaid expansions would represent an adverse outcome. Highereducated married mothers are also more likely to receive adequate prenatal care (88.8% versus
47%) and to have 3 more prenatal visits (average of 12.4 versus 9.3 visits) relative to lowereducated unmarried mothers. All of these differences are statistically significant. On average,
28.3% of pregnant women were eligible for Medicaid coverage over 1988-1996; this eligibility
increased from 20% in 1988 to over 32% by 1996 (see Figure 1). We exploit these expansions
across states and over time to assess how public insurance coverage may impact low-educated
pregnant women’s prenatal behaviors.
6.

Results

6.1

Estimates for among Low-educated Mothers

13

We match Medicaid eligibility based on year of pregnancy, rather than year of birth, for those records
where gestation straddles adjacent years since prenatal smoking is most responsive during the first
trimester (Colman, Grossman, and Joyce 2003; Colman and Joyce 2003). That is, if a woman continues
to smoke beyond the first trimester upon learning that she is pregnant, then it is highly unlikely that her
smoking status during later stages of her pregnancy would respond to Medicaid. Given that gestation in
the birth records is likely measured with error, we also alternately imputed pregnancy year based on birth
year and a standard gestation of 38 weeks for all births. Results are not sensitive to using this alternate
measure.

20

Table 2 presents estimates of the reduced-form effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility
for pregnant women on the prenatal smoking measures, pregnancy weight gain, and behaviorrelated health indicators of low-educated (high school graduate or less) pregnant women. For
each health behavior, we estimate models without and with state-specific linear trends.
Results are virtually the same, so we present only those without state-specific trends in the text
(panel A) and include estimates with state-specific trends in the Appendix. It is reassuring that
the direction and magnitudes of the estimates are not at all sensitive to these controls and
evidence of a valid research design.14
Models in columns 1-2 suggest that Medicaid eligibility is positively and significantly
associated with smoking. Specifically, estimates indicate that a 12 percentage-points increase
in Medicaid eligibility, which is the approximate change that occurred over 1988-1996, is
associated with a 0.8 percentage-point increase in the probability of prenatal smoking and a 0.7
percentage-point increase in the probability of smoking more than 5 cigarettes daily.15 These
effects are statistically significant, and the magnitudes represent approximately a 3% increase
relative to the baseline mean smoking rates.16 All models for smoking control for the state

14

Estimates are also robust to controlling for state-specific quadratic trends (results available upon
request).
15
This effect includes both the intensive and extensive margins. With respect to the average number of
cigarettes smoked daily (not reported), estimates suggest a significant increase of 0.8 cigarettes per day
(associated with a 100% increase in Medicaid eligibility), with almost all of this effect being realized at the
extensive margin.
16
In theory, the increase in prenatal smoking can reflect a decrease in the likelihood of cessation among
women who smoked prior to pregnancy as well as any increase in initiation. However, it is very unlikely
that the results are driven by initiation. The majority of low-educated female smokers initiate daily
smoking prior to age 18, and virtually all initiate prior to age 21. Our results are robust to excluding
pregnant women ages 18-20 from the analyses. Furthermore, very few women start smoking during
pregnancy. Hence, the increase in prenatal smoking should be interpreted symmetrically as a decrease in
the likelihood of quitting smoking during pregnancy among women who were smokers prior to their
pregnancy.

21

excise tax on cigarettes, and show significant negative effects of taxes associated with prenatal
smoking consistent with the literature (Colman, Grossman, and Joyce 2003).17
Columns 3-5 present results for weight gain during pregnancy. These estimates suggest
a decrease in weight gain of about 1.12 pounds (associated with a 100% increase in Medicaid
eligibility) or approximately a 0.14 pound statistically significant decrease in weight gain
associated with a 12 percentage-points increase in Medicaid eligibility for pregnant women; this
translates to a 0.5% decline relative to the baseline mean for low-educated mothers. The
expansions also appear to be associated with a leftward shift of the weight-gain distribution, as
evidenced by the increase in the prevalence of women who are gaining below the minimum
recommended threshold (15 pounds) and a decrease in the prevalence of women gaining
above the maximum recommended threshold (40 pounds).
Estimates in columns 6-8 suggest an increase in behavior-related adverse gestational
health indicators, though only the effect on diabetes is statistically significant. The effect
magnitudes, for models with and without state trends, suggest a 3% increase in the prevalence
of gestational diabetes associated with a 12 percentage-points increase in Medicaid eligibility.
Panel B of Table 2 assesses whether there are non-linear effects of Medicaid eligibility.
Given that higher levels of eligibility are affecting individuals with increasingly higher income
and rates of private insurance and lower rates of no insurance, Medicaid take up at these rates
is likely to capture a shift in type of coverage rather than individuals becoming newly insured.
Thus the incentives underlying ex ante moral hazard and changes in the information set due to
physician contact should be much less affected if the individual is simply substituting public for
17

The tax elasticity for prenatal smoking among pregnant women with a high education or below is
estimated at -0.05.

22

private coverage.18 We therefore expect effects on behaviors to diminish with expansions in
eligibility. Estimates in panel B indicate significant non-linear effects and generally confirm this
prediction, as evidenced by the negative coefficient of the quadratic eligibility terms.
Estimates in panel B, for instance, suggest that the marginal increase in the likelihood of
prenatal smoking is 0.45 percentage point when eligibility is 0.20 but declines to 0.14 when
eligibility is 0.30. Thus, the adverse effects of expanded coverage on health behaviors are
stronger at lower levels of eligibility, which is consistent with the fact that more individuals are
shifting from being uninsured to being insured at these levels (Dubay and Kenney 1997; Dave et
al. 2011). The non-linear effects on the other smoking measures, weight gain, and gestational
hypertension are also significant, and the inflection points for all of these effects generally
occur at eligibility levels greater than 0.30, suggesting that, at least for the range of the
expansions observed over the sample period, Medicaid is associated with adverse effects with
respect to these outcomes. With respect to diabetes, the non-linearity is similarly suggestive of
diminishing effects at higher levels of Medicaid eligibility, though these estimates are not
statistically significant.
6.2

Estimates for Less-than-High School Educated Single Mothers
The above analyses pertain to all pregnant women with at most a high school education.

Among this group, it was predominantly the lowest-educated single mothers who experienced
the highest Medicaid take-up rates and the largest changes in insurance coverage, and are
relatively more likely to be affected by the Medicaid eligibility expansions. The models in Table
18

There may still be some shifts in incentives due to differences in cost-sharing, provider access, and
other components between private insurance and Medicaid. The potential effects of these differences in
program components are mixed. On the one hand, Medicaid coverage is much more generous than
private insurance and typically involves no cost-sharing. However, provider networks for Medicaid may
be more limited than private insurer networks due to lower reimbursement.

23

3 therefore restrict the sample to less-than-high school educated single mothers. Assuming a
similar behavioral response, we expect the intention-to-treat estimates in Table 3 to be larger
than those in Table 2 because of the larger “first stage” effect on coverage.
Comparing estimates in Table 3 with those in Table 2, we indeed find that the
expansions increased smoking more among the lowest-educated single mothers relative to loweducated mothers in general and implicitly low-educated married mothers, who are less likely
to be Medicaid eligible. Specifically, a 12 percentage-points increase in eligibility raises prenatal
smoking by 1.2 percentage-points among less-than-high school educated single mothers; this
compares to a corresponding 0.8 percentage points increase among mothers with a high-school
degree or less. Similarly, the estimates for average weight gain (1.5 pounds increase associated
with a 100% increase in Medicaid eligibility, corresponding to 0.2 pound or 0.6% increase
associated with a 12 pct. points increase in eligibility) and gaining above/below the
recommended thresholds are noticeably larger for this sub-population.
As the linear specification of eligibility may mask considerable heterogeneity over the
observed range of the Medicaid expansions, Panel B in Table 3 presents the non-linear effects
for the lower-educated single mothers. Specifically, we find that at an eligibility level of 0.20
(which roughly corresponds to the level in effect at the beginning of the sample period), the
marginal increase is 0.6 for prenatal smoking, 0.4 for smoking more than 5 cigarettes daily, and
3.1 cigarettes for daily smoking consumption. All of these marginal effects are expectedly
higher for this group of lower-educated single mothers relative to those reported in Table 3.
6.3

Adjusting for Prenatal Care

24

Estimates presented so far capture the reduced-form effect of the eligibility expansions
for pregnant women on their health behaviors, which operates through both a potential ex
ante moral hazard channel, an income effect and through counteracting shifts in the patient’s
perceptions regarding their illness probability and the productivity of self-protection due to
insurance-induced contact with physicians. Models in Table 4 for low-educated mothers
attempt to account for this latter pathway by directly controlling for the adequacy of prenatal
care and the number of prenatal care visits over the pregnancy. These estimates, both linear
and non-linear specifications of eligibility, are virtually unchanged from those in Table 2, which
do not control for the measures of prenatal care. The implication is that the adverse effects of
Medicaid on healthy behaviors are not offset by insurance-induced prenatal care and contact
with healthcare professionals. Similar results are found when limiting the sample to single
mothers who have not graduated from high school.19
While controlling for potential confounding factors (in this case, prenatal care) is a
standard practice, Angrist and Pischke (2009) note that including such “mediators” in the
specification is problematic because these mediators are themselves endogenous, and hence
would lead to biased estimates. Thus, as an alternate to controlling for prenatal care, we also
directly estimated the effect of the eligibility expansions on the joint probability between the
19

This contrasts with the study by Dave and Kaestner (2009), who find that insurance improves health
behaviors through greater physician contact. Part of the reason why there may not be strong
counteracting effects in our case relates to the difference in study populations. Dave and Kaestner
(2009) investigate the effects of Medicare and their population of interest is the elderly upon receiving
public insurance at age 65, whereas we study the Medicaid-eligible population of low-educated single
mothers ages 18-39. For instance, Dave et al. (2008) study the direct effects of these expansions on
prenatal care and find that a 20 percentage-points increase in eligibility is associated with an insignificant
0.06 additional prenatal visit, about half a percentage point increase (also statistically insignificant) in the
rd
probability of receiving adequate care, and a significant 0.3 percentage point decrease in late (3
trimester) prenatal care initiation, among low-educated mothers. Hence, it does not appear that the
expansions resulted in significantly higher contact between pregnant women and the medical care
community, at least for the average mother, which may explain why the results are not sensitive to
controlling for prenatal care.

25

various health behaviors and measures of prenatal care adequacy, via multinomial logit models
(MNL). The marginal changes in these joint probabilities allow us to pick up potential
interactions between these behaviors and contact with the medical profession, and assess both
unconditional and conditional (on prenatal care) effects of the eligibility expansions on prenatal
behaviors. These results (not presented) are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent (nearly
the same) with those presented above.20 Hence, our results do not indicate that prenatal care
had any meaningful effects on smoking
6.5 Placebo tests
We estimated models for college-educated married mothers between the ages of 18-39,
for whom the expansions in Medicaid eligibility should have minimal to null effects. Estimates
are presented in Table 5. Notably, we do not find any economically meaningful or statistically
significant effects of the expansions on their prenatal smoking or weight gain behaviors. This
adds to other evidence (e.g., the absence of state-trends to matter) supporting the research
design and bolsters the plausibility of our approach.
7.

Discussion

20

Specifically, we assessed movement of the probability density across four categories comprising
st
st
combinations of adequate prenatal care and prenatal smoking (1: 1 trimester care + No smoking; 2: 1
st
st
trimester care + Smoking; 3: No 1 trimester care + No smoking; 4: No 1 trimester care + Smoking), and
similar combinations of adequate prenatal care and weigh gain thresholds. With respect to smoking, the
marginal effect suggest an increase in the joint probability of prenatal care and smoking (category 2) and
the probability of prenatal care and no smoking (category 1) relative to the other two categories – thus an
increase in early initiation, conditional on smoking. A 12 percentage-points increase in eligibility would
move about 1.5% late initiators into early care, based on the MNL estimates. We also find that the
expansions are associated with an increase in the probability of prenatal care and smoking (category 2)
and the probability of no prenatal care and smoking (category 4) relative to the other two categories; thus
Medicaid is associated with an overall increase in prenatal smoking (and, of more than 5 cigarettes daily),
and it is validating that these effect magnitudes are highly similar to the OLS estimates (0.07 and 0.1) in
Tables 2 and 3 for the two sub-populations. Turning to the MNL models that assess non-linear effects of
eligibility, we find as before that the patterns and effect magnitudes diminish at higher levels of eligibility.
MNL estimates are not reported, and results are available from the authors upon request.

26

Assessing the effects of the Medicaid program on health behaviors is important since
state and federal governments have dramatically expanded Medicaid over the past two
decades to provide insurance for an increasingly large proportion of poor and near-poor
persons. The rationale for these expansions is to decrease the population that is uninsured,
and consequently to increase the use of healthcare services and improve population health.
However, besides anticipated effects on health services use, insurance coverage expansions
may also result in meaningful unintended changes in health behavior, some of which reflect a
worsening in primary prevention effort and an increase in risky behaviors. No previous
research has directly evaluated the effect of Medicaid on behaviors among pregnant women.
We provide the first such evaluation based on quasi-experimental variation in Medicaid
expansions between states and over time in the late 1980s through mid 1990s.
Economic theory suggests three main effects of gaining health insurance coverage on
health behaviors. One effect is a reduction in primary prevention activities because insurance
reduces the price of curative medical care and therefore lowers the financial costs of illness (ex
ante moral hazard). Another effect is from income gain through reduced out-of-pocket
expenditures. Finally, insurance could alter health behaviors through greater contact with
health providers.
We find robust evidence that Medicaid expansions were associated with an increase in
prenatal smoking and a reduction in pregnancy weight gain for low-educated mothers. These
effects are found whether we account for increases in prenatal care services or not suggesting
no/little indirect effect of insurance on health behaviors because of increased contact with
prenatal care providers. Specifically, an increase in Medicaid eligibility of 12 percentage points
27

for pregnant women (approximately the magnitude of the expansion over the sample period)
raised the likelihood of smoking during pregnancy by approximately 0.8 percentage point or 3%
relative to the baseline mean. This is an average effect that masks considerable heterogeneity
over the eligibility distribution. The marginal increase is larger (3 percentage points) at an
eligibility level of 0.2, which is approximately the level that was in effect at the beginning of the
sample period.
We note that these effects are intent-to-treat (ITT) effects since Medicaid take-up rates
are typically far less than 100%. For instance, if we assume a Medicaid take-up rate of 50%
(25%), then the above ITT estimate (for a 12 percentage point change in eligibility) needs to be
scaled upwards by a factor of 16 (32) in order to derive the structural treatment-on-the-treated
(TOT) effect of gaining Medicaid coverage. Doing so implies that actual Medicaid coverage for a
low-educated mother who was previously uninsured raised the likelihood of prenatal smoking
by about 12 (24) percentage points, or approximately 36% (67%) of the 1989 baseline
prevalence among low-educated mothers. Implicit TOT effects rescaled in this manner should
be interpreted with caution because small changes in the denominator (in this case the
Medicaid take-up rate) and the underlying estimates can lead to large differences.
Nevertheless, our finding is consistent with Baicker et al. (2013), who find that randomlyassigned Medicaid eligibility in Oregon is associated with an increase in smoking of about 6
percentage points with a confidence interval (-2.5 to 13.7 percentage points) that includes our
back-of-the-envelope imputed treatment-on-the-treated estimate.
We also find consistent evidence that the expansions were associated with a decrease in
pregnancy-related weight gain. The implications of this finding for maternal and infant health
28

are a priori mixed because guidelines recommend a weight gain of 25 to 35 pounds for a
woman who is normal weight pre-pregnancy, but at the same time gaining too much weight
during pregnancy, especially for pre-pregnant overweight or obese women, may be risky for the
mother and the infant. The average female in 1990 was overweight with a mean BMI of
approximately 27, and current guidelines recommend pregnancy weight gain of 15-25 pounds
for such women. Based again on a Medicaid take-up rate of 50% (25%), our estimates suggest
that Medicaid coverage for a previously uninsured low-educated pregnant woman could lead to
a decrease in weight gain by about 2 (4) pounds. Given that the average pregnant woman in our
sample experienced a weight gain of about 30 pounds at baseline, this reduction may still place
the pregnancy weight gain within or above recommended guidelines.
The adverse effects that we observe result from both ex ante moral hazard and income
effects (as there is no evidence for an effect due to greater care). Reductions in out-of-pocket
spending on healthcare as a result of Medicaid coverage will increase consumption of both risky
and healthy behaviors. Gruber and Yelowitz (1999) find that expanding Medicaid eligibility for
pregnant women and all children between 1984-1993 raised overall consumption expenditures,
and Leininger et al. (2010) find similar increases in consumption spending due to the reduction
in the family’s out-of-pocket medical spending associated with expansions in the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP).
On average, reduction in out-of-pocket spending with switching from uninsured to
Medicaid coverage is $700, 21 which represents a 9% increase in income.22 Kenkel et al. (2014)
21

These estimates are based on average out-of-pocket spending for non-Medicare Medicaid/publicly
insured families with a health problem of $250, compared to about $1100-1200 with employer/other
private coverage, and $550 without coverage (Tables 6 & 8 of
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/fund-report/2002/jun/family-out-of-pocket-

29

estimate an income elasticity of smoking at the extensive margin of 3.6 among low-income
adults. While this is clearly a large estimate, we use it to assess the maximum amount of the
smoking effect that may be due to income. Combining these estimates suggests that the
potential income effect associated with the Medicaid expansion would lead to an increase in
smoking by as much as 8.7 percentage points (or 26% of baseline mean in this group). This
compares to the imputed TOT of 12 percentage points. So part of the increase in smoking,
perhaps a large part of it, may be due to an income effect, but there remains an ex ante moral
hazard effect too. Moreover, the potentially large income effect bolsters the plausibility of our
estimate, which at first appears quite large. In fact, it is reasonable given the change in income
and possible ex ante moral hazard effects.
The results from this study suggest that the Medicaid eligibility expansions may have
reduced prevention efforts of low-educated pregnant women and increased their participation
in unhealthy behaviors. These results highlight the importance of providing incentives to
maintain prevention efforts, for instance by encouraging visits to the doctor, removing costsharing for preventive care, or capitalizing on the patient-physician contact to probe and
encourage healthy behaviors, when designing public insurance program expansions in order to
reduce unintended adverse behavioral effects. Most importantly, our results may explain why
Medicaid expansions have not been associated with substantial improvement in infant health.

spending-for-health-services--a-continuing-source-of-financial-insecurity/merlis_oopspending_509pdf.pdf).
22
Average annual personal income from all sources over the sample period was $7,650 for low-educated
pregnant women identified in the CPS.

30

References
Almond D, Currie J. 2011. Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25(3): 153-72
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton and Oxford:, 2009.
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. 2013. “The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Force Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health
Insurance Experiment.” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
# 19547.
Bhattacharya, J., M. K. Bundorf, N. Pace, and N. Sood. 2011. “Does Health Insurance make you
Fat?” in Michael Grossman and Naci Mocan (Eds.), Economic Aspects of Obesity, p. 35-64,
University of Chicago Press.
Card, D., Dobkin, C., & Maestas, N. (2008). The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage on
health care utilization and health: Evidence from Medicare. The American Economic Review,
98(5), 2242–2258.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. Infant mortality and low birth weight among
black and white infants—United States, 1980—2000. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
51(27): 589- 592.
Chiappori, P. A. (2000). Econometric models of insurance under asymmetric information. In G.
Dionne (Ed.), Handbook of Insurance. North Holland
Cohen, A., & Dehejia, R. (2004). The effect of automobile insurance and accident liability laws
on traffic fatalities. The Journal of Law & Economics, 47(2), 357–393. doi:10.1086/422978.
Colman, G. J., & Joyce, T. (2003). Trends in smoking before, during, and after pregnancy in ten
states [PRAMS]. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 24, 29–35.
Colman, Greg, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce, 2003, The effect of cigarette excise taxes on
smoking before, during, and after pregnancy, Journal of Health Economics 22, 1053–1072.
Courbage, C., & Coulon, A. (2004). Prevention and private health insurance in the U.K. Geneva
Papers on Risk and Insurance: Issues and Practice, 29(4), 719–727. doi:10.1111/j.14680440.2004.00313.x
Currie J. 2009. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
and Human Capital Development., Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1):87-122.
31

Currie, J., & Gruber, J. (1996). Saving babies: The efficacy and cost of recent changes in the
Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women. The Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263–1296.
doi:10.1086/262059.
Curtin, S.C., M. Osterman, S.F. Uddin, S.R. Sutton, and P.R. Reed. (2013) “Source of Payment for
the Delivery: Births in a 33-state and District of Columbia Reporting Area, 2010,” National Vital
Statistics Report, 62(5): 1-20.
Currie J, and J Gruber. 1996. Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care, and child
health. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 431-466.
Cutler, D. M., & Zeckhauser, R. (2000). Insurance markets and adverse selection. In A. J. Cutler
& J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of health economics. North Holland.
Dave, D., and R. Kaestner. 2009. Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from
Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics. Published online March
11, 2009. DOI 10.1007/s 10754-009 9056-4.
Dave, Dhaval, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. 2008. “Re-examining the
Effects of Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Series, No. 14591.
Dave, Dhaval, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. 2011. “The Effect of
Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women: An Analysis Using
Deliveries.” Inquiry 47: 315-330.
Dave, Dhaval, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. 2014. “The Effect of
Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant
Women” American Journal of Health Economics, Forthcoming.
DeLeire, Thomas, Leonard M. Lopoo, and Kosali I. Simon. 2011. “Medicaid Expansions and
Fertility in the United States.” Demography 48: 725‐747.
Dubay, L., and G. Kenney. 1997. Did the Medicaid expansions for pregnant women crowd-out
private insurance?” Health Affairs 16(1): 185-193.
Fortin, B., & Lanoie, P. (2000). Incentive effects of worker’s compensation: A survey. In G.
Dionne (Ed.), Handbook of insurance. North Holland.
Gruber, J., and K. Simon. 2008. Crowd-out ten years later: Have recent public insurance
expansions crowded out private health insurance?" Journal of Health Economics 27: 201–217.
Gruber, J. and A. Yelowitz. “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings,” Journal of Political
Economy, 107(6): 1249-1274, 2009.
32

Hadley, J. 2003. Sicker and Poorer—The Consequences of Being Uninsured: A Review of the
Research on the Relationship between Health Insurance, Medical Care Use, Health, Work, and
Income. Medical Care Research and Review 60(2 Suppl):3S–75S.
Howell, E.M. 2001. The impact of the Medicaid expansions for pregnant women: A synthesis of
the evidence. Medical Care Research and Review 58(1): 3-30.
Hoynes, H., D. Miller, and D. Simon. (2014) “Income, The Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant
Health,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming.
Institute of Medicine. 2009. Weight Gain during Pregnancy: Reexamining the Guidelines, Report
Brief, May 2009.
Joyce, Theodore, Robert Kaestner, and Florence Kwan. 1998. “Is Medicaid Pronatalist? The
Effect of Eligibility Expansions on Abortions and Births.” Family Planning Perspectives 30: 108113.
Kaestner, R., & Carroll, A. (1997). New estimates of the labor market effects of workers’
compensation insurance. Southern Economic Journal, 63(3), 635–651. doi:10.2307/1061099.
Kelly, Inas Rashad; Markowitz, Sara. Incentives in Obesity and Health Insurance. Inquiry, 46(4):
418-432, Winter 2009.
Kenkel, D. S. (2000). Prevention. In A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of health
economics. North Holland.
Kenkel, D.S., M.D. Schmeiser, and C.J. Urban. “Is Smoking Inferior? Evidence from Variation in
the Earned Income Tax Credit,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series,
No. 20097. May 2014.
Klick, J., and T. Stratmann. (2007). “Diabetes Treatments and Moral Hazard,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 50, p. 519.
Kotelchuck, M. (1994) “The Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization Index: Its US Distribution and
Association with Low Birthweight,” American Journal of Public Health, 84(9): 1486-1489.
Leininger L, Levy H, Schanzenbach D. Consequences of SCHIP Expansions for Household WellBeing. Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 13(1):1–30, 2010
Levy, H., and D. Meltzer. 2004. What do we really know about whether health insurance affects
health?” pp179-204 in C. McLaughlin ed. Health policy and the uninsured. Urban Institute Press,
Washington D.C.
33

Lilliard, L. A., Manning, W. G., Peterson, C. E., Lurie, N., Goldberg, G., & Phelps, C. E. (1986).
Preventive medical care: Standards, usage and efficacy. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Publication
Services, Report No. R3266-HCFA.
Newhouse, J. P. (1993). Free for all? Lessons from the RAND health insurance experiment. In A
RAND study. Cambridge, London: Harvard University Press
Ruser, J. W. (1985). Workers’ compensation insurance, experience-rating, and occupational
injuries. The Rand Journal of Economics, 16(4), 487–503. doi:10.2307/2555508.
Ruser, J. W. (1991). Workers’ compensation and occupational injuries and illnesses. Journal of
Labor Economics, 9(4), 325–350. doi:10.1086/298272.
Stanciole, A. E. (2008). Health insurance and life style choices: Identifying the ex-ante moral
hazard. The Geneva Papers, 33, 627–644.
Zavodny, Madeline and Marianne Bitler. 2010. “The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility Expansions on
Fertility.” Social Science and Medicine 71: 918-924.

34

Figure 1
Fraction of Pregnant Women Eligible for Medicaid Coverage
Natality Files: 1988 - 1996

Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women
0.350

0.300

0.294

0.293

1993

1994

0.324

0.323

1995

1996

0.284
0.272

0.276

0.251

0.250

0.200

0.200

0.150
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

35

Table 1
Sample Means
Mothers Ages 18-39
Sample: Births

Any prenatal smoking
Smoking > 5 cigarettes daily
Number of cigarettes smoked
per day (including 0 for nonsmokers)
Weight gain
Weight gain < 15 pounds
Weight gain > 40 pounds
Gestational diabetes
Gestational hypertension
Gestational anemia
Adequate prenatal care
Prenatal care visits
Medicaid eligibility for
pregnant women
Age
Some high school education
High school graduate
Some college
College or above
Married
White
Black
Other Race
Hispanic
State unemployment rate
State private insurance rate
among single males with
incomes below 200% FPL
State excise tax on cigarettes,
in cents per pack
Observations

1989-1997
All

1989-1997
High
School &
Below

1989-1997
Below
High
School &
Unmarried

1989-1997
College &
Above

1989
High
School &
Below

Married

1989
Below
High
School &
Unmarried

0.160
0.119

0.226
0.171

0.332
0.249

0.029
0.019

0.263
0.204

0.402
0.311

1.891
30.520
0.080
0.167
0.025
0.031
0.019

2.752
30.116
0.097
0.174
0.024
0.029
0.021

4.027
29.182
0.123
0.171
0.017
0.022
0.027

0.279
31.062
0.042
0.140
0.025
0.030
0.013

3.370
29.779
0.087
0.155
0.020
0.027
0.021

5.177
28.453
0.122
0.150
0.014
0.021
0.029

0.726
11.306

0.644
10.721

0.470
9.262

0.888
12.408

0.606
10.374

0.384
8.441

0.283
26.968
0.196
0.375
0.224
0.205
0.720
0.799
0.153
0.048
0.162
6.123

0.300
25.346
0.343
0.657
0
0
0.611
0.777
0.181
0.042
0.228
6.203

0.342
23.242
1
0
0
0
0
0.673
0.293
0.034
0.352
6.333

0.235
30.731
0
0
0
1
1
0.878
0.054
0.068
0.045
6.004

0.240
25.170
0.326
0.674
0
0
0.663
0.772
0.189
0.039
0.185
5.518

0.285
23.137
1
0
0
0
0
0.631
0.334
0.035
0.305
5.504

0.592

0.586

0.578

0.602

0.609

0.602

29.024
33,685,308

28.511
18,632,637

29.504
3,175,277

29.738
6,309,269

19.788
2,100,145

19.880
312,725

Notes: Observations listed represent the maximum number of observations for the given sample. Some variables
have fewer observations due to missing information. Samples represent births occurring over the period denoted for
pregnancies commencing between 1988-1996.

36

Table 2
Mothers 18 - 39, High School Educated or Below
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women on Health Behaviors
Linear and Non-Linear Effects
Outcome

Smoke

Model
Panel A
Eligibility
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age
Panel B
Eligibility
Eligibility-squared
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age

Weight Gain
(pounds)

1

Smoke >5
Cigarettes
Daily
2

Weight Gain
> max.
recommended
5

Hypertension

Anemia

Diabetes

3

Weight Gain
< min.
recommended
4

6

7

8

0.0688***
(0.0222)
0.111
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0580***
(0.0195)
0.103
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-1.1234***
(0.3140)
0.034
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0163*
(0.0090)
0.022
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0177***
(0.0065)
0.015
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0015
(0.0024)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0049
(0.0040)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0048*
(0.0024)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.0419***
(0.1349)
-1.5035***
(0.2011)
0.113
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.7367***
(0.1124)
-1.0483***
(0.1667)
0.103
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4.9791***
(0.7905)
-9.5612***
(1.1951)
0.034
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0441***
(0.0147)
-0.0437**
(0.0188)
0.022
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.2349***
(0.0233)
-0.3961***
(0.0387)
0.015
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0297***
(0.0065)
-0.0454***
(0.0103)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0114
(0.0072)
0.0264*
(0.0143)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0200
(0.0131)
-0.0245
(0.0185)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
13,183,083
13,028,195
12,901,579
12,754,657
12,754,657
17,154,866
17,154,866
17,154,866
Notes: All models control for maternal age, education, race, indicators for education* race, ethnicity, state unemployment rate (contemporaneous,
lag, lead), state private insurance rate among low-income (<200% FPL) single males, outcome mean among college-educated married pregnant
women between the ages of 25-39, and state*race, state*age category (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39), year*race, and year*age category effects.
Models for weight gain also control for indicators for gestation in weeks. Standard errors are clustered within state cells and reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: ***p-value ≤ 0.01; **0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; *0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

37

Table 3
Mothers 18 - 39, Less-than-High School Educated, Unmarried
Linear & Non-Linear Effects
Outcome

Smoke

Model
Panel A
Eligibility
Adj. R2
Panel B
Eligibility
Eligibility-squared
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age
Observations
Notes: See Table 2.

Weight Gain
(pounds)

1

Smoke >5
Cigarettes
Daily
2

Weight Gain
> max.
recommended
5

Hypertension

Anemia

Diabetes

3

Weight Gain
< min.
recommended
4

6

7

8

0.0959***
(0.0323)
0.186

0.0814**
(0.0308)
0.185

-1.4610***
(0.5032)
0.048

0.0249*
(0.0142)
0.026

-0.0286**
(0.0127)
0.022

0.0009
(0.0036)
0.004

0.0073
(0.0077)
0.011

0.0007
(0.0036)
0.011

1.2313***
(0.2157)
-1.5236***
(0.2706)
0.187

0.8021***
(0.1769)
-0.9661***
(0.2229)
0.186

2.8662**
(1.4215)
-5.9116***
(1.7811)
0.048

0.0130
(0.0192)
0.0164
(0.0307)
0.026

0.1578***
(0.0418)
-0.2547***
(0.0529)
0.022

-0.0015
(0.0060)
0.0034
(0.0082)
0.004

-0.0162
(0.0105)
0.0346*
(0.0190)
0.011

-0.0366***
(0.0106)
0.0549***
(0.0142)
0.011

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

2,086,831

2,051,850

1,962,883

1,933,615

1,933,615

2,927,940

2,927,940

2,927,940

38

Table 4
Mothers 18 - 39, High School Educated or Below
Linear & Non-Linear Effects
Controlling for Prenatal Care
Outcome

Smoke

Model
Panel A
Eligibility
Adj. R2
Panel B
Eligibility
Eligibility-squared
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age

Weight Gain
(pounds)

1

Smoke >5
Cigarettes
Daily
2

Weight Gain
> max.
recommended
5

Hypertension

Anemia

Diabetes

3

Weight Gain
< min.
recommended
4

6

7

8

0.0673***
(0.0212)
0.114

0.0576***
(0.0193)
0.105

-1.2543***
(0.3525)
0.041

0.0175*
(0.0088)
0.024

-0.0208***
(0.0072)
0.019

0.0015
(0.0023)
0.005

0.0040
(0.0040)
0.010

0.0046*
(0.0024)
0.014

1.0179***
(0.1329)
-1.4745***
(0.1991)
0.116

0.7208***
(0.1102)
-1.0283***
(0.1641)
0.106

5.0999***
(0.8875)
-9.9802***
(1.3404)
0.041

0.0428***
(0.0146)
-0.0397**
(0.0185)
0.024

0.2363***
(0.0250)
-0.4042***
(0.0418)
0.019

0.0259***
(0.0065)
-0.0457***
(0.0107)
0.009

-0.0119
(0.0075)
0.0256*
(0.0147)
0.010

0.0244*
(0.0126)
-0.0319*
(0.0179)
0.014

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
12,692,164
12,550,251
12,553,016
12,412,200
12,412,200
16,413,761
16,413,761
16,413,761
Notes: All models control for the number of prenatal care visits, and the adequacy of prenatal care based on the number of visits and
initiation/timing (using the Kotelchuck criteria). Also see notes to Table 2.

39

Table 5
Mothers 18 - 39, College Educated & Above, Married
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women on Health Behaviors
Outcome

Smoke

Weight Gain
> max.
recommended
5

Hypertension

Anemia

Diabetes

3

Weight Gain
< min.
recommended
4

Model
Panel A
Eligibility

6

7

8

-0.0091
(0.0114)
0.013
Yes
Yes

0.0822
(0.5014)
0.015
Yes
Yes

-0.0015
(0.0063)
0.018
Yes
Yes

0.0041
(0.0124)
0.006
Yes
Yes

0.0095*
(0.0054)
0.003
Yes
Yes

-0.0032
(0.0064)
0.005
Yes
Yes

0.0046
(0.0043)
0.004
Yes
Yes

-0.0326
(0.0199)
0.014
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0293
(0.0203)
0.018
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.4362
(0.3627)
0.016
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0060
(0.0065)
0.018
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0067
(0.0092)
0.007
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0129**
(0.0055)
0.003
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0045
(0.0070)
0.005
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0023
(0.0046)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0300
(0.0200)
0.014
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0272
(0.0204)
0.018
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.5215
(0.4143)
0.015
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0032
(0.0067)
0.018
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0065
(0.0091)
0.007
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0143***
(0.0052)
0.003
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0033
(0.0064)
0.005
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0070
(0.0044)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
4,666,321
Notes: See notes to Table 2.

4,657,208

4,752,414

4,728,756

4,728,756

5,747,146

5,747,146

5,747,146

Adj. R2
State
Year
Panel B
Eligibility
Adj. R2
State
Year
State specific trends
Panel C
Eligibility
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age
State specific trends

Weight Gain
(pounds)

1

Smoke >5
Cigarettes
Daily
2

-0.0094
(0.0114)
0.011
Yes
Yes

40

Appendix
Mothers 18 - 39, High School Educated or Below
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women on Health Behaviors
Controlling for State-specific Trends
Outcome

Smoke

Model
Panel A
Eligibility
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age
State specific trends
Panel B
Eligibility
Eligibility-squared
Adj. R2
State*Race
State*Age
Year*Race
Year*Age
State specific trends

Weight Gain
(pounds)

1

Smoke >5
Cigarettes
Daily
2

Weight Gain
> max.
recommended
5

Hypertension

Anemia

Diabetes

3

Weight Gain
< min.
recommended
4

6

7

8

0.0833***
(0.0193)
0.111
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0573***
(0.0161)
0.103
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.9184**
(0.4155)
0.034
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0194**
(0.0080)
0.022
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0050
(0.0081)
0.015
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0019
(0.0024)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0009
(0.0032)
0.010
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0047**
(0.0021)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.0912***
(0.1315)
-1.5838***
(0.2011)
0.113
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.7653***
(0.1100)
-1.1122***
(0.1691)
0.104
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5.2775***
(0.8719)
-9.8560***
(1.2120)
0.034
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0482***
(0.0143)
-0.0459**
(0.0172)
0.022
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.2508***
(0.0240)
-0.4072***
(0.0371)
0.015
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0294***
(0.0067)
-0.0450***
(0.0110)
0.004
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0183*
(0.0102)
0.0314*
(0.0168)
0.010
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0202
(0.0125)
-0.0253
(0.0184)
0.009
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
13,183,083
13,028,195
12,901,579
12,754,657
12,754,657
17,154,866
17,154,866
17,154,866
Notes: All models control for maternal age, education, race, indicators for education* race, ethnicity, state unemployment rate (contemporaneous,
lag, lead), state private insurance rate among low-income (<200% FPL) single males, outcome mean among college-educated married pregnant
women between the ages of 25-39, and state*race, state*age category (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39), year*race, and year*age category effects.
Models for weight gain also control for indicators for gestation in weeks. Standard errors are clustered within state cells and reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: ***p-value ≤ 0.01; **0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; *0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

41

