                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     LEARNING TO TAKE RISKS? THE EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON RISK-TAKING
                         IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                          Sandra E. Black
                                          Paul J. Devereux
                                          Petter Lundborg
                                           Kaveh Majlesi

                                        Working Paper 21043
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21043


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




The data used in this paper comes from the Swedish Interdisciplinary Panel (SIP) administered at the
Centre for Economic Demography, Lund University, Sweden. We thank Helena Holmlund for generously
sharing the reform coding with us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning to Take Risks? The Effect of Education on Risk-Taking in Financial Markets
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi
NBER Working Paper No. 21043
March 2015
JEL No. D14,D31,G11,I24,I26

                                               ABSTRACT

We investigate whether acquiring more education when young has long-term effects on risk-taking
behavior in financial markets and whether the effects spill over to spouses and children. There is substantial
evidence that more educated people are more likely to invest in the stock market. However, little is
known about whether this is a causal effect of education or whether it arises from the correlation of
education with unobserved characteristics. Using exogenous variation in education arising from a Swedish
compulsory schooling reform in the 1950s and 1960s, and the wealth holdings of the population of
Sweden in 2000, we estimate the effect of education on stock market participation and risky asset holdings.
We find that an extra year of education increases stock market participation by about 2% for men but
there is no evidence of any positive effect for women. More education also leads men to hold a greater
proportion of their financial assets in stocks and other risky financial assets. We find no evidence of
spillover effects from male schooling to the financial decisions of spouses or children.


Sandra E. Black                                       Petter Lundborg
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Texas                                   Lund University
Austin, TX 78712                                      P.O. Box 7082
and IZA and NBER                                      SE-220 07 Lund
sblack@austin.utexas.edu                              Sweden
                                                      petter.lundborg@nek.lu.se
Paul J. Devereux
School of Economics                                   Kaveh Majlesi
and Geary Institute                                   Department of Economics
University College Dublin                             Lund University
Belfield, Dublin 4                                    P.O. Box 7082
Ireland                                               S-220 07 Lund, Sweden
and IZA and CEPR                                      kaveh.majlesi@nek.lu.se
devereux@ucd.ie
                                                                    There is a strong correlation between educational attainment and participation in

financial markets—according to the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances in the United States,

37.1% of households headed by college graduates participated in the stock market, while this

fraction was only 5.6% among households headed by high school dropouts.                                                                                                                                                                                  Even after

controlling for wealth and/or income, this correlation remains. But is this a problem? That

depends on what is driving this observed difference. To the extent this difference reflects

differences in preferences or other characteristics that are also correlated with education, we may

see no reason for concern. However, if this is the result of a lack of information or financial

acumen, it may suggest a role for public policy. Financial decision-making often involves an

understanding of complicated issues that may limit the ability of less-educated adults to make

smart investment decisions.1 But could more education ameliorate this problem? More generally,

what is the role of education in financial decision-making? Does more education actually change

people’s investment behavior? And, if yes, how?

                                                                 A key difficulty with identifying the causal effect of education on investment behavior is

that education is likely correlated with many unobserved individual characteristics that may be

related to investment behavior, such as risk tolerance, IQ, and family background; this suggests

that observed correlations may reflect these unobserved differences and not a causal relationship.

To address this issue, we take advantage of an education reform in Sweden in the 1950s and

1960s that increased compulsory schooling from 7 to 9 years in different municipalities at

different times. The change in schooling induced by this reform is thus uncorrelated with other

individual characteristics related to wealth and asset allocation. Using administrative data that

includes information on the wealth portfolios of the population of Sweden in 2000, we can
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
1
       	  Christelis et al. (2010) and Grinblatt et al. (2011) show that portfolio choice is related to cognitive abilities.	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2	  
identify the causal effect of the increase in education induced by the legislative change on the

wealth portfolios of those born in the period around the law change. By further linking the data

to the children of these men and women, we are also able to study whether any positive effects of

schooling spill over to the next generation.

                                                            There are several channels through which education might affect the decision to

participate in the equity market and the share of assets invested in equities. One possibility is that

more education reduces risk aversion, which is considered a major factor in willingness to bear

financial risk.2 Another possible factor is through income; obtaining more education typically

leads to higher earnings and greater wealth that then enables greater investments in risky

financial assets. Finally, the cost of gathering and processing information about the risks and

returns in the market might be lower for more educated individuals.3 To the extent that education

may increase financial acumen, this suggests that the large literature estimating the return to

education in terms of earnings may actually underestimate the financial benefits from increasing

educational attainment.

                                                            In addition to broadening our knowledge about the financial returns to education, this

work contributes to our knowledge of the underlying determinants of equity market participation.

Evidence suggests that there is substantial welfare loss from the decision not to hold stocks in

one’s portfolio; historically, stock market investment has had a high return compared to safer

financial assets such as bonds and money market funds. As a result, it is important to understand



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
2
  Standard models imply that, in a frictionless market, differences in risk preferences and wealth (if risk taking is a
function of wealth) are the main sources of cross-sectional variation in the share in equities, (e.g., Samuelson, 1969;
Merton, 1969).	  

3
  See Bertaut (1998); Guiso et al. (2003); Hong et al. (2004); Bogan (2008); and Christiansen, Joensen, and Rangvid
(2008). In markets with frictions, transaction and information costs may explain why many individuals do not invest
in stocks or other financial assets (Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995; Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3	  
why individuals may under-invest.4

                                                            We find a causal effect of education on men’s investment decisions. Among men, more

education increases the likelihood of stock market participation, the likelihood that he holds risky

financial assets in general, and the proportion of his financial assets that he invests in stocks and

other risky assets. The evidence also suggests that greater financial wealth is a possible

mechanism underlying this relationship. However, we find no evidence that these effects persist

across generations or that these effects spillover to spouses. There is no evidence of an effect of

education on the financial decisions of women. These findings are robust to a variety of

specification tests. To the extent that there may be substantial welfare loss when individuals

choose not to hold stocks, these results suggest there may be a role for policy to influence

financial risk-taking.5

                                                            The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature, while Section 3

describes the relevant institutional background. Section 4 describes the compulsory schooling

reform and our data. Section 5 outlines our empirical strategy and Section 6 presents our results.

Section 7 then concludes.



2. Related Literature

                                                                    Although it is not the primary focus of the research, several previous studies have

documented a strong relationship between the level of education and equity market participation

in both Sweden and the United States (Campbell, 2006; Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
4
 In addition, understanding the determinants of stock market investment also provides insight into the determinants
of the distribution of wealth (Guvenen 2006), ownership of individual retirement accounts (Bernheim and Garrett
2003), and wealth effects on consumption (Dynan and Maki 2001).	  

5
 Cocco et al. (2005) show that in calibrated life-cycle models the welfare loss from no stockholding is between 1.5
and 2 percent of consumption.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4	  
2009; Barnea et al. 2010 among others).6 This positive relationship remains even in specifications

with multiple controls.7 However, despite the presence of a robust correlation between education

and investment in risky financial assets, there is only limited work identifying the causal effect of

education on equity holding.

                                                                    There is also a small literature--primarily focused on distinguishing genetic versus

environmental determinants of investment behavior--that uses differences in investment behavior

among twins. These studies sometimes include education as a control variable in specifications

with twin fixed effects, where the education estimates are based on differences in education

within twin pairs. Using Swedish data, Barnea et al. (2010) show that the association between an

advanced degree (college or graduate) and stock market participation drops (and in the case of a

college degree becomes statistically insignificant) when they control for twin fixed effects,

suggesting that the effect of education on participation in the stock market is significantly lower

after controlling for genetic factors. Also using a panel of Swedish twins, Calvet and Sodini

(2014) find that education is not significantly correlated with risky market participation and the

risky share of financial assets once they control for yearly twin fixed effects. Unfortunately,

while informative, twin studies are quite limited in their ability to determine the causal impact of

any particular characteristic and are better suited for isolating the genetic versus environmental

components.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
6
  In a related literature, financial literacy has also been shown to be correlated with stock market participation and
portfolio diversification. Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011) find that those with low financial literacy are much
less likely to invest in stocks and Guiso and Jappelli (2008) show that measures of financial literacy are strongly
correlated with the degree of portfolio diversification. Hastings et al. (2013) provide a survey of the literature on the
relationship between financial literacy and financial outcomes.
7
  For example, using the U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances and controlling for wealth, income, age, race, and risk
tolerance, Campbell (2006) reports a large and significant role for education in predicting whether a household owns
public equity. The same study warns that education variables in demographic regressions could be endogenous and
overstate the effects of exogenous increases in education on investment behavior.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5	  
                                                                    Cooper and Zhu (2014) adopt yet another approach and use U.S. data to estimate a

structural life-cycle model of the relationship between education and risky market participation.

They conclude that education affects household finance mainly through increasing income and

that higher educational attainment is associated with a lower stock market entry cost and a larger

discount factor. However, this approach relies on functional form for identification as opposed to

exogenous variation in education induced by a policy change.

                                                            Most closely related to our own work is that by Cole, Paulson, and Shastry (2014) who

use variation in state compulsory schooling laws between 1914 and 1978 in the US to examine

the effect of education on a variety of wealth and credit measures. Using data from the Census as

well as the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax dataset, they provide compelling evidence

that education affects investment income and reduces the probability that an individual declares

bankruptcy. Using the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), they find that an

additional year of education increases the probability of owning equities by 4 percentage points

(statistically significant at the 10% level). Unfortunately, for outcomes on stock ownership, they

are limited by relatively small sample sizes; in addition, recent research has suggested there are a

number of limitations to using compulsory schooling laws in the U.S. for identification that are

not relevant to the Swedish case. Our paper advances our understanding of the effect of education

on stock ownership by using an arguably cleaner source of variation combined with population

data from Sweden; in these data, we can observe total wealth, stock ownership, as well as

information about the risk distribution of the assets.8


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
8
  Stephens and Yang (2014) demonstrate that IV estimates using U.S. compulsory schooling laws often change sign
and significance with the addition of region by year controls and so are not robust across reasonable specifications.
In addition, Cole et al. cluster standard errors by state-year rather than by state and so do not allow for serial
correlation at the state-level. Bertrand et al. (2004) show that this can lead to greatly underestimated standard errors
and Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2008) demonstrate this for U.S. compulsory schooling law analysis.	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6	  
3. Institutional Background

                  It is important to understand the institutional context for our study, particularly the role of

pension programs as a component of savings. While the social welfare and pension systems are

quite generous in Sweden, a large proportion of financial wealth is held outside of pension funds.

Non-retirement wealth accounts for almost 84 percent of aggregate household financial wealth

(Calvet et al 2007), and it is this form of wealth that is the focus of our study.

                  Relative to countries such as the U.S., Sweden’s pension system would be considered

quite generous. Sweden has a mix of public and private pension schemes, and individuals are

allocated to different pension systems depending on the public or private sector affiliation and

year of birth of the individual. The longer one works, the higher pension one receives. The

retirement age is flexible and individuals can claim retirement benefits beginning at age 61.

                  In 2000, when we measure asset allocation, the public pension system almost entirely

consisted of a national pension plan financed on a pay-as-you-go basis.9 In addition, most people

receive an occupational pension from their employer. According to the Swedish Pensions

Agency, about 90% of employees receive some pension benefits from their employer as a

condition of employment. On average, around 4.5% of the employee's salary is put into employer

provided schemes (Thörnqvist and Vardardottir, 2014). Swedish residents also have tax

incentives to invest in private pension savings that are only accessible after retirement. However,

as mentioned earlier, individuals still hold a substantial fraction of their wealth in non-retirement




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
9	   An individual account system known as the Premium Pension System (PPS) was introduced in 1999 but, because

these funds were so new, investment in the PPS funds was very low when we are measuring asset allocation.
Therefore, the existence of these funds is unlikely to have had any important effect on asset allocation.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7	  
wealth. In addition, stock market participation rates are higher in Sweden than in many other

countries such as the United States (Guiso, Haliassos, and Jappelli, 2001).10

                                                           Because we examine both male and female investment behavior separately, it is important

to understand whether there are incentives to transfer wealth holdings from one spouse to

another. There do not appear to be any such incentives. In the event of a divorce, in the absence

of a prenuptial agreement, all assets are split equally among spouses. Until 2006, there was a

1.5% tax on wealth above 1.5 million SEK for single tax filers and 3 million for a married couple

filing jointly. The value of jointly owned assets was split between the two tax filers. Thus, there

were no incentives for husbands and wives to strategically allocate assets between themselves in

order to reduce their wealth tax bill.

                                                           Finally, people who face greater labor income risk may be less likely to choose risky

financial portfolios. Consequently, the unemployment insurance system could potentially affect

individuals’ risk-taking behavior in financial markets; a more generous system could create an

incentive to take more risk with one’s portfolio. In 2000, while the formal replacement rate was

at 80 per cent of wages, the effective replacement rate taking earnings-ceilings into account was

around 65 percent. (Carling et al, 2001).11 Because of this, it is difficult to imagine that high

risky market participation in Sweden compared to many other countries can be explained by the

“generous” unemployment insurance system.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
10
   There is also a guaranteed pension for those who have had little or no income from work, and the size of this
guaranteed pension is based on how long the person has lived in Sweden. In 2000, the maximum guaranteed pension,
which applies to those who have lived in Sweden for at least 40 years, is 2394 SEK per month ($254) before taxes
for those who are married, and 2928 SEK per month ($311) for a single person. A tax rate of 30 percent is then
applied. 	  
11
 	   There is an earnings ceiling above which no additional benefits are paid. In 1996, it was estimated that 75 percent
of employees had monthly earnings exceeding the ceiling (Bharadwaj et al. 2014).	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8	  
4. Empirical Strategy

                                                            Because education is correlated with unobservable characteristics that are also likely

related to portfolio allocation, we use variation in educational attainment induced by a change in

the compulsory schooling law to identify the causal effect of education on risky market

participation.

The Compulsory Schooling Reform

                                                            The Swedish comprehensive primary schooling reform was implemented across

municipalities at various times during the 1950s and 60s. A parliamentary committee first

initiated the reform in 1948, and its most notable feature was an increase in the mandatory years

of schooling from seven to nine years.12 To facilitate an evaluation of the reform, it was

implemented gradually across municipalities in a manner meant to be representative of the

country’s population and geography.13 In 1949, 14 municipalities introduced the reform, and

additional municipalities were added year by year. (Marklund 1981). In 1962, the parliament

mandated that all municipalities implement the reform by 1969.14

                                                            In addition to an increase in the years of compulsory schooling, the reform changed a

number of features of the public school system. In the pre-reform school system, students were

tracked at grade 6, based on their performance; after the reform, this early tracking was abolished

and students were instead integrated until 9th grade. In practice, however, the change was less

dramatic, since students in the new system were able to choose between different types of courses
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
12
               In a few larger cities, mandatory schooling was eight years before the reform. 	  

13
  Both before and after the reform, Swedish children normally started school during the calendar year in which they
turned seven, meaning that compulsory schooling after the reform usually lasted until the age of 16.	  

14
  	  In general, the reform was implemented in all school districts within a municipality. The exceptions were the three
largest cities, Stockholm, Göteborg, and Malmö, where the reform was implemented in different school districts in
different years. We use information on the parish the person grew up in to correctly allocate the reform variable for
these cities.	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9	  
and could self-track.15 The reform also changed the national curriculum. English became a

compulsory subject in reform schools and was taught beginning in the fifth grade. However, in

1955, even non-reform schools were required to make this change to the curriculum. Beyond

this, the reform did not lead to any other changes in the total number of hours taught or to the

distribution of hours designated to different subjects.16

                                                            There is a substantial literature that uses changes in the compulsory school laws in

Sweden to study a variety of outcomes, including income, health, and crime. Meghir and Palme

(2005) showed that the reform increased educational attainment and led to higher labor incomes.

Holmlund et al. (2011) used the reform as an instrument for parental schooling, and found

evidence of a causal effect of parent's educational attainment on child's educational attainment,

and Lundborg et al. (2014) used a similar strategy to establish a positive effect of maternal

education on the health and skills of sons at age 18. Finally, Meghir, Palme, and Schnabel (2012)

use the Swedish reform to show that extra education reduced crime rates both for the individuals

affected and for their children.17 Thus, there is much evidence that the compulsory schooling

reform had substantial and meaningful effects on the cohorts affected by it.

Data


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
15
   The tracking before grade nine was abolished in 1962 but in Math and foreign languages, students were still able
to choose between harder or easier classes. In a detailed description of the schooling reform, Marklund (1987, p.
180) notes that “the reform school between 1955 and 1960 conformed to a streaming system that in terms of routes
was not too much different from the old parallel school with one common school route and one junior secondary
school route.”	  

16
   Because it expanded compulsory schooling, the reform led to an increase in demand for teachers. This induced
some schools in the early years of the reform to hire teachers who were not formally qualified. Over time, as several
teacher colleges were opened, the shortage began to ease in the mid-60s (Marklund 1981). Municipalities were
compensated by the government for the additional financial burden of hiring teachers and expanding school
facilities. For a thorough overview of the schooling reform, see Holmlund (2008) and Lundborg et al. (2014).	  

17
           	  Hjalmarsson et al. (2014) used the same reform to study the effect of education on adult crime. 	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10	  
                                                            We begin with a comprehensive dataset based on merged administrative registers that

contains information on all Swedish citizens born between 1930 and 1980; this dataset includes

information on educational attainment, municipality of residence, basic demographic

information, and detailed wealth data.

                                                            In order to assign reform exposure status to individuals, we need to know in which

municipalities individuals grew up. To do that, we link data from the 1960 and 1965 censuses

that include information on municipality of residence. For cohorts born between 1943 and 1949,

we use information from the 1960 census and for those born between 1950 and 1955 we use

information from the 1965 census. We drop individuals who were born prior to 1943.18

                                                                    In order to determine which individuals were exposed to the reform, we make use of a

reform algorithm constructed by Helena Holmlund. Using birth year and municipality and parish

of residence when growing up, the algorithm assigns a binary reform exposure variable to each

individual in these cohorts. The algorithm is able to assign reform exposure to 90 percent of

individuals born 1943-1955 who have non-missing information on municipality and parish of

residence.19

                                                            In order to assign years of schooling to our sample, we use data from the education

register in 1990. The register contains information on highest educational degree completed,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
18
  The reason for restricting our sample to those born 1943 and onwards is that the 1960 census provides a less
accurate measure of municipality of residence for those born prior to 1943. A person born in 1940, for instance, may
have moved out of his parent’s place in order to work or study by the time of the census. Holmlund (2008)
documents that the fraction of individuals living with their mothers in 1960 drops substantially for the pre-1943
cohorts.	  
19
   Only 0.19 percent of the population living in Sweden at the time of the 1960 and 1965 censuses lack information
on municipality of residence. The reform indicator is subject to measurement error. First, the reform exposure
algorithm assumes that the students were in the right grade for their age. Svensson (2008) showed that 88 percent of
all children born in 1949 were in the right grade in 1961, reflecting both that some students repeated a class and that
some students started school earlier. Second, it is not always possible to assign a sharp starting date of the reform.
These measurement problems only concern the cohorts born right around the assumed starting date of the reform and
do not affect the consistency of the instrumental variables estimator we use.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11	  
which we use to impute years of schooling.20 Table 1 shows the distribution of schooling in our

sample 2 years before and 2 years after the reform.21

                                                            For data on asset allocation, we predominantly rely on the Swedish Wealth Data

(Förmögenhetsregistret) from the year 2000. These data were collected by the government’s

statistical agency, Statistics Sweden, for tax purposes between 1999 and 2007, when the wealth

tax was abolished.22 The data includes all financial assets held outside retirement accounts at the

end of a tax year, December 31st, reported by a variety of different sources, including the

Swedish Tax Agency, welfare agencies, and the private sector. Financial institutions provided

information to the tax agency on their customers’ security investments and dividends, interest

paid or received, and deposits.23 Since the information is based on statements from financial

institutions, it is likely to have very little measurement error and, since the entire population is

observed, selection bias is not a problem.

                                                            In this paper, we have data on the aggregate value of bank accounts, mutual funds, stocks,

options, bonds, and capital endowment insurance as well as total financial assets and total assets



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
20
  We follow Holmlund et al. (2011) and impute years of schooling in the following way: 7 for (old) primary school,
9 for (new) compulsory schooling, 9.5 for (old) post-primary school (realskola), 11 for short high school, 12 for long
high school, 14 for short university, 15.5 for long university, and 19 for a PhD university education. Since the
education register does not distinguish between junior-secondary school (realskola) of different lengths (9 or 10
years), it is coded as 9.5 years. For similar reasons, long university is coded as 15.5 years of schooling.	  

21
   In the table, there is no category for 8 years of schooling as the education register does not distinguish between
different lengths of pre-reform primary school. Some school districts in the big cities had already implemented 8
years of mandatory schooling at the time of the reform.	  

22
  	  The wealth tax used to be paid on all the assets of the household, including real estate and financial securities, with
the exception of private businesses and shares in small public businesses (Calvet et al. 2007) and was levied at a rate
of 1.5 percent on net household wealth exceeding SEK 900,000 in year 2000. The Swedish krona traded at $0.106 at
the end of 2000, so this threshold corresponds to $95,400.

23
   Importantly, nontaxable securities and securities owned by investors below the wealth tax threshold were included
in the reports (Calvet et al. 2007).	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12	  
for the population of Sweden.24 For the analysis, we use data on the value of stocks, the value of

risky assets (stocks plus mutual funds with a risky component), and total financial wealth held by

individuals.

                                                            For data on income, we use the Income Register which includes income beginning in

1968.                                                               Our measure of earnings includes earnings from employed labor as well as self-

employment.

                                                            Our final sample for analysis includes more than 1.3 million individuals born between

1943 and 1955 for whom we have complete information on schooling, municipality and parish of

residence when growing up, and wealth in 2000. While 1.8 million Swedish citizens were born

between 1943 and 1955, twenty percent of those did not participate in the 1960 census; however,

this group consists almost entirely of immigrants who had not arrived in Sweden by 1960 and,

consequently, were not exposed to the educational reform. Out of the remaining individuals, 95

percent survived until 2000. Only 2 percent lack information in the education register of 1990.

                                                            We analyze equity market participation using four outcome variables constructed from the

2000 Wealth Register.25 The first is an indicator variable for whether the individual owns stocks

directly – we refer to this as stock market participation or direct equity participation. The second

variable is an indicator variable for participation through either direct stock holding or mutual

funds with a stock component – we refer to this as risky market participation.26 Our final two

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
24
 	  We have incomplete information on small bank accounts as they did not need to be reported by banks to the
Swedish Tax Agency unless there was more than 100 SEK (about $10) in interest during the year.	  

25
   The choice of year 2000 is somewhat arbitrary. As a result, we later show that our results are quite similar when
we use the years 1999, 2001, and 2002. An advantage of using data from the earlier years of the Wealth Register is
that all individuals in the sample are below the age of retirement. Fagereng, Gottlieb and Guiso (2013) show a
rebalancing of the portfolio away from stocks as investors approach retirement, and stock market exit after
retirement.	  
26
  This includes holdings of mutual funds that only include stocks but also includes mutual funds that have a mixture
of stocks and other financial instruments such as bonds. By definition, persons with zero financial wealth are


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13	  
measures are the share of financial assets held in stocks, and the share of financial assets held in

equities, both conditional on participation. This latter variable is defined as the proportion of

financial assets that are either in stocks or in mutual funds that have a stock component.

                                                            Table 2 provides summary statistics for our data. On December 31 2000, 36 percent of

individuals in our sample directly held stocks outside retirement accounts, while 63 percent held

equities either through direct stock holding or mutual funds with a stock component. Although

there is no difference in men and women’s rate of participation in risky financial markets, men

held more of their risky assets as stocks while women preferred mutual funds with an equity

component. Conditional on participation, the average equity share for men and women was 0.37

and 0.31 and the average risky share was 0.54 and 0.67 respectively.



5. Empirical specification

                                                                           Our empirical specification is based on the two following equations. Our first stage

equation is:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1)

where                                                                                                denotes the number of years of schooling of individual i, belonging to cohort c, and

growing up in municipality m. Reform exposure,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is a dummy variable taking the value of

one if the individual was exposed to the reform.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and δ c denote municipality and birth cohort

fixed effects.

                                                                           The main equation of interest is:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (2)



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
considered to have no holdings of stocks or risky assets.	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14	  
where           denotes our outcomes of interest, such as stock market participation or the share

of risky assets. Here,       is instrumented with reform exposure, according to Equation (1). The

parameter of interest is     which captures the causal effect of schooling on financial outcomes.

Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level to allow for heteroskedasticity and arbitrary

serial correlation across cohorts within municipalities. In addition to the basic specification in (1),

we also estimate specifications with controls for parental education, with municipality-specific

trends, and with region by cohort dummies. As we will see later, the estimates are quite robust to

the exact choice of specification.

          As described earlier, the reform was not randomly implemented across municipalities.

Our empirical approach is therefore based on the assumption that, conditional on birth cohort

fixed effects and municipality fixed effects (and, in some specifications, parental education,

municipality-specific trends and region by cohort dummies), exposure to the reform is as good as

random.

          While we cannot test this assumption directly, we can provide evidence that suggests it

is valid. We first examine whether the timing of reform implementation is related to observable

characteristics; these results are presented in Table A1. The first column shows the relationship

between parental schooling and our binary indicator of reform exposure without controlling for

municipality dummies. Here, both mothers and fathers’ schooling is positively and significantly

associated with reform exposure, suggesting that, in a given year, the reform was more likely to

be implemented in municipalities where the parents were better educated on average. However,

when we include municipality fixed effects in column (2), this wipes out these significant

correlations; the estimates of parental schooling in column (2) are tiny and statistically

insignificant. This continues to be the case in the specifications with region by birth cohort fixed




	                                                                                                  15	  
effects and municipality-specific trends (columns 3 and 4), suggesting that our identifying

assumption may be reasonable.

       Finally, a concern may be that some parents may have responded to the reform by moving

to municipalities that were early implementers in order to ensure their child would benefit from

the reform. Such endogenous mobility has previously been investigated by Meghir and Palme

(2005) and by Holmlund (2008); both studies find little reason for concern. Only between 3 and 4

percent moved from a municipality that had not yet implemented the reform to a one that had,

and an equal share moved in the opposite direction. In addition, mobility was not found to be

systematically related to observable characteristics that are associated with education, such as

parent’s education.



6. Results

First Stage

         We first examine the relationship between exposure to the reform and years of

education. In Table 3, we present the regression results of the first-stage effects of reform

exposure on education using four different specifications. Column (1) includes controls for birth

cohort fixed effects and municipality fixed effects; we find the reform increases education by

0.27 years for men and 0.16 years for women. To control for possible omitted variables, we next

include additional controls for parental schooling to our first-stage regressions. Column (2) in

Table 3 adds controls for mother’s schooling; this has no effect on the estimates of the effect of

the reform. When we next add region by year of birth fixed effects to the base specification

(Column 3), this leads to a slight increase in the coefficients to 0.3 for men and 0.18 for women.

Finally, column (4) adds municipality-specific linear trends to the base specification; once again,

the addition of these controls leads to a small increase in the first stage estimates to 0.32 for men


	                                                                                                16	  
and 0.21 for women. For both men and women, the F-statistics suggest that the instrument is

sufficiently strong in all specifications.

Effects of Education on Stock and Risky Asset Holding

                                                                           Table 4 shows the effect of schooling on individual stock market and risky asset

participation. Panel A presents the estimates for stock market participation of men and panel B

presents the corresponding results for women. The first column shows the OLS relationship

between schooling and stock market participation. Not surprisingly, this estimate is positive and

highly significant for both men and women, with magnitudes of 0.034 and 0.029 respectively,

implying that an extra year of schooling is associated with about a 3% increase in the probability

of stock market participation. Columns (2) to (5) then present the IV estimates for a variety of

specifications. All specifications include cohort and municipality dummies and columns (3) – (5)

also include controls for mother’s schooling, region by year of birth fixed effects, and

municipality-specific trends, respectively. Among males, in the baseline specification (Column

2), the estimate suggests that an extra year of education increases stock market participation

about 2% from a base of 42%. Importantly, our results are quite robust to specification choice

with estimates for men of about 2% in all columns.27 Among women, although the OLS estimates

are quite similar to those of men, the IV estimates provide no evidence for a positive effect of

education on stock market participation. Indeed the point estimates are negative, albeit

statistically insignificant.

                                                                           In panels C and D of Table 4, we study a broader measure of risky financial behavior --

risky market participation. This variable is one for people who either own stocks directly or who

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
27
   Stephens and Yang (2014) show that, in the US, estimates of compulsory schooling are generally not robust to
adding interactions of census region and year of birth to the regression. In column (4) we show that our estimates are
robust to adding region by year of birth fixed effects. Sweden has 21 counties that we use to construct these fixed
effects.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17	  
own stocks indirectly through mutual funds. The IV evidence of an effect of education is now

weaker for men, with point estimates of about 1% that are marginal in terms of statistical

significance. This suggests that the effect of education may in fact be working through the

decision to purchase individual stocks instead of holding mutual funds with a stock component.

The estimates for women continue to be negative and statistically insignificant.

                                                                           In addition to influencing the participation decisions, education could also affect the

allocation decision between risky and less risky assets. In Table 5, we look beyond the extensive

margin and study the effects of education on the log (share) of stock holdings and risky assets in

financial wealth, conditional on participation. Panels A and B show the results for the share of

financial wealth directly invested in stocks and Panels C and D have the analogous estimates for

log (share) of financial wealth in risky assets. For men, there is a positive and statistically

significant effect of education on the log (share) of wealth held in stocks. The estimates imply

that, conditional on participation, one more year of education results in around a 10 percent

increase in the share of stocks in financial wealth for men. Relative to the average share of 37

percent, this is equivalent of around 3.7 percentage point increase in the share of stocks for

men.28 However, as at the extensive margin, there is no evidence of any effect for women. Also,

as was the case at the extensive margin, when we turn to the share of financial wealth in risky

assets (stocks and stock-containing mutual funds), the effects for men are positive but smaller

(and less statistically significant) than for stock holding. As before, there is no evidence of an

effect for women.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
28
   As is common in the literature on the returns to education, the IV estimates here are larger than the OLS estimates
despite priors that OLS is likely biased upwards due to omitted variable bias. This can be explained by a variety of
factors, the most likely being that the IV represents the local average treatment effect—the effect of education for
those who would have obtained 7 years of education but who, after the reform, obtain 9. The effects of education on
this sample may be larger than the average effects for the population.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18	  
Robustness Checks

                                                                           We also conducted a number of robustness checks; these are presented in Appendix

Tables 2 and 3. For parsimony, we only report estimates for our baseline specification with

municipality and cohort fixed effects. One possible concern is that we are including too many

years before and after the reform and should look more closely around the law change. Panel A

of Table A2 shows our main results when we include only cohorts born within 5 years of the first

reform cohort in that particular municipality to verify that we are making appropriate

comparisons; the results are quite robust to this restriction. Because of uncertainty regarding the

exact number of pre-reform years of schooling in the three cities of Stockholm, Göteborg, and

Malmö, Panel B, presents estimates when we re-run our main specification dropping these cities.

The estimates are similar but the standard errors fall somewhat. This probably arises because the

first stage is weaker due to the generally higher levels of pre-reform education in these cities.29

                                                                           Finally, Appendix Table 3 presents results when we consider different years of data.

Our decision to use wealth data from 2000 was arbitrary, and Appendix Table 3 shows our results

are robust to this choice by reporting estimates using data from 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 in

columns (1) to (4) respectively. The last column then shows estimates using averages of the

dependent variable for each individual across the 4 years. These estimates are almost identical to

the estimates using 2000 data; this is unsurprising as investment behavior tends to change slowly

over time.

Intra-Household Spillovers

                                                            So far, we have considered the role of individual education on his/her own investment

behavior. However, when one considers families, it may be that one spouse influences the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
29
 Excluding these three cities increases the first stage coefficient in the baseline specification from 0.27 to 0.34 for
males and from 0.16 to 0.21 for females.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19	  
other’s investment behavior.30 To test this empirically, we can estimate the effects of one

spouse’s education on the portfolio allocation of his/her spouse.31

                                                                           In Table 6, we look for spillovers within households directly by studying how one

spouse’s education affects the asset holding of the other. We do this with and without a control

for the education of the other spouse, where we instrument both own education and spousal

education with reform exposure. We find no evidence of any spillover effects.32



Intergenerational Spillovers

                                                                           Finally, because of the richness of our data we are able to examine whether the effects

of education on financial risk-taking are transmitted to the children. To do so, we estimate

similar specifications, but now our outcome measures are the risk allocation of the children of the

affected cohorts.

                                                            In order to link children to their parents, we make use of the Swedish multigenerational

register. With our data, we are able to link children born 1980 or earlier to our main sample born

1943-1955. For our female sample, we observe 920,148 children distributed across 492,224

mothers. For fathers, we observe 713,886 children among 404,982 fathers.33

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
30
               As we noted earlier, there is no tax incentive for spouses to reallocate assets from one to the other.

31
  For married people, we can also examine the effect of their education level on the investment decisions of the
household, not just their individual investments. When we do this, we continue to find evidence of an effect of
education on individual investment behavior within two-adult households (even in this reduced sample) but find no
evidence of an effect on total household asset allocation.

32
  The reason for the smaller number of observations in these regressions is that the sample is restricted to cases
where also the spouse has non-missing information on education, birth year, and reform exposure. In these analyses,
we put no restriction on the birth year of the spouse. 	  

33
  We thus lack information on children for 23 percent of the women, which reflects that some women remain
childless throughout their life and that some children were born after 1980. From external sources we know that
about 12 percent of women born during our study period remained childless (SCB 2011). We lack information on
children for 39 percent of our males, where the higher rate reflects the fact that a higher proportion of males in our


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20	  
                                                                           In order to study outcomes of the children at the oldest possible age, we focus on data

from the wealth register as of 2006. This is the last year of data in the register; at this point, the

youngest child is at least 26, which is well past the age at which most young Swedish adults have

completed their education. Table A4 shows summary statistics for the sample of children,

revealing that the average age of the children in 2006 was 33. Despite their relatively young age,

almost half of the children hold some risky asset and about a fifth hold stocks directly.

                                                                           Table 7 summarizes the results, using the previous IV specification that includes

municipality and birth cohort fixed effects. Panel A shows the effects for men. In the first

column, the estimate of the effect of father’s schooling on children’s stock market participation is

0.002 and insignificant. We get similarly tiny and insignificant estimates for children’s risky

market participation and for their log share of stocks or risky assets. The corresponding results

for mothers, shown in Panel B of Table 7, are small and insignificant in all cases, suggesting that

mothers’ schooling does not causally influence children’s financial holdings. This is in contrast to

the OLS estimates that suggest significant and positive correlations between parental schooling

and children’s holdings.34

                                                                           There are two potential concerns with the analysis above. First, parental schooling may

be related to the probability of observing a child in our data, which could bias our results. This

would be the case if schooling increases the age at first birth or the probability of remaining

childless. We can test this directly; to do so, we estimate the effect of schooling on the

probability of not observing any child our data. Doing so, we get positive but statistically

insignificant effects of schooling for both males and females, suggesting no systematic

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
study cohorts remain childless and that, on average, males have their first child later than females (SCB 2011).

34	   This
       finding appears inconsistent with recent U.S. evidence that used variation induced by compulsory schooling
laws and data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics that found a negative effect of parental education on the
measured risk aversion of their children (Hryshko et al. 2011).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21	  
differences in the probability of being in our sample by parental education.

                                                                           A second concern is that, among the parents where we observe at least one child,

schooling might be negatively related to the age of the child in 2006. If younger children hold

fewer assets, this might bias us against finding an effect of schooling. To test this, we estimate

the effect of schooling on age of the child in 2006. When we do this, we again find small and

insignificant effects for both males and females.35

Discussion

                                                            We have found that exogenous increases in education lead to greater stock market

participation among men. This is an important finding, as it suggests that risk-taking behavior in

financial markets is partly determined by educational policies. However, the question remains:

what are the mechanisms underlying the effect of male education on investment behavior?

                                                            While we cannot definitively answer this question, we next explore some of the potential

mechanisms through which education could operate. One channel, emphasized by Cooper and

Zhu (2014), is that education increases earnings and, hence, leads to greater risky market

participation. This could be because higher stable return to human capital can partially substitute

for bond holding, or perhaps because the fixed costs of investment decrease with earnings.

                                                            For comparison to the existing literature, we first estimate the returns to education using

the compulsory schooling instrument and our sample. In this case, the dependent variable is the

log of average earnings between 1980 and 2000, including only those years with positive

earnings. These results are presented in column (1) of Table A5. Using 2SLS, the return to

education is about 3% for men but there is no evidence of a positive return for women.36 It could


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
35
  The estimates are -0.07 for males and -0.17 for females. In addition, we have run the analyses in Table 7
controlling for the age of the child in 2006. The conclusions were robust to this change.

36
                 The OLS estimates suggest a return of about 7% for both men and women. The low 2SLS earnings returns to


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22	  
be that education affects earnings for men, and these increased earnings affect their risk-taking

behavior. As a crude way of testing this channel, columns (2) to (5) of Table A5 include controls

for log(earnings). As a result, there are falls in the size of the coefficients of education on risk

taking but the changes are not large, suggesting that the earnings channel may not be very

important.

                                                            Another possible mechanism is that the changes in portfolio allocation are due to

differences in financial wealth.37 While education could increase financial wealth through its

effect on earnings, it could also affect it directly by changing saving or consumption behavior. If

people become less risk averse as their wealth increases, we would expect to see increased wealth

due to increases in education leading to changes in financial risk-taking.38 As with labor earnings,

we next include log(financial wealth) as a control in our regressions; we can then attribute the

changes in our coefficients of interest as the fraction “explained” by differences in financial

wealth.39 We also report 2SLS estimates of the effect of education on log(financial wealth).

                                                            In order to consider financial wealth as a possible mechanism, one much first deal with

the issue that many people (24%) are recorded as having zero financial wealth. This arises

because, as mentioned earlier, small bank accounts are underrepresented in our data. Since almost


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
education are consistent with estimates from previous Swedish studies (Meghir and Palme 2005). Small earnings
returns to education are common findings in European data and have recently been found for Britain (Devereux and
Hart, 2010) and Germany (Pischke and von Wachter, 2008).
37
   In a related literature, Behrman et al. (2012) show that greater financial literacy leads to higher wealth
accumulation in Chile.

38
   However, even with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA), more education could lead to greater risk tolerance
and greater financial wealth through higher returns. In this scenario, greater financial wealth is a result of greater
risk-taking rather than a mechanism that leads to greater risk taking.

39
   It is important to note that identifying the role of financial wealth is murkier than identifying the role of income—
in the case of financial wealth, changing risk-taking behavior will itself affect financial wealth; income does not have
this same endogeneity problem.	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                23	  
everybody has a bank account, in reality the people who we measure as having zero financial

wealth probably in fact have some small amount of financial wealth.40 In addition, the financial

wealth distribution is extremely skewed, with a small number of individuals having very large

holdings. For these reasons, we use the log of financial wealth in the analysis and we impute

financial wealth as being 1 for cases with zero reported wealth.41 To verify that our conclusions

are not being driven by outliers, we also conduct robustness checks where we trim the top of the

financial wealth distribution so as to reduce the impact of individuals with extremely high

financial wealth.

                                                            Table 8 presents the results using our baseline specification with cohort and municipality

fixed effects along with controls for financial wealth. As we can see, the addition of a control for

financial wealth has a substantial effect on the IV estimates. For example the effect of education

on the stock market participation of men falls from 0.018 (Table 4) to 0.012 with the addition of

the control for log financial wealth. The last column of Table 8 directly estimates the effect of

education on log financial wealth. The IV estimates are statistically insignificant for both men

and women. However the point estimate for men (11%) is quite substantial. As noted earlier, one

concern is that these estimates are strongly influenced by outliers with very large financial

wealth. In Table A6, we show that omitting observations with the top 5% or 10% of financial

wealth leads to a larger and more precisely estimated statistically significant 18% effect of a year

of education on financial wealth. Overall, the evidence suggests that education increases financial




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
40
 	  In surveys, the fraction of Swedes aged 15 and above that have a bank account has consistently been 99 percent
(Riksbanken, 2014).

41
   Using Inverse Hyperbolic Sine function instead, that is defined for zero financial wealth, generates identical
results.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24	  
wealth substantially and that this is probably an important mechanism through which education

increases stock market participation.42

                                             Another possible mechanism is that effects of education on portfolio allocation are due to

the effects of education on attitudes towards risk-taking. While information deficits and fixed

costs are plausible reasons for why education may increase the likelihood of investing in stocks,

risk aversion may be a more likely explanation for why education increases the proportion of

financial wealth invested in stocks, conditional on participation.43 Our findings for men that

education increases risk-taking at both the extensive and intensive margins are consistent with an

effect of education on risk-attitudes over and above any effects on information and fixed costs.44



7. Conclusion

                                                                           By using the increased educational attainment induced by the change in the compulsory

schooling legislation in Sweden in combination with a rich dataset containing wealth information

for the entire population of the country, we are able to estimate the causal relationship between

education and risk-taking in the financial market. We find evidence of a positive effect of

education on stock holding for men but not for women. Interestingly, we find no evidence of

spillovers from husbands to wives; husband’s education does not affect the stock market

participation behavior of his wife and vice-versa. We also find no evidence that higher education

of men leads to their children being more likely to hold a higher proportion of financial wealth in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
42
  Interestingly, adding log(earnings) as an control in addition to log(financial wealth) has no effect on the effect of
education on risk-taking, suggesting that the effects of income probably work through their effects on financial
wealth.

43
  In a standard asset pricing model (assuming CRRA and Independently and Identically Distributed returns), the risk
preference parameter for an individual is proportional to the share that the individual invests in equities.

44
   However, Jung (2015) finds using UK survey data and compulsory schooling laws that self-reported risk aversion
is increased by extra schooling.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25	  
risky assets. These results are robust to a variety of specifications and a number of robustness

checks. The evidence also suggests that greater financial wealth is a possible mechanism

underlying this relationship. Given existing research suggesting substantial welfare costs to

choosing not to hold stocks (Cocco et al. 2005), these findings suggest a role for government

policy; this is yet one more benefit of increasing educational attainment.




	                                                                                           26	  
References

Barnea, A, Cronqvist, H, and S. Siegel (2010). Nature or Nurture: What determines investor
behavior? Journal of Financial Economics, 98: 583-604.

Behrman, J.R., O.S Mitchell, C.K. Soo, and C. Bravo (2012). How Financial Literacy Affects
Household Wealth Accumulation. American Economic Review, 102(3): 300-304.

Bernheim, B. D., & Garrett, D. M. (2003). The effects of financial education in the workplace:
evidence from a survey of households. Journal of Public Economics, 87(7), 1487-1519.

Bertaut, C. C. (1998). Stockholding behavior of US households: evidence from the 1983–1989
survey of consumer finances. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(2), 263-275.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How much should we
trust differences- in-differences estimates?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-
275

Bharadwaj, P., Lundborg, P., & Rooth, D. O. (2014). Health Endowments and Unemployment
during Macroeconomic Crises. Manuscript

Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., & Salvanes, K. G. (2008). Staying in the Classroom and out of the
maternity ward? The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage births. The Economic
Journal, 118(530), 1025-1054.

Bogan, V. (2008). Stock market participation and the internet. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 43(01), 191-211.

Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., & Sodini, P. (2007). Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of
Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy, 115(5), 707-747.

Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y. and Sodini, P. (2009). Fight Or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by
Individual Investors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124.

Calvet, L. E., & Sodini, P. (2014). Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of Risk-Taking in
Household Portfolios. The Journal of Finance, 69(2), 867-906.

Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household finance. The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1553-1604.

Carling, K., Holmlund, B., & Vejsiu, A. (2001). Do benefit cuts boost job finding? Swedish
evidence from the 1990s. The Economic Journal, 111(474), 766-790.

Christelis, D., Jappelli, T., & Padula, M. (2010). Cognitive abilities and portfolio
choice. European Economic Review, 54(1), 18-38.

Christiansen, C., Joensen, J. S., & Rangvid, J. (2008). Are economists more likely to hold
stocks? Review of Finance, 12(3), 465-496.


	                                                                                           27	  
Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., & Maenhout, P. J. (2005). Consumption and portfolio choice over the
life cycle. Review of financial Studies, 18(2), 491-533.

Cole, S., Paulson, A., & Shastry, G. K. (2014). Smart Money? The Effect of Education on
Financial Outcomes. Review of Financial Studies, 27(7), 2022-2051.

Cooper, R., & Zhu, G. (2014). Household Finance over the Life-Cycle: What does Education
Contribute? (No. w20684). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Devereux, Paul J. and Robert A. Hart. (2010). “Forced to be Rich? Returns to Compulsory
Schooling in Britain.” Economic Journal 120:1345–1364.

Dynan, K. E., & Maki, D. M. (2001). Does stock market wealth matter for consumption?

Fagereng, A., Gottlieb, C., & Guiso, L. (2013). Asset market participation and portfolio choice
over the life-cycle. Netspar Discussion Paper 26/13.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., & Linnainmaa, J. (2011). IQ and stock market participation. The
Journal of Finance, 66(6), 2121-2164.

Guiso, L., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (2001). Household portfolios: An international
comparison. Household Portfolios.

Guiso, L., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (2003). Household stockholding in Europe: where do we
stand and where do we go? Economic Policy, 18(36), 123-170.

Guiso, L., & Jappelli, T. (2008). Financial literacy and portfolio diversification. EIEF WP 12/08.

Guvenen, F. (2006). Reconciling conflicting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution: A macroeconomic perspective. Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(7), 1451-1472.

Hjalmarsson, R., Holmlund, H, Lindqvist, R. (2014) "The Effect of Education on Criminal
Convictions and Incarceration: Causal Evidence from Micro-data" Forthcoming, Economic
Journal.

Haliassos, M., & Bertaut, C. C. (1995). Why do so few hold stocks? The Economic Journal,
1110-1129.

Hastings, J. S., Madrian, B. C., & Skimmyhorn, W. L. (2013). Financial Literacy, Financial
Education and Economic Outcomes. Annual Review of Economics, 5, 347.

Holmlund, H. (2008). A Researcher's Guide to the Swedish Compulsory School Reform. CEE DP
87. Centre for the Economics of Education. London School of Economics and Political Science,
Houghton Street, London, WC2A 2AE, UK.




	                                                                                              28	  
Holmlund, H., Lindahl, M., & Plug, E. (2011). The causal effect of parents' schooling on
children's schooling: a comparison of estimation methods. Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3),
615-651.

Hong, H., Kubik, J. D., & Stein, J. C. (2004). Social interaction and stock-­‐market
participation. The Journal of Finance, 59(1), 137-163.

Hryshko, D., M. J. Luengo-Prado and B. E. Sorensen, “Childhood determinants of risk aversion:
The long shadow of compulsory education,” Quantitative Economics 2 (03 2011), 37–72.

Jung, S. "Does Education affect risk aversion? Evidence from the British Education Reform"
Applied Economics, forthcoming 2015.

Lundborg, Petter, Anton Nilsson, and Dan-Olof Rooth. (2014). Parental Education and Offspring
Outcomes: Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory School Reform. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1), 253-78.

Marklund, S. (1981). Från reform till reform: Skolsverige 1950–1975,                   Del    2,
Försöksverksamheten. Stockholm: Skolöverstyrelsen och UtbildningsFörlaget.

Marklund, S. (1987). Från reform till reform: Skolsverige 1950–1975,                   Del    5,
Försöksverksamheten. Stockholm: Skolöverstyrelsen och UtbildningsFörlaget.

Meghir, C., & Palme, M. (2005). Educational reform, ability, and family background. American
Economic Review, 414-424.

Meghir, C., Palme, M., & Schnabel, M. (2012). The effect of education policy on crime: an
intergenerational perspective. National Bureau of Economic Research, (No. w18145).

Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time
case. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 247-257.

Pischke, J.-S. and von Wachter, T. (2008). Zero Returns to Compulsory Schooling in Germany:
Evidence and Interpretation. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3), 592-598.

Riksbanken (2014). Har kontanter någon framtid som lagligt betalningsmedel? Ekonomiska
kommentar. Nr 9 2014.

Samuelson, P. A. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 239-246.

SCB (2011). Olika generationers barnafödande. Demografiska rapporter 2011:3.
SOU (2005). Svårnavigerat? Premiepensionsparande på rätt kurs. Betänkande                    av
Premiepensionsutredningen. Stockholm: Statens Offentliga Utredningar (SOU) 2005:87.

Stephens Jr, M., & Yang, D. Y. (2014). Compulsory Education and the Benefits of
Schooling. American Economic Review, 104(6), 1777-92.


	                                                                                           29	  
Svensson, A. (2008). Har dagens tonåringar sämre studieförutsättningar? En studie av
förskjutningar i intelligenstestresultat från 1960-talet och framåt. Pedagogisk Forskning i Sverige
13 (4): 258–77.

Thörnqvist, T., & Vardardottir, A. (2014). Bargaining over Risk: The Impact of Decision Power
on Household Portfolios. Manuscript.

Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., & Alessie, R. (2011). Financial literacy and stock market
participation. Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), 449-472.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002). Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice
heterogeneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures. National Bureau of
Economic Research (No. w8884).




	                                                                                              30	  
        Table 1. Distribution of years of schooling two years before and after the reform.
               Years of             Before                       After
               schooling
               7                    15.8%                        2.3%
               9                     8.4%                       20.6%
               9.5                   3.3%                        0.5%
               11                   32.2%                       34.6%
               12                   12.2%                       12.1%
               14                    3.7%                        4.4%
               15.5                 23.7%                       24.9%
               19                    0.6%                        0.6%
               N                   183,568                     151,456
Notes: Before indicates education distribution of cohorts in the two years prior to the reform,
while After indicates the distribution of those two years post reform. Note that because the
reform occurred in different municipalities at different times, the actual year of the reform varies
by municipality.




	                                                                                               31	  
                                                Table 2. Summary Statistics

                                                           Males                                    Females
                                              Mean       Standard        Obs           Mean       Standard        Obs
                                                         Deviation                                Deviation
     Portfolio characteristics:
             Financial wealth*               266,225     1,210,262      662,057       186,596     753,577      642,110
             Direct equity participation**    0.42           0.49       662,096         0.30        0.46       642,119
             Direct equity share***           0.37           0.34       275,389         0.31        0.32       194,618
             Risky market participation**     0.63           0.48       662,096         0.63        0.48       642,119
             Risky share***                   0.54           0.39       417,957         0.67        0.33       403,705
      Financial characteristics:
             Real Estate wealth*             656,229     2,184,561      662,096       459,735 1,315,905        642,119
             Total wealth*                   1030242     34,400,000     662,096       674,205 7,461,090        642,119
             Total liabilities*              306,904     1,430,661      662,096       183,937     996,811      642,119
     Demographic characteristics:
             Age in year 2000                 51.17          3.72       662,096        51.20        3.72       642,119
             Education                        11.34          2.88       662,096        11.66        2.79       642,119
             Married                          0.60           0.49       662,096         0.62        0.49       642,119
             Born in Sweden                   0.97           0.16       662,096         0.97        0.17       642,119
Notes: * All monetary values are reported in Swedish Krona on December 31, 2000. At the time, the exchange rate was 1
       USD = 9.42 SEK.
      ** A dummy, taking a value of 1 if the individual participates.
      *** Conditional on participation




      	                                                                                                                32	  
                       Table 3. First-stage regressions. Males and Females.
                        (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                            Panel A: Males
Reform exposure          0.266          0.266            0.305             0.323
                     (0.043)***       (0.039)***        (0.023)***        (0.024)***
N                      662,096          662,096           662,096           662,096
F-stats                 38.79            46.42             177.67            186.33
                                               Panel B: Females
Reform exposure           0.164          0.163              0.183             0.213
                       (0.031)*** (0.029)***            (0.018)***        (0.020)***
N                        642,119        642,119           642,119           642,119
F-stats                   27.18          30.40             106.76            114.63
Mother’s schooling         NO            YES                 NO                NO
Region by cohort FE        NO             NO                YES                NO
Mun. trends                NO             NO                 NO               YES
 Notes: Columns (1)-(4) show the effect of reform exposure on years of schooling from
 specifications including birth cohort and municipality fixed effects. In addition, columns (2)-(4)
 include: (2) controls for mothers’ schooling and an indicator of missing information on mothers’
 schooling, (3) region-by-county fixed effects, and (4) municipality-specific linear trends.
 Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




	                                                                                              33	  
Table 4. Effect of education on participation in stock markets and risky markets. Males and
females.
                                (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)
                                        Panel A: Stock market participation, males
   Schooling                   0.034          0.018         0.019         0.022       0.016
                            (0.001)*** (0.008)**        (0.009)**      (0.009)**   (0.008)**
   N                          662,096       662,096      662,096        662,096     662,096
                                       Panel B: Stock market participation, females
   Schooling                   0.029         -0.018        -0.019        -0.025      -0.012
                            (0.000)***      (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.014)*    (0.011)
   N                          642,119       642,119      642,119        642,119     642,119
                                        Panel C: Risky market participation, males
       Schooling               0.033          0.012          0.012        0.020        0.012
                            (0.001)***      (0.008)        (0.008)     (0.008)**    (0.007)*
    N                         662,096       662,096       662,096       662,096     662,096
                                       Panel D: Risky market participation, females
    Schooling                  0.036         -0.021         -0.021       -0.014       -0.016
                            (0.000)***      (0.018)        (0.017)      (0.013)      (0.011)
    N                         642,119       642,119       642,119       642,119     642,119
    Mother's schooling           NO            NO            YES           NO           NO
    Region by cohort FE          NO            NO             NO          YES           NO
    Mun. trends                  NO            NO             NO           NO          YES
Notes: (1) OLS regression on the relationship between schooling and stock market participation
(panels A-B) or risky market participation (panels C-D). Columns (2)-(5) show instrumental
variables estimates of the effect of schooling from specifications including birth cohort and
municipality fixed effects. In addition, columns (3)-(5) include: (3) controls for mothers’
schooling, (4) region-by-county fixed effects, and (5) municipality-specific linear trends.
Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




	                                                                                             34	  
Table 5. Effect of education on (log)share of stocks and risky holdings out of total financial
wealth. Males and females.
                                (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)
                                            Panel A: (log)share of stocks, males
    Schooling                  0.025          0.103          0.104       0.092           0.085
                            (0.002)*** (0.049)**         (0.050)**     (0.048)*       (0.045)*
    N                         275,389       275,389       275,389       275,389       275,389
                                           Panel B: (log)share of stocks, females
    Schooling                  0.010          0.003         -0.012       0.012          -0.038
                            (0.002)***       (0.094)       (0.106)      (0.075)        (0.077)
    N                         194,618       194,618       194,618       194,618       194,618
                                         Panel C: (log)share of risky assets, males
    Schooling                  0.016          0.048          0.048       0.023           0.035
                            (0.001)***      (0.027)*      (0.027)*      (0.025)        (0.024)
    N                         417,957       417,957       417,957       417,957       417,957
                                        Panel D: (log)share of risky assets, females
    Schooling                  0.012          0.023          0.023       0.003           0.013
                            (0.001)***       (0.037)       (0.039)      (0.038)        (0.029)
    N                         403,705       403,705       403,705       403,705       403,705
    Mother's schooling          NO             NO            YES           NO             NO
    Region by cohort FE         NO             NO             NO          YES             NO
    Mun. trends                 NO             NO             NO           NO            YES
Notes: (1) OLS regression on the relationship between schooling and share of stocks (panels A-
B) and share of risky assets (panels C-D) out of financial wealth. Columns (2)-(5) show
instrumental variables estimates of the effect of schooling from specifications including birth
cohort and municipality fixed effects. In addition, columns (3)-(5) include: (3) controls for
mothers’ schooling, (4) region-by-county fixed effects, and (5) municipality-specific linear
trends. The estimates are conditional on holding any stock (panels A-B) or any risky asset (panels
C-D). Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




	                                                                                             35	  
           Table 6. Results for married males and females. Outcome is spousal stock market participation, risky market participation, (log) share
           of stocks and risky assets.
                                    (1)                            (2)                            (3)                            (4)
                        Stock market participation      Risky market participation        (log)share of stocks       (log)share of risky assets
                                                                            Panel A: Males
Schooling                  -0.016          -0.018          0.003         0.002           0.012            0.003          0.036           0.033
                          (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.082)          (0.080)        (0.031)         (0.030)
N                        350,865         350,865         350,865        350,865        108,832          108,832        228,306         228,306
                                                                           Panel B: Females
Schooling                  -0.007          -0.013          0.006         0.004          -0.103           -0.079         -0.027          -0.006
                          (0.016)         (0.013)         (0.016)       (0.012)         (0.084)          (0.064)       (0.043)         (0.036)
N                        362,879         362,879         362,879        362,879        174,115          174,115        258,930        258,930
Birth FE                    YES             YES            YES            YES            YES              YES            YES             YES
Municipal. FE               YES             YES            YES            YES            YES              YES            YES             YES
Spousal schooling           NO              YES             NO            YES             NO              YES             NO             YES
Notes: The table shows the effect of schooling on spousal stock market participation, risky market participation, and the (log)share of stocks and
risky holdings out of total financial wealth for the sample of married men and women. Estimates are shown with and without controls for spousal
education, where both own and spousal education are instrumented with reform exposure. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors
clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                         Table 7. Results for children’s outcomes

                               (1)                                  (2)                              (3)                              (4)
                    Stock market participation         Risky market participation            (log)share of stocks         (log)share of risky assets
                       OLS              IV                OLS               IV              OLS                IV           OLS                IV
                                                                             Panel A: Fathers
Schooling               0.018            0.002           0.023            -0.005            0.011            -0.039         0.010            -0.013
                     (0.000)***        (0.009)        (0.000)***         (0.010)         (0.001)***         (0.084)      (0.001)***         (0.039)
N                      713,886         713,886          713,886         713,886            147,730          147,730        351,909          351,909
                                                                             Panel B: Mothers
Schooling               0.018           -0.013           0.024            -0.022            0.006            -0.000         0.007             0.025
                     (0.000)***        (0.014)        (0.000)***         (0.015)         (0.002)***         (0.105)      (0.001)***         (0.051)
N                      920,148         920,148          920,148         920,148            199,629          199,629        458,204          458,204
Birth FE                YES              YES              YES              YES              YES               YES           YES               YES
Municipal. FE           YES              YES              YES              YES              YES               YES           YES               YES
    Notes: The table shows the effect of parental schooling on the children’s stock market participation, risky market participation, and the (log)share
    of stocks and risky holdings out of total financial wealth. All models include birth cohort fixed effects and municipality fixed effects. Robust
    standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




   	                                                                                                                                                37	  
Table 8. Effect of education on financial decisions (controlling for financial wealth).
Males and females.

                   Stock market Risky market (log)share of (log)share    (log)
                   participation participation      stocks   of risky Financial
                                                              assets   wealth
                                            Panel A: Males
       Schooling       0.012         0.004           0.087    0.049      0.115
                      (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.045)*  (0.026)* (0.096)
       N             662,096       662,096        275,389   417,957 662,096
                                          Panel B: Females
       Schooling       -0.012       -0.010          -0.046    0.006     -0.154
                      (0.012)      (0.009)         (0.103)   (0.037)   (0.181)
       N             642,119       642,119        194,618   403,705 642,119
    Birth FE         YES              YES            YES        YES        YES
    Municipal.       YES              YES            YES        YES        YES
    FE
    Financial        YES              YES            YES        YES
    wealth
Notes: All columns control for birth cohort fixed effects, municipality fixed effects.
Columns (1)-(4) show instrumental variables estimates of the effect of schooling,
controlling for log (financial wealth). Column (5) shows the instrumental variable
estimates of the effect of schooling on log (financial wealth). Standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




	                                                                                    38	  
 Table A1. Exogeneity of the reform. Predicting reform exposure by parental
 schooling.
                               (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                   Panel A: Males
Father’s years of             0.013            -0.000           -0.000           0.000
schooling                 (0.002)***          (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
Mother’s years of             0.005            -0.000           -0.000          -0.000
schooling                 (0.001)***          (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
N                           662,096          662,096          662,096          662,096
                                                  Panel B: Females
Father’s years of             0.013             0.000            0.000           0.000
schooling                 (0.002)***          (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
Mother’s years of             0.005            -0.000           -0.000          -0.000
schooling                 (0.001)***          (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
N                           642,119          642,119          642,119          642,119
Birth FE                      YES               YES              YES             YES
Municipal. FE                  NO               YES              YES             YES
Region by cohort FE            NO                NO              YES              NO
Mun. trends                    NO                NO               NO             YES
 Notes: The table shows estimates of the relationship between parental schooling and
 reform exposure. Column (1) shows results including only birth cohort fixed effects.
 Column (2) shows estimates from a specification including birth cohort and
 municipality fixed effects. In addition, columns (3)-(4) include: (3) region by cohort
 fixed effects, and (4) municipality-specific linear trends. All estimations include
 indicator variables for missing schooling for fathers and mothers. Missing schooling
 is replaced by municipality by cohort means of schooling. Standard errors are
 clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
	  




	                                                                                  39	  
                                                            Table A2. Robustness checks.
                                                 Males                                                            Females
                           (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)                 (8)
                      Stock market     Risky market      (log) share   (log) share      Stock          Risky        (log) share of     (log) share of
                      participation    participation      of stocks      of risky       market        market            stocks           risky assets
                                                                          assets     participation participation
                                                 Panel A: Shrinking window to cohorts -5 to +5 years around reform
Schooling                  0.019            0.023           0.086         0.031         -0.014         -0.016           0.077                0.054
                         (0.009)**       (0.008)***        (0.054)       (0.028)       (0.015)        (0.016)          (0.093)              (0.041)
Birth FE                    YES              YES            YES            YES           YES            YES              YES                 YES
Municipal. FE               YES              YES            YES            YES           YES            YES              YES                 YES
Observations              438,180          438,180         178,688       272,761       424,597       424,597           125,765             263,462
                                                              Panel B: Dropping the three largest citites
Schooling                  0.021            0.016           0.077         0.027         -0.002         -0.002           0.039                0.022
                        (0.007)***        (0.007)**       (0.040)*       (0.020)       (0.010)        (0.010)          (0.063)              (0.030)
Birth FE                    YES              YES            YES            YES           YES            YES              YES                 YES
Municipal. FE               YES              YES            YES            YES           YES            YES              YES                 YES
Observations              579,156          579,156         242,135       369,479       560,947       560,947           168,694             354,925
Notes: The table shows various robustness checks on the effect of schooling on the children’s stock market participation, risky market
participation, (log) shares of stocks and risky assets. Panel A only includes cohorts born 5 years prior to or 5 years after the cohorts that were first
exposed to the reform. Panel B drops the three biggest cities. All models include birth cohort fixed effects and municipality fixed effects. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
        Table A3. Effect of education on participation in stock markets and risky markets.
                                        Males and females.
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)
       Year                     1999         2000         2001        2002       Average
                                                                                1999-2002
                                       Panel A: Stock market participation, males
       Schooling                0.008        0.018        0.018       0.022         0.017
                              (0.009)     (0.008)** (0.008)** (0.008)*** (0.008)**
       N                      664,606      662,096     659,572      656,710      655,912
                                      Panel A: Stock market participation, females
       Schooling               -0.024       -0.018       -0.014      -0.010        -0.017
                              (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.016)
       N                      643,732      642,119     640,356      638,445      637,928
                                       Panel C: Risky market participation, males
      Schooling                 0.016         0.012      0.011        0.012         0.012
                             (0.009)*       (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)
      N                       664,606      662,096     659,572      656,710      655,912
                                      Panel D: Risky market participation, females
      Schooling                -0.029        -0.021     -0.017       -0.016        -0.022
                              (0.020)       (0.018)    (0.016)      (0.017)       (0.017)
      N                       643,732      642,119     640,356      638,445      637,928
      Birth FE                  YES           YES        YES          YES           YES
      Municipal. FE             YES           YES        YES          YES           YES
Notes: Columns (1)-(5) show instrumental variables estimates of the effect of schooling from
specifications including birth cohort and municipality fixed effects. Columns (1)-(4) show the
results for data from 1999 to 2002, respectively. In Column (5), the outcome variable is the
average of participation across the four years represented in Columns (1)-(4) and the sample is
limited to those who are represented in the sample in all four years. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
	  
	  
                                     Table A4. Summary Statistics for children.

                                                 Children of fathers              Children of mothers
                                         Mean        Standard          Obs   Mean     Standard      Obs
                                                     Deviation                        Deviation
    Portfolio characteristics:
      Direct equity                       0.21          0.41       713886     0.22      0.41      920148
    participation**
            Direct equity share***        0.08          0.21       550067     0.09      0.22      712696
      Risky market                        0.49          0.50       713886     0.50      0.50      920148
    participation**
            Risky share***                0.33          0.37       550067     0.33      0.37      712696
    Demographic
    characteristics:
            Age in year 2006             32.05          4.21       713886    33.34      4.68      920148
            Female                        0.49          0.50       713886     0.49      0.50      920148
Notes: * A dummy, taking a value of 1 if the individual participates. ** Conditional on participation.
     *** A dummy, taking a value of 1 if the child is a female.




     	                                                                                                 42	  
Table A5. Effect of education on financial decisions (controlling for earnings). Males and
females.
                        (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                     Earnings Stock market Risky market (log)share of (log)share
                                  participation participation        stocks       of risky
                                                                                   assets

       Schooling       0.030          0.015         0.008           0.114          0.049
                    (0.012)***      (0.008)*       (0.008)        (0.053)**      (0.029)*
       N              658,479       658,479        658,479         274,029       416,117

       Schooling      -0.039         -0.015         -0.018          0.017         0.024
                     (0.030)        (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.094)       (0.036)
       N             638,412        638,412        638,412         193,488       401,680
     Birth FE          YES             YES            YES              YES          YES
     Municipal.        YES             YES            YES              YES          YES
     FE
     Earnings                          YES            YES              YES          YES
Notes: All columns control for birth cohort fixed effects, municipality fixed effects. Column
(5) shows the instrumental variable estimates of the effect of schooling on earnings. Columns
(2)-(5) show instrumental variables estimates of the effect of schooling, controlling for
log(earnings). Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




	                                                                                           43	  
Table A6. Effect of education on log (financial wealth) for different wealth cutoffs. Males and
females.
 Wealth cutoff Full sample 99th percentile 95th percentile 90th percentile 75th percentile
                                                Panel A: Males
 Schooling          0.115           0.131           0.171            0.181             0.158
                  (0.096)         (0.092)        (0.084)**         (0.080)**         (0.083)*
 N                662,096        655,475          628,991           595,886          496,572
                                               Panel A: Females
 Schooling         -0.154          -0.133          -0.088            0.027             0.030
                  (0.181)         (0.159)         (0.141)           (0.121)           (0.118)
 N                642,119        635,697          610,013           577,906          481,589
 Birth FE           YES             YES              YES              YES              YES
 Municipal. FE      YES             YES              YES              YES              YES
Notes: All columns control for birth cohort fixed effects, municipality fixed effects. Columns
(1)-(5) show instrumental variables estimates of the effect of schooling on financial wealth for
different wealth cutoffs. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                	  

	  




	                                                                                            44	  
