                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INCONSISTENT POLICY EVALUATION:
                  A CASE STUDY FOR A LARGE WORKFARE PROGRAM

                                       Arthur Alik-Lagrange
                                         Martin Ravallion

                                       Working Paper 21041
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21041


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2015




For their comments on an earlier version of this paper the authors thank Sylvain Chabé-Ferret, Pierre
Dubois, Rinku Murgai, Dominique van de Walle, Jasmin Fliegner, Thomas Chaney, Jeanne Commault
and seminar participants at the Toulouse School of Economics and at EDePo (IFS, London), and
participants of 2014 EUDN workshop. Alik-Lagrange acknowledges support from Ecole Normale
Supérieure-Cachan. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Arthur Alik-Lagrange and Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Inconsistent Policy Evaluation: A Case Study for a Large Workfare Program
Arthur Alik-Lagrange and Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 21041
March 2015
JEL No. D61,H43,H53,J08,O15

                                            ABSTRACT

Evaluations of workfare programs in poor rural economies have typically ignored two features that
policy makers stress: involuntary unemployment and the expected welfare losses from work requirements.
The paper generalizes past evaluation theory and methods to incorporate both features, and shows
that doing so can switch the policy ranking in favor of welfare over workfare. A case study for India’s
massive National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme indicates lower impacts on poverty than suggested
by past methods, despite a more “poor-poor” incidence. A basic-income guarantee would dominate
net workfare earnings in terms of the impact on poverty for a given budgetary outlay.


Arthur Alik-Lagrange
Toulouse School of Economics
arthur.alik@tse-fr.eu

Martin Ravallion
Center for Economic Research
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu
1.      Introduction
        The ways that social programs are analyzed and evaluated are sometimes in tension with
the government’s rationale for the intervention. For example, the widespread practice in both the
literature and policy discussions has been to use consumption expenditure or income as the
measure of household economic welfare in assessing the impacts of social programs. Yet the
policy motivation typically assumes that people themselves do not care solely about their
consumption or income. Indeed, both the motivation and mechanism design are often anchored
to a broader concept of welfare. Thus there is an inconsistency between the policy and how it is
evaluated. We dub this “inconsistent policy evaluation.”
        An example is found in the literature on microfinance schemes. Motivated by concerns
about credit market failures, microfinance programs have aimed to support small-scale credit and
savings transactions by poor people. The main outcome variable in past impact evaluations has
been current consumption, as widely used in measuring poverty.2 Yet the presumption of credit-
market failure suggests that a first-order welfare impact comes from relaxing that constraint. This
need not be evident in current consumption. Thus there is an inconsistency between how these
schemes are often evaluated and the rationale of policy makers for the existence of the scheme.3
        Another example — the focus of this paper — is found in the context of the longstanding
policy issue of the choice between “workfare” and “welfare” as antipoverty policies. The key
theoretical paper on this policy problem is Besley and Coate (BC) (1992). That paper made a
valuable contribution in deriving conditions under which imposing a work requirement on
welfare recipients yields a more cost-effective policy against poverty than transfers without such
requirements. The key factor in favor of workfare is seen to be that it permits screening of the
poor from the nonpoor, given imperfect information on heterogeneous abilities. This is the
longstanding “self-targeting” argument for workfare. Yet the BC analysis has two features that
are inconsistent with the arguments made by policy makers in favor of workfare schemes in poor
rural economies, which have emphasized the existence of higher involuntary unemployment
rates among the poorest and the fact that the type of work provided gives disutility. The BC



2
        See, for example, Pitt and Khandker (1998). For a review of the arguments and evidence on these schemes
see Ravallion (2015), which also discusses poverty measurement.
3
        Also see Kanbur et al. (1994b) who discuss the sensitivity of targeting performance with respect to policy
makers valuation of households effort when offered a poverty alleviation program implying labor supply adjustment.

                                                        2
analysis assumes instead that there is full employment and that the policy maker attaches no
welfare loss to the type of work done.4
        This paper examines the implications of a consistent analysis/evaluation method for
assessments of workfare. We consider the case of public work schemes in poor labor surplus
economies and in exploring not only the impact on targeting performance and poverty, but also
on the relative costs of these programs as opposed to basic income schemes. Modified Besley-
Coate conditions are derived in a generalized framework addressing the two factors above that
have so far been missing from the theory on the targeting performance and cost-effectiveness of
public work scheme.5 The two omissions are logically related. Omitting the welfare loss implied
by the work requirement is justified if poverty does not result from high unemployment rates
among the poor. However, as we show, if involuntary unemployment exists and is negatively
correlated with consumption levels then internalizing the welfare loss implied by the work
requirement tightens the sufficient condition for workfare to be cost-effective. As in BC, it
remains theoretically ambiguous whether workfare will dominate welfare even with asymmetric
information. We thus turn to data.
        The empirical context is the largest anti-poverty program in India (and undoubtedly the
largest anywhere in terms of population coverage), namely the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS for short).6 The existence of involuntary
unemployment in the context of rural India’s economy has been widely documented.7 NREGS is
premised on the view that involuntary unemployment (or underemployment) is an important
cause of poverty in this setting.8 The scheme promises 100 days of work per year per household
to all rural households whose adults are willing to do unskilled manual labor at the statutory
minimum wage rate notified for the program.



4
          This is also true in the generalized framework developed in Besley and Coate (1995).
5
          Basu (2013) considers the theoretical link between the existence of involuntary unemployed casual workers
and the impact of MNREGA on agricultural output and laborers welfare.
6
          Workfare has been widely used in crises and by countries at all stages of development. Famously, workfare
programs were a key element of the New Deal introduced by US President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1933 in
response to the Great Depression. They were also a key element of the Famine Codes introduced in British India
around 1880 and have continued to play an important role to this day in the sub-continent. Relief work programs
have helped in responding to, and preventing, famines in Sub-Saharan Africa.
7
          See Bardhan (1984).
8
          The “MNREGA manual” recognizes explicitly the correlation between unemployment and poverty. The
manual is available on the administrative website of the Ministry of Rural Development of the Government of India:
see http://nrega.nic.in/netnrega/WriteReaddata/Circulars/MGNREGA_manualjuly.pdf.

                                                         3
         Much has already been written on NREGS, typically focusing on its performance in
reaching India’s rural poor and reducing their poverty as measured by household consumption
per person.9 However, consumption of commodities cannot be considered a satisfactory metric of
welfare in this context, given that it ignores the fact that the work involved is physically
demanding and even unpleasant and that many participating workers would probably not be
working otherwise. One typically toils for long hours doing manual labor in the open sun at high
temperatures, and with poor facilities and little or no likely job satisfaction. We contend that any
reasonable ethical observer, whether a policy maker or an evaluator of the scheme, would
conclude that casual manual labor in rural India is especially hard and unpleasant work by any
standards and that such work entails a welfare loss at given consumption. Nor is it plausible that
people in this setting would choose casual manual labor over regular non-manual work when
available. Anyone who can get a regular non-manual job will take it in preference to doing
casual manual labor. Furthermore, it is rare that someone does both.10
         Yet the evaluation methods found in practice attach no welfare penalty to doing casual
manual work. Two people with the same real consumption expenditure are deemed to be equally
poor even if one of them derives all that consumption from hard grinding toil while the other
enjoys leisure time or some relatively pleasant form of work.
          The inconsistency here between the outcome measure used for evaluation and the
policy-maker’s rationale for the intervention is troubling. The fact that the work involved is
unpleasant is one reason why workfare programs have long been used to fight poverty, in both
rich and poor countries. The policy maker (implicitly or explicitly) agrees that the work is
unpleasant and would almost certainly not consider doing it. The underlying mechanism design
of workfare programs is based on incentives constraints in which work enters negatively in
utility functions. How then can the policy maker justify ignoring the fact that the work is
unpleasant when assessing the welfare gains from the program?
         This is clearly problematic within a welfarist approach whereby “welfare” should only be
assessed by whatever people maximize, even ignoring the well-known identification problems
9
          Dutta et al. (2013) provides an assessment. Also see the discussions in Jha et al. (2009, 2012), Gaiha
(1997), Bhalla (2011), Imbert and Papp (2011).
10
          In India’s National Sample Survey for 2010, only 7.6% of all rural households reported both at least one
casual manual work activity and another paid activity, and among those reporting at least one casual manual activity
77.4% did not report any other paid activity (both values are weighted shares using expansion factors). It appears
that the vast majority of casual manual working households have little or no access to other paid activities, including
regular non-manual work.

                                                           4
involved in inferring utility from observed behavior.11 The evaluations in practice have
invariably been non-welfarist.12 But that does not justify a situation in which the policy maker’s
rationale for the intervention is inconsistent with how it is being evaluated. If the policy maker
judges that people are worse off doing this work, such that at a given income level only the poor
will do so in expectation, then surely the evaluator cannot ignore the welfare loss from this work
in assessing the program.13
         Thus it is of interest to explore whether incorporating an ethically-motivated assessment
of a welfare loss from the type of work done alters the theoretical justification of such a program
and its evaluation. By welfare loss we do not refer here to households’ utility loss, but rather to a
consistent government’s paternalistic assessment. Hence our approach differs from Besley and
Coate (1995) who compare income maintenance and utility maintenance workfare programs.
         There are two opposing effects of removing the ethical inconsistency in the evaluation. It
is plain that, for any given participant, we will tend to over-estimate the benefits of the program
by ignoring the welfare cost of doing the kind of work that NREGS provides. However, that does
not imply that we will under-estimate the poverty impact of the scheme. To the extent that
NREGS participants tend to come from households that already do casual manual labor, ignoring
the welfare cost of doing that work will lead one to understate how well targeted such a program
is to poor people, who will be even poorer (in terms of welfare) than their consumption suggests.
And some participants who are not considered poor when the welfare cost of the type of work
they do is ignored will now be seen to be poor.
         Which of these two effects dominates will determine how the gains from the program are
distributed across the population and (in combination with how the chosen poverty measure
weights gains at different levels of living) whether or not the poverty impacts are underestimated
by standard methods that ignore the welfare cost of work.
         The paper examines the sensitivity of standard assessments of the cost-effectiveness of
NREGS to ignoring the welfare loss from casual manual work. We consider the case of an
evaluator caring about welfare losses implied by casual manual wage labor only. There are, of

11
         See Pollak and Wales (1979) and Browning (1992).
12
         For further discussion of this distinction in the context of antipoverty policy see Kanbur et al. (1994a) and
Ravallion (2015).
13
         Notice that the policy maker can think that the work is so unpleasant as to deter the non-poor but still
believe that the extra work brings a welfare gain to the poor. This only requires the judgment that the income gain is
enough to outweigh the direct welfare loss.

                                                          5
course, other types of unpleasant work in this setting, but we want to define a welfare measure
consistent with the motivation of the Act that created NREGS, which aims to provide casual
manual work on public-works projects on demand. In practice, the main alternative to supplying
casual manual labor (often for work on another farm) is working on one’s own farm. We assume
that the policy maker in this setting treats this as a very different form of work that gives little
disutility to the farmer, at least relative to casual wage work. This is plausible in this context.
Indeed, it can be expected that own-farm work gives personal satisfaction to a farmer that is
more than enough to outweigh any disutility of the physical labor involved. We also assume that
in the policy maker’s view permanent work in this setting (such as working for the government
or in a formal-sector enterprise) has very different welfare consequences. Here too there is likely
to be significant job satisfaction. Indeed, studies of subjective welfare typically find that a
regular job is a direct source of personal satisfaction, with a positive effect on perceived
happiness or satisfaction with life.14 Although we do not know of any supportive evidence, it
would seem a plausible assumption that casual manual wage labor in rural India provides little or
no intrinsic job satisfaction; the overwhelming direct welfare effect is negative—to be balanced
against the positive value of the gain in earnings. We comment on the likely direction of bias in
our main results if the evaluation allows for other (non-casual non-manual) work entailing a
welfare loss.
         The paper proposes a simple data-consistent welfare objective for a workfare scheme that
generalizes the standard consumption-based measure to allow for the unpleasant nature of casual
manual labor. Following standard practice in the literature on anti-poverty programs (including
workfare) we treat this as a non-welfarist assessment, meaning that we do not assume that the
welfare metric is also what people maximize personally.15 We do not assume anything about
subjective utility.16 Using data on forgone income, we also allow for involuntary unemployment
in the absence of workfare. This alters further the net impact and the cost effectiveness of
workfare relative to a welfare program providing an un-targeted basic income.
         This approach is in contrast to the tradition in labor economics, which assumes that
people are free to choose their labor supply and that policy goals are solely utility-based. By this

14
         For an overview of the evidence on this point see World Bank (2012).
15
         Thus our exposition of the problem also departs from the optimal nonlinear income taxation literature were
the government’s goal is to maximize a utilitarian welfare function given by the sum of utilities, following Mirrlees
(1971).
16
         Our approach thus departs from Moffit’s (2006) paternalistic preferences based on households utilities.

                                                          6
approach one assumes that casual labor supply maximizes subjective utility and one finds
preference parameters econometrically that are consistent with that assumption. There is a
tradition in welfare measurement of deriving the parameters under that assumption, subject to
certain (potentially strong) identifying assumptions.17 One can question the relevance of this
approach to the setting at hand. Consistently with the presumption that there is widespread
underemployment, our measure does not assume that workers are free to work as little or as
much as they want. Nor do we assume that the welfare metric used by the policy maker/evaluator
coincides with whatever people maximize. To our knowledge, it is rare for any impact evaluation
to claim that the outcome variable used for assessing impact coincides with the utility function
maximized by participants. Rather, it is the norm to impose an essentially non-welfarist
objective. While we do not take issue with that approach here, we do question whether it is
consistent to advocate a program as being effective because it imposes forgone income and
welfare losses on participants (though not so much that they cease to participate) while ignoring
those losses when we come to assess the program.
         Importantly, our approach is operational with the same data currently used by most
researchers in assessing the targeting and poverty impacts of NREGS. We then see how this
affects assessments of the targeting performance and poverty impact of NREGS. On allowing for
an imputed welfare cost of casual manual labor supply, we show that poverty and inequality
measures for rural India are appreciably higher and that the program performs much better in
reaching the poor. However, despite the better targeting, we find that NREGS (in the one state of
India for which the required survey data are available) has somewhat lower poverty impacts
when we discount the welfare gains to participants.18
         The following section explains how the features of involuntary unemployment and
consistency between the evaluation and the rationale for the intervention modify the theoretical
conditions established by Besley and Coate (1992). Section 3 explains our empirical approach.
Section 4 describes our data, while section 5 presents our evaluation method using those data.
Our results are found in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.



17
         For a useful overview of this approach see Blundell et al. (2007).
18
         This is in line with the theoretical predictions from Besley and Coate (1992). They predict indeed a “self-
defeating” impact of the work-requirement itself if one is concerned about the welfare loss implied by the work
offered.

                                                          7
2.       Modified Besley-Coate conditions
         We generalize the model of Besley and Coate (BC) (1992) to derive the theoretical
implications of an internalization of the welfare loss from work requirements, allowing for
involuntary unemployment negatively correlated with consumption. We focus here on the
screening argument, which is consistent with the primary goal of workfare programs in targeting
transfers to poor people.
         Following Moffit’s (2006) generalization of BC, there is a continuous type of                    agents
characterized by their wage rate                     with cumulative distribution function             . A program
is defined by a set of contracts                where         and      are the benefit level and the public-
work requirement, which are constant over participants.19 Let                               and           denote
private labor supply in the presence of the workfare scheme and in its absence respectively. The
absence of involuntary unemployment on the private labor market calls for:


                                                                                                            (1)


This is equivalent to                             where        is the optimal labor supply of an unrationed
household on the private labor market. For now, we assume that (1) holds, but we relax this later.
Earnings on the private sector are given by:


                                                                                                            (2)


Notice that, as in BC, any income effect from the benefit               is turned off. Utilities are linear in
income but with a disutility of work given by the function h(.):

                                                                                                            (3)

A person takes up the program on a contract (                   ) if                                . For now the
function h(.) is increasing, strictly convex and such that             is not a corner solution in the
household’s optimal choice of its labor supply, i.e.                      and               where is the



19
          Here we depart from Besley and Coate (1995) where the government can define an optimal set of contracts
for each ability type. Assuming a workfare with a single contract simplifies our derivations, but more importantly it
is also consistent with what NREGS offers to rural households.

                                                          8
maximum hours a household can supply given physical and market rationing constraints.20 This
interior solution assumption is crucial; it implies the absence of involuntary unemployment in
(1).
       Now consider the screening argument in a situation in which the evaluator cares about the
welfare loss implied by the work requirement. In our set up, the government aims to bring
everyone above a poverty line, z. Consistently with the literature, we assume that in the absence
of the scheme low-wage workers are poor and high-wage ones are rich and that they are
separated by a given poverty line       where households are characterized by wage rate     .
However, we modify this assumption allowing the welfare loss to be internalized by the
government:

                                                                                                (4)

Here f(.) is the paternalistic welfare loss identified by the government. Notice that for         this
problem is close to the utility maintenance programs described in Besley and Coate (1995). We
do not assume that the government internalizes the welfare loss caused by the work requirement
in a utilitarian way. In this perspective our approach differs also from Moffit’s (2006)
paternalistic government preferences in that we do not base the definition of f(.) on the
underlying household preferences. We only assume that in the government’s view working more
at a given consumption level reduces households’ welfare, i.e.,             . The objective of the
government is to get low-wage workers above the poverty line at minimum cost:

                                                                                                      (5)

       Full information: First consider the case when the government can observe wage rates
and private earnings. The government faces voluntary participation and poverty alleviation
constraints:

                                                                                                  (6.1)

                                                                                                  (6.2)




20
       This characterization is consistent with Besley and Coate (1995).

                                                       9
respectively. In this case, the cost minimizing program is obviously a welfare program. Any
public work requirement                 implies forgone earnings that the government would have to
compensate for—against no gains from targeting. The government then offers:

                                                                                                            (7.1)

                                                                                                            (7.2)

The costs of the program is                                                           . This is higher than the

costs derived in BC if                      , otherwise it is exactly the same up to the generalization to
allow a continuous distribution of wage rates.
        Asymmetric information: Suppose now that the government cannot observe wage rates
and private earnings. In the absence of a public work requirement, high wage workers will
masquerade and take up the program to receive benefits. Then the government can use a public-
work requirement for screening. This targeting advantage of workfare comes at a cost, namely
that the net gain to poor people is lowered by the cost of complying with the work requirement.
Intuitively, workfare is more likely to be the better option when the poverty rate is lower and/or
the forgone income of workfare participants is lower. Following BC, we show that a sufficient
condition for workfare to be more cost-effective than welfare is that                                      or
                        .21
        The internalization of the welfare loss does not impact this condition. Indeed, whether the
government cares about the participants’ welfare loss does not matter if they can supply as much
work as they want to on the labor market in the absence of the scheme. Essentially, low wage
workers pay in order to be screened as being poor in the form a work requirement, but under the
full employment assumption they would anyway spend this time working. The scheme implies
no net welfare loss and the only trade-off faced by the government remains that between limiting
cash transfers to high wage workers and having to compensate low wage workers for forgone
incomes implied by the time spent on public work.
        We can summarize the implications as follows (with a formal proof and closed form
solutions found in the Appendix):

21
        See Besley and Coate (1995) for a technical discussion on whether a solution to the government’s costs-
minimizing program does exist depending on assumptions on the distribution of      and on the shape of    .

                                                       10
Proposition 1: Under the labor-market clearing condition, whether or not the evaluator
cares about the welfare loss implied by the work requirement does not alter the BC
condition for the workfare program to be cost-minimizing, namely that
            . However, internalizing part of the welfare loss increases the length of the work
requirement and the transfers needed for poverty alleviation.

        The increase in the length of the work requirement may appear counterintuitive here, but
the intuition is restored if one observes that the benefits increase with the length of the work
requirement (see Appendix).
        Introducing involuntary underemployment: We now relax the assumption that poor
households can supply as much work as they want on the private labor market. Then the time
spent working on public works overlaps only partly with the time the participant would spend
working in the absence of the scheme. We thus modify the labor supply schedule as follows:


                                                                                                         (8)


This is equivalent to                          , meaning we do not assume anymore that                         .
Labor supply in the absence of the scheme may now be a corner solution (                     ). Let    denote
the share of the work requirement that the individual would spend working in the absence of the
scheme:           means that workers supply as much work as they want in the absence of the
scheme, and           means they are rationed on the labor market. While                   can be seen as
realistic for rich households, we must relax this for low wage workers. We assume instead that:

                                                                          22



Notice that the unemployment is involuntary: at the offered wage rate on the private market, poor
households would be typically willing to supply more work. Poverty is now correlated with both
low wages and involuntary unemployment.23 Earnings from the private sector are now:


22
         In theory, our model can always fit the data if one define the poverty line as the above which no one is
involuntary unemployed, meaning the only assumption we really need is increases with and reaches its upper
bound for some interior values:                              .
23
         We do not explain where involuntary underemployment comes from, and how it relates endogenously with
other variables of our model; see Basu(2013) for an example of an explicit model. Nor do we explore any causal
relationship between wage rates, unemployment and poverty. The only statement we need for our results to be valid

                                                       11
                                                                                                                 (9)


The poverty alleviation constraint becomes,                :

                                                                                                              (10.1)

                                                                                                              (10.2)

         In the full information case, the result is not changed. The government offers a welfare
program                  with no transfer to high wage households and it gives to each low-wage
worker:

                                                                                                                 (11)

In this case the costs are the same as before and unemployment has no impact on the costs of the
welfare program.
         In the asymmetric information case incentives are unchanged (                                    ). If the
government does not internalize the welfare loss (                      ) then we can summarize the modified
BC conditions in the following proposition, which is proved in the Appendix:

Proposition 2: If the poor face higher involuntary unemployment in the absence of the
scheme than the non-poor and the evaluator does not internalize the welfare loss implied by
the program then the modified BC condition for the workfare program to be more cost-
effective than welfare is that                                     .

         This is intuitive: if the poor do not find other work during the time spent satisfying the
work requirement then the forgone earnings implied by workfare are lower than in the market
clearing case, which reduces the transfers needed for poverty alleviation. Notice that the standard
BC condition                                 remains sufficient. However, the modified condition in
Proposition 2 is less restrictive in that:




is the statistical correlation between those variables, which is widely documented in the literature and observed in
the data we use later.

                                                          12
       The combination of unemployment and internal consistency on the part of the
government’s evaluation (           ) further alters the BC conditions for workfare to be more cost
effective, as in the following proposition (also proved in the Appendix):

Proposition 3: If the poor face unemployment in the absence of the scheme and the
government internalizes the welfare loss implied by workfare then the modified BC
sufficient condition for the workfare program to be more cost effective than welfare is that
                            where




Evidently this case is more restrictive than the previous one; indeed
                                                .

       We see that in the presence of unemployment positively correlated with low ability and
poverty, the internalization of the welfare loss tightens the sufficient condition for workfare to be
more cost effective than welfare. From this theoretical discussion we conclude that workfare
evaluation in practice should internalize the welfare loss implied by the type of work observed
when poor participants would be more often involuntary unemployed than richer ones in the
absence of the scheme. Under these assumptions we see that such an internalization can switch
the cost-effectiveness ranking in favor of a welfare.
       We turn next to the data, exploring how the internalization of the welfare loss from the
work requirement of NREGS alters the impact evaluation.

3.     Welfare measurement

       As discussed in the Introduction we impute a welfare loss from casual manual labor. Our
welfare measure is a function of both consumption and casual manual work, the former variable
entering positively and the later negatively.
       We assume that regular non-manual work dominates in both its remuneration and
enjoyment, such that the worker will do as much of that work as available (given her skills,
experience and constraints on the casual manual labor market) before contemplating any casual

                                                    13
manual labor. We acknowledge that this is a strong assumption in the abstract, but we believe it
is plausible and appropriate in this context. As a stylized fact, casual manual workers in rural
India do not have the option of accessing non-manual regular jobs. Support for this can be found
in the survey findings for the state of Bihar in Dutta et al. (2014). Their survey asked participants
in NREGS what they think they would have been doing if not for the work they obtained on the
scheme. Amongst male respondents, 45% said they expect they would have been doing casual
work (farm or non-farm), and about the same proportion said they would be unemployed,
searching for work. The rest said they would be working on their own land or in their home.
Women expected to get less casual work and were more likely to be working at home. Strikingly,
none of the (male or female) survey respondents identified non-manual regular employment as
an option. Of course, NREGS workers are a selected sample. However, Dutta et al. find almost
no observable differences between NREGS workers and other casual laborers. The reality on the
ground appears to satisfy an even stronger assumption than we require here, namely that the
labor market is segmented, with all those having access to a regular non-manual job doing that
job, and doing no casual manual labor, while the rest do as much casual work as they desire (or
can find, if there is unemployment).
        To make our approach operational with the data available, we assume that welfare is
assessed by adjusted consumption as given by:
                                                                                                (12)
where    is ordinary consumption,           is a parameter reflecting the welfare penalty attached
to doing casual manual labor in the amount        . Adjusted consumption entails a downward
adjustment relative to    for households supplying casual labor (            ) but no adjustment
otherwise (       ). The distributions of   and         are not intrinsically level comparable, so we
will mainly use percentiles rather than levels.
        Equation (12) is not, of course, the only way one might adjust the welfare measure for the
welfare loss deemed to be associated with doing casual manual work. More complex functional
forms could be proposed, allowing (for example) for non-separability between casual manual
labor supply and consumption. However, we want a functional form that delivers an empirically
tractable welfare metric allowing for the welfare cost from casual work, which can be
implemented with the same data used by the standard method in which welfare is solely
measured by consumption. With the functional form in (12) we obtain a very intuitive

                                                   14
expression for how the standard measure of consumption could be adjusted to reflect the welfare
cost of casual manual labor in the view of a policy maker, giving the adjusted consumption.
       The implications of this adjustment for measures of poverty and inequality are ambiguous
in theory, and will depend on the data, notably how      varies with     It is instructive to consider
one special case, namely when      is decreasing in     as suggested by Figure 1. Measured
consumption will be adjusted downwards for the poorest, and upward for the richest. There will
not be first-order dominance, but all standard poverty measures will increase for poverty lines up
to the mean. Standard inequality measures will naturally increase; more precisely, there will be
Lorenz curve dominance, with unambiguously higher inequality in the adjusted distribution. Just
how much the poverty and inequality measures are affected is (of course) an empirical issue and
depends on the particular functional form used by the evaluator.
       The implications for a workfare scheme’s impact on poverty are also ambiguous in
theory. As discussed in the Introduction, we expect our adjustment for the disutility of casual
manual work to reveal better targeting to poor people who are more likely to do this type of
work, as provided by NREGS. Against this, the effect on the welfare gains to participants of
allowing for the welfare loss from the work provided will go in the opposite direction.
       How should one set      ? This can be recognized as a normative judgment for making
inter-personal comparisons of welfare. For the purpose of making consistent inter-personal
comparisons we need to impose common preferences, so we need to use one reference value of
the parameter. However, we do not assume that workers maximize (12). They may well have
other preferences, and even if they did not it would be unrealistic to assume that casual workers
are free to choose their labor supply in this setting; indeed, this would be inconsistent with the
rationale for NREGS, which rests on the existence of involuntary
unemployment/underemployment of casual labor, implying that workers are not free to supply as
much labor as they would like. Some workers are unable to get as much work as they would like
at the going wage rate.
       To bound the value of      we make the following assumption: The evaluator (or policy
maker) judges that casual labor is welfare diminishing at given consumption but, nonetheless,
that the typical casual worker is better off with extra work if she chooses to do it. This is
defensible in this context, for it would be hard to imagine why a policy such as NREGS would
exist at all if the work provided was not deemed to increase welfare, even if it not by as much as

                                                  15
the increment to consumption alone would indicate (notice that households are free to participate
or not). This requires that:

                                                                                                        (13)

We assume that the consumption is given by:
                                                                                                        (14)
Where        is independent of the amount of casual work done at the wage rate               . Thus equation
(13) establishes that      is bounded above by         .
          This simply tells us that the government in this setting internalizes the welfare loss
implied by the type of work required at a rate not exceeding the typical wage rate paid for casual
manual work. We thus consider a range of values of              in a neighborhood of the median of this
wage rate.

4.        Setting and data

          Rural India is characterized by higher unemployment rates among the poorest and one of
the explicit goals of NREGS is to provide work to those households rationed on the private labor
market. Figure 1 shows the link between low wage rates, unemployment and position along the
per capita consumption distribution in the NSS for rural areas. We see that unemployment is
more prevalent for the bottom part of the consumption distribution, which shows lower wage
rates. Among working households, the lower the median wage rate in the household the more
prone it is be unemployed. These observations place us in the third case described above and
proposition 3 applies in this context.
          The literature on poverty in India has also emphasized the link with casual manual labor
and the real wage rate for that work.24 This is seen to be mainly driven by the strong correlation
between rural landlessness and poverty, such that the rural poor are more likely to depend on
agricultural labor. This is illustrated by Figure 2, which gives the non-parametric regression
function of the participation rate in casual manual labor in rural India (top) and rural Bihar
(bottom) against the percentile of household consumption per person; the regression allows for




24
          See, for example, Bardhan (1984), van de Walle (1985), Datt and Ravallion (1998), Deaton and Drèze
(2002).

                                                        16
state effects.25 We see a marked decline in the average participation rate from almost 50% for the
poorest percentile to zero for the richest. This presumably reflects both the disutility of casual
manual work and the availability of better options for richer households in the form of regular,
non-manual, work, which is more pleasant and better-paid.
         We use two household data sets. The first is the 66th round (July 2009-June 2010) of the
Employment Schedule (“Schedule 10”) of the Government of India’s National Sample Survey
(NSS). These data include household characteristics (including demographics, NREGS
participation, social groups) and information on household members’ education, principal and
subsidiary activity and time disposition during the week ended (block 5.3). The questionnaire
also includes a block on monthly household expenditures during the last 30 days (block 9). We
observe the weekly supply of casual manual work and also the daily wage rate for this type of
work during the week ended (in block 5.3). The daily wage rate of a household is defined as its
total earnings from casual manual work divided by total number of days spent on such work
across all household members during week ended (status code 41, 42 and 51). Table 1 gives
summary statistics on        ,    and     .
         To facilitate estimation of the net gains to participants and to test the robustness of our
results using the NSS, we will also use another household dataset collected in rural areas of the
state of Bihar with support from the World Bank. In 2010, Bihar had the highest poverty rate of
any major state of India (Dutta et al., 2012). Two rounds of survey data were collected for 3,000
randomly chosen households from 150 random villages spread across Bihar. The first round was
between May and July of 2009 and the second during the same months one year later. A two-
stage sampling design was followed, using the 2001 Census list of villages as the sampling
frame. Data were collected through several survey instruments, including household surveys and
individual surveys, the latter for one adult male and one adult female in each household. Dutta et
al. (2014, Chapter 3) contains a fuller description of the survey design. In this paper we only
report results for the first round of the Bihar survey, which is designed to be representative of
rural Bihar. However, we did all our analysis for the second round as well and all qualitative
findings reported for Round 1 were found to be robust.



25
         The estimation used the partial linear regression routine, PLREG, in Stata (Lokshin, 2006). The state
effects entered as additive dummy variables.

                                                         17
        The World Bank’s Bihar Survey contains similar variables to the NSS data (including on
consumption), but provides more detail on participation and other variables related to NREGS.26
Importantly, the Bihar survey includes self-reported estimates of forgone work and earnings for
NREGS participants. The Bihar Survey contains a block on time spent on casual work during the
week ended, with total number of days and incomes for each activity (block 23). Thus we are
able to estimate income gains (net of forgone earnings) from NREGS in Bihar, and impacts on
poverty directly from the data. As a stylized fact, virtually the only options NREGS participants
have for earning income in this setting are from casual manual work for a local landowner or on
some non-agricultural activity. Most participants are landless and have lived in the villages for
generations. They can be presumed to have a clear idea of their labor–earning options throughout
the agricultural year, and hence can be expected to have reasonably reliable estimates of their
forgone earnings.

5.      Performance evaluation

        Do the poorest participate more and do they get higher gains? By comparing the
distributions of unadjusted consumption             with adjusted consumption            we are able to
quantify the impact of allowing for the welfare loss from work on assessments of the program’s
performance. There are two aspects of performance. The first is targeting performance. Here we
analyze the relationship between the participation rates in NREGS and the position along the
distribution of consumption per capita. Using the two different welfare measurements,
and     , we estimate      and      defined as non-parametric regression functions between the
participation rate (PR) and the position along the distribution of these two measurements:27

                                                                                                           (15)
and similarly for the adjusted consumption, for which the non-parametric function is denoted

26
          One difference is that we do not have the split manual/non-manual work in the Bihar survey: we only know
if the activity was or was not casual work. This implies higher participation rate in this type of work in the Bihar
Survey (21.1% in the NSS data on rural Bihar versus 39.8% in the Bihar Survey).
27
          We used the method of cubic splines smoothing, enabling us to produce point wise 95% confidence
intervals. For Figure 1 and Figure 7 we use instead a running-line least-squares smoothing using Cleveland's (1979)
tricube weighting function, as programmed in Stata (as the “lowess” command). When applying these methods, we
use an arbitrary smoothing parameter to obtain smooth enough estimate of the regression functions. We could have
used a cross-validated bandwidth instead, but for the essentially graphical purposes of this estimation we followed
Deaton (1989) in selecting a bandwidth such that gives enough smoothness without losing detail, thus also avoiding
the computational burden implied by cross-validated bandwidth selection.

                                                        18
     . Thus         is the participation rate observed for a given level of consumption                  and
is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of consumption. p and                      are smooth non-
parametric functions to be determined empirically.28 If the program is indeed better targeted in
terms of adjusted consumption             then we should observe that the function               has a lower
gradient than p.
         Second, we study the impact of our adjustment on the gains from the scheme. For this
purpose we use household-specific estimates of forgone income for men and women from the
Bihar Survey. These are answers to the questions: “If you were doing some other work instead of
this during these days, how many days do you think you would have worked?” and “If you were
doing some other work instead of this during these days, what wage would you might have
earned per day?”29 (The NSS does not contain these questions, which were developed for the
Bihar survey.) The post-NREGS distribution of consumption is that observed in the data.
Without the adjustment for the welfare loss from manual labor the pre-NREGS distribution is
derived from the post-NREGS distribution simply by subtracting the net gains from the scheme,
as given by gross wages less the imputed forgone income as reported by the household. An
alternative way would be to estimate a wage regression and use estimates to predict earnings in
the absence of the scheme, but it would be recall that our aim here is to illustrate the impact on
poverty elevation and costs effectiveness for a given arbitrarily chosen function                    rather than
producing an operational impact evaluation.
         The gain from the scheme is then defined as (in obvious notation)                                     . The
calculation is more complicated for the adjusted consumption, for which the gain is
      where:
                                                  (j=1, 0)                                                     (16)

We analyze then the relationship between the net gains and the position along the consumption
distribution, both original and adjusted, following a similar non-parametric approach described
above for participation.




28
          Alternatively we can focus directly on the relationship between PR and x (rather than F(x)). However,
using F(x) for the horizontal axis assures an even spread of data points, giving an incidence graph that is less prone
to outliers at the extremes.
29
          For further discussion see Dutta et al. (2014).

                                                          19
        In aggregating these gains we use the popular headcount index (H), given by the
proportion of the population living in households with mean consumption below the poverty line.
However, it is of interest to also look at two “higher-order” measures, for which we use the
poverty gap (PG) index, to also reflect the depth of poverty, and the squared poverty gap (SPG)
index, which penalizes inequality amongst the poor, and can thus be interpreted as reflecting the
severity of poverty. All three measures are members of the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (1984) class
of additive measures.
        Costs effectiveness: In assessing NREGS we consider the impact on poverty of a
counterfactual welfare program in which the government’s outlay on NREGS wages is used
instead to provide a uniform lump-sum transfer to all, whether poor or not, i.e., a basic income
guarantee scheme. We do this with and without internalizing the welfare losses from
participating, which makes sense considering the high observed unemployment rates among the
poor.
        In practice, we calculate H for pre- and post-adjusted and unadjusted consumption per
capita, which gives the impact of NREGS’s on poverty as directly observed from the data. We
then evaluate what would be the impacts of a welfare program with same costs, i.e. we give to all
households an equal share of the observed government’s outlay on the top of their consumption
in the absence of the scheme. We then re-calculate the poverty measures with this counterfactual
consumption     .
        Note that this comparison does not take account of any other benefits to the poor from
NREGS. There are undoubtedly some benefits from the asset creation, although this is not
emphasized as a goal of the scheme. It has also been argued by advocates of the scheme’s
demand-driven nature helps empower workers, which may well have benefits in other respects.
There may also be other (indirect) benefits of a basic-income guarantee.

6.      Results

        We set a benchmark value of     at the median wage rates observed in the Bihar survey:
70 rupees per day per capita. Figure 3 shows a kernel estimation of the distribution of      . In both
datasets the distribution of   is skewed to the right. There are outliers, which support our use of
the median instead of the mean. However, we will consider a range of values for      up to      ,



                                                20
consistent with our assumption that the policy maker judges that the typical worker is better off
with extra work if she chooses to do it.
        We first consider the effects of the adjustment for the welfare loss from casual manual
work on measures of poverty and inequality based on the post-NREGS distributions.30 Table 2
summarizes the joint distribution of         and     . Given that there is a higher incidence of casual
manual work in the poorer segments of the population, it is to be expected that the lower part of
the distribution is impacted more by the consumption adjustment. Our adjustment for the welfare
loss from work has an impact on measured poverty and inequality. Figures 4 and 5 show
respectively the cumulative distribution functions and the corresponding Lorenz curves.31 As is
evident in Figure 4, we do not have first-order dominance, so the ranking in terms of any
standard measure of poverty will depend on the precise measure used and the poverty line
(Atkinson, 1987). Poverty measures are higher under our adjustment for the welfare loss from
work up to about the 40th percentile.
        Table 4 gives the impacts of our adjustment on the PG and SPG indices for both datasets.
Recall that the distributions are not level comparable, so here we are measuring the effects on
poverty at a given mean, interpretable as the “distributional component” of the poverty measure
(Datt and Ravallion, 1992). In the all-India NSS sample, and using the median post-NREGS as
the poverty line, the PG index rises from 13.7% to 34.8%, while the SPG index rises from 5.1%
to 43.4%. Inequality is unambiguously higher after our adjustment for the welfare loss from
work (Figure 5). In order to quantify this increase in inequality, we report in Table 3 the
corresponding Gini coefficients calculated before and after the adjustment for the welfare loss
from work. For the first implementation (using the whole NSS), the Gini coefficient rises from
31% to 56%, which is a substantial increase. Comparing the Bihar sample of the NSS with the
World Bank’s Bihar survey sample as a whole, the rise in Gini coefficient is clearly higher for
NSS Bihar (+0.25 for NSS Bihar versus +0.12 for World Bank survey sample as a whole).
        Turning next to assessments of targeting performance, we estimate                  and    for the NSS
data (rural households only) using again                . The result of this estimation is showed in
Figure 6 (top). For both                the participation rate decreases as consumption rises. Using

30
         Recall that we can only measure the net gains due to the program using the specially-designed World Bank
Bihar survey. Thus we can only derive pre-NREGS consumptions for that dataset.
31
         Here and elsewhere we use household weights (expansion factors) to assure that the sample-based
calculations are representative of the population in the base year.

                                                       21
the original consumption (without our adjustment) we see that participation rates are lower than
average for roughly the richest 50%, but we see no clear sign of better targeting within the poorer
half of the distribution (         is quite flat for                ). However, after adjusting for the
welfare loss from work, we see much better targeting performance among the poor, particularly
for                        We also provide 95% confidence interval bounds, showing significance

of these features. Except when the two curves cross (around the median, i.e.                          ) and for the
richest quintile, 95% pointwise confidence bands do not overlap.
        We test for robustness with respect to the choice of             . For this purpose, we repeat the
analysis using several values for         (Figure 7). We test with                 and 105, respectively half
of the median and 1.5 the median. We observe an improvement of measured targeting
performance when increasing the rate at which welfare from casual manual loss is internalize.
        Redoing the same estimation on the Bihar Survey, we find that                         is flatter than
for the poorer half of the distribution (Figure 6). In the Bihar Survey, the adjusted version shows

good targeting performance on the entire wealth distribution with                                                .32

We see better targeting performance when using                 instead of     , with less impact of the
adjustment among the richest 30%. This is implied by our particular choice of the welfare
function, but as already mentioned any other function in which                 would enter positively and
negatively would lead to the same results, up to their magnitude, would                                 hold.
        It will be recalled that the above calculations only adjust for the welfare loss from casual
manual wage labor. As noted in the introduction, this is a type of work in this setting that is
likely to be regarded by the policy maker as yielding disutility—far more so than self-
employment on one’s own farm or regular salaried work. But that is an assumption on our part.
If in fact these other forms of work are also seen as yielding disutility then we expect that the
corrected targeting performance will not be as pro-poor as we report above, using only our
adjustment for the welfare loss from casual manual wage work. Given that we will now show
that (for Bihar at least) the improvement in measured targeting performance is not great enough
to outweigh the reduced benefits of participation in NREGS when we allow for the welfare loss
from the work provided, our main qualitative conclusion concerning the poverty impacts will
remain valid.

32
        This result is qualified when checking for robustness with respect to the choice of    as in Figure 6.

                                                        22
         Using the Bihar survey we can also study the distribution of the net gains from the
scheme along the distribution of             and     . Figure 8 shows how the mean net gains against pre-
NREGS consumption, with and without our adjustments, for various values of . We see from
Figure 8 that the net gains from the scheme are highest for the poorest using un-adjusted
consumption, but the impacts are attenuated when we adjust for the welfare loss from the work
provided by the scheme. This is mechanically implied by the fact that poor participants are more
prone to be unemployed would they not be participating.
         Table 5 gives the impacts of NREGS earnings on poverty for both the population as a
whole and for the sub-sample of NREGS participants for                                    . We give results using
a poverty line set at the median of the post-NREGS distribution of (un-adjusted) consumption,
this for each     . Notice that we now compare HDI for                 and        which are level comparable
for a given     . We see that the poverty measures (both post-NREGS and pre-NREGS) are
generally higher with our adjustment for the welfare loss from casual manual labor. The impact
estimates for the HDI and PGI (post-NREGS less pre-NREGS) are found to be lower for both
poverty measures after adjusting for the welfare loss from labor.33 For the SPGI the
internalization seems to improve the impact measured. As implied by Figure 8, poverty impacts
for the population as a whole are little affected by our adjustment for the welfare loss from work.
         Table 6 gives the poverty impacts of the welfare scheme providing an untargeted basic
income to all, in amount determined by the outlays on wages under NREGS as observed in our
data.34 Comparing Tables 5 and 6 we see that for                     the poverty impacts are very similar.
However, at higher values of           we see that the welfare scheme dominates the workfare scheme,
as predicted by our theoretical model.

7.       Conclusions
         Workfare schemes typically, and deliberately, offer unpleasant work. In the case of
India’s National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme the work provided is monotonous
manual labor, toiling for long hours in the open sun. Nobody is likely to enjoy this work, and that
is undoubtedly part of the reason that relatively rich people appear to only rarely turn up for

33
         Notice also that the impact on the income-gap ratio—namely the mean distance of the poor below the line,
as a percentage of the line (i.e., the ratio of the PG index to the headcount index)—is also lower with our adjustment.
34
         An alternative option is to derive the outlays from administrative data, as is done in XXX (ref to the WBER
“Is workfare cost-effective in a poor labour-surplus economy?”).

                                                          23
work on the scheme, on top of their (probably) higher opportunity costs on the private labor
market. Yet, while this “self-targeting” mechanism is a key aspect of the rationale for such
schemes, the fact that the type of work is unpleasant for participants has never (to our
knowledge) been used in assessing the impact of NREGS or other workfare schemes, nor has it
been included in the theoretical models that underpin the evaluations of such programs. This is
an ethically troubling inconsistency. And we have demonstrated that it has bearing on the results
of the evaluation.
       Depending on to what type of activities participating households do in the absence of the
scheme, and whether or not the evaluator cares about the disutility implied by the scheme,
workfare programs may appear more or less cost effective as compared to welfare programs
providing un-targeted transfers (a basic-income scheme). On generalizing the long-standing
model in Besley and Coate (1992) we have derived the tighter constraint for workfare to
dominate welfare implied by higher unemployment rates for poorer households and a consistent
evaluation, such that the evaluator internalizes the welfare loss implied by the type of work
offered. This generalization is motivated by the fact that poverty in developing countries is
typically correlated with both low wage rates on the private labor market and a high incidence
underemployment.
       We have offered a simple correction for this deficiency in past assessments of the
performance of workfare programs. Our adjustment to measured household consumption allows
for the welfare loss from casual manual labor. This is a welfare function consistent with the
particular goal of the scheme, as expressed in the legislation creating NREGS. The adjustment
involves a single preference parameter that can be readily calibrated to available data.
       The proposed adjustment of the welfare measure for the welfare loss from casual manual
labor entails a marked difference to standard measures of poverty and inequality. The
distributional change implies a lower incidence of poverty, but higher measures of its depth and
severity. The adjustment also affects the assessment of the targeting performance of NREGS.
Whereas the choice between the unadjusted consumption and our adjusted version does not make
a significant difference among the 30% richest, the assessed targeting performance changes
appreciably among the poorest half when we allow for the welfare loss from doing casual
manual work. However, allowing for that welfare loss also devalues the benefits to participants.
Using survey data for Bihar, we find that this effect dominates the gains from better targeting

                                                24
performance implied by allowing for the welfare loss from the type of work done. The scheme
reaches even poorer people, but it does less to raise their welfare.
       The empirical results imply that if the evaluator ignores the welfare loss from the type of
work offered then the earnings gains from NREGS have almost the same impact on poverty as a
welfare scheme that transfers the same gross outlay on wages as a uniform lump-sum transfer—a
basic income scheme in which everyone receives the same amount whether poor or not. This
implies that as long as the NREGS generates non-negligible indirect benefits to participating
workers through the assets created or the empowerment benefits it will dominate the welfare
scheme. However, the extra benefits from workfare would need to be larger if the evaluator
internalizes the welfare losses generated by the type of work offered. Without these extra,
indirect, benefits, welfare clearly dominates workfare when everyone involved, including the
evaluator, agrees that the work is unpleasant.




                                                 25
Appendix
       Proposition 1: On the top of voluntary participation and poverty alleviation constraints,
the government faces the incentive constraints:




Notice that the second inequality boils down to any non-poor being weakly worse off when
participating in the program than in the status quo. This is weaker than the upward adjacent
monotonicity incentive compatibility required in BC (1995), but sufficient here since the
government chooses between a welfare program and a workfare with a single contract. A cost-
minimizing workfare program is defined by:




Notice we have used the assumption that                                    .      is the work
requirement implying high ability workers’ indifference between                     and
          , i.e.     is such that:




                                                  26
The cost of this workfare program is                                  . Again we have
                             . Also notice that             , can be rewritten in the closed form
solution:




We see that the higher the gap in wages between the poor and the rich, the lower the work
requirement. If the government cares about the welfare loss implied by the work requirement
then it has to increase       . This program generates per capita costs of
       Now consider a welfare program,                  , characterized by




(as implied by the poverty alleviation constraint). This leads to the per capita costs:

                                     +




The sufficient condition for workfare to be the cost-minimizing option is thus:

                          , as claimed in Proposition 1. Hence we end up with the same solution as
in BC, even though the government is now internalizing part of the welfare loss implied by the
time spent on the scheme. This makes sense if one recalls the labor market clearing assumption:

                                                              .




                                                   27
       Proposition 2: In the asymmetric information case the solution found in BC is altered if
one relaxes their assumption that the labor market clears. Under a workfare scheme, the
government offers a transfer conditional on a public work requirement:




           =


           =

     is defined exactly as before, indeed          implies:




But now                                                            . We see that the transfer

needed to meet the poverty alleviation constraint is a function of the rationing parameter . How
   evolves with depends on the slope of      in                       , indeed:




       Next consider welfare. The transfers needed to meet the poverty alleviation constraints
are the same as before, namely                            But if one wants to express the per
capita costs of such a welfare program as a function of       in this set up one gets:




                                                  28
We verify that for         we have                                          and we are back to the

case described already.

        We see that if the government does not internalize the welfare loss then

                                 and a workfare is cost minimizing if and only if

          , which is less restrictive than                       because       . This leads to
Proposition 2 with closed form solutions:




        Proposition 3: If the government does internalize the welfare loss then:



Workfare is cost minimizing if and only if:




From the previous derivation we can rewrite:




Notice that the existence of a closed form solution for             depends now on the
invertibility of   with respect to      . Hence a workfare is cost minimizing if and only if
                           , where:

                                                  29
Thus we have Proposition 3. Notice that                     because
          and for        we have                ; hence   . Again, for
we are back to the case described above.




                                           30
References

Atkinson, Anthony B., 1987, “On the Measurement of Poverty,” Econometrica 55: 749-64.
Bardhan, Pranab, 1984, Land, Labor and Rural Poverty: Essays in Development Economics.
       New York: Columbia University Press.
Basu, Arnab K, 2013, “Impact of Rural Employment Guarantee Schemes on Seasonal Labor
       Markets: Optimum Compensation and Workers' Welfare,” The Journal of Economic
       Inequality, 11: 1-34.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate, 1992, “Workfare vs. Welfare: Incentive Arguments for
       Work Requirements in Poverty Alleviation Programs,” American Economic Review
       82(1): 249–61.
_____________, and ____________, 1995, “The Design of Income Maintenance Programmes,”
       Review of Economics Studies 62: 187–221.
Bhalla, Surjit, 2011, “Does NREGA Really Work?” Business Standard 27 March.
Blundell Richard, Thomas Macurdy and Costas Meghir, 2007, “Labor Supply Models:
       Unobserved Heterogeneity, Nonparticipation and Dynamics,” Handbook of Econometrics
       Volume 6A, Chapter 69, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Browning, Martin, 1992, “Children and Household Economic Behavior,” Journal of Economic
       Literature 30: 1434-1475.
Cleveland, W. S., 1979, “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatter Plots,”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 74: 829-836.
Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion, 1992, “Growth and Redistribution Components of Changes
       in Poverty: A Decomposition with Application to Brazil and India,” Journal of
       Development Economics 38: 275-295.
___________ and _____________, 1994, “Transfer Benefits from Public Works Employment,”
       Economic Journal 104: 1346-1369.
___________ and _____________, 1998, “Farm Productivity and Rural Poverty in India,”
       Journal of Development Studies 34(4): 62-85.
Deaton, Angus, 1989, “Rice Prices and Income Distribution in Thailand: A Non-Parametric
       Analysis,” Economic Journal 99(395): 1-37.




                                              31
Deaton, Angus and Jean Drèze, 2002, “Poverty and Inequality in India: A re-Examination,”
       Economic and Political Weekly September 7: 3729-48.
Drèze, Jean and Reetika Khera (2011), “Employment Guarantee and the Right to Work,” in
       Reetika Khera (ed.) The Battle for Employment Guarantee, New Delhi: Oxford
       University Press.
Dutta, Puja, Rinku Murgai, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2012, “Does India’s
       Employment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment?” Economic and Political
       Weekly 48 (April 21): 55-64.
_________, ____________, ______________and ___________________, 2014, Right to Work?
       Assessing India’s Employment Guarantee Scheme in Bihar. World Bank Report.
Foster, James., J. Greer, and Erik Thorbecke, 1984, “A Class of Decomposable Poverty
       Measures,” Econometrica 52: 761-765.
Gaiha, Raghav, 1997, “Rural Public Works and the Poor: The Case of the Employment
       Guarantee Scheme in India,” in S. Polachek (ed.) Research in Labour Economics,
       Connecticut: JAI Press.
Imbert, Clement and John Papp, 2011, “Estimating Leakages in India’s Employment Guarantee,”
       in Reetika Khera (ed.) The Battle for Employment Guarantee, New Delhi: Oxford
       University Press.
Jha, Raghbendra, Sambit Bhattacharyya, Raghav Gaiha and Shylashri Shankar, 2009, “‘Capture’
       of Anti-Poverty Programs: An Analysis of the National Rural Employment Guarantee
       Program in India,” Journal of Asian Economics 20(4): 456-464.
Jha, Raghbendra, Raghav Gaiha, Manoj K. Pandey, 2012, “Net Transfer Benefits under India’s
       Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,” Journal of Policy Modeling 34(2): 296-311.
Kanbur, Ravi, Michael Keen, Matti Tuomala, 1994a, “Optimal Nonlinear Income Taxation for
       the Alleviation of Income Poverty,” European Economic Review 38(8): 1613-1632.
______________, 1994b, “Labor Supply and Targeting in Poverty Alleviation Programs,” World
       Bank Economic Review 8(2): 191-211.
Lokshin, Michael, 2006, “Difference-Based Semiparametric Estimation of Partial Linear
       Regression Models,” STATA Journal 6: 377-384.
Mirrlees, James, 1971, “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” Review of
       Economic Studies 38:175-208.

                                              32
Moffitt, Robert, 2006, “Welfare Work Requirements with Paternalistic Government Preferences,”
       Economic Journal 116(515): 441-458.
Pitt, Mark, and Shahidur Khandker, 1998, “The Impact of Group-Based Credit
       Programs on Poor Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants
       Matter?” Journal of Political Economy 106: 958-96.
Pollak, Robert, and Terence Wales, 1979, “Welfare Comparison and Equivalence Scale,”
       American Economic Review 69: 216–221.
Ravallion, Martin, 2009, “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of the Antipoverty
       Program?” World Bank Research Observer 24(3): 205-231.
______________, 2012, “Poverty Lines across the World,” Chapter 3 of the Oxford Handbook
       of the Economics of Poverty, edited by Philip N. Jefferson, Oxford University Press.
______________, 2015, The Economics of Poverty, Oxford and New York: Oxford University
       Press.
Ravallion, Martin and Gaurav Datt, 1995, “Is Targeting through a Work Requirement Efficient?
       “Some Evidence for Rural India,” in D. van de Walle and K. Nead (eds) Public Spending
       and the Poor: Theory and Evidence, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ravallion, Martin, Gaurav Datt, and Shubham Chaudhuri, 1993, “Does Maharashtra’s
       ‘Employment Guarantee Scheme’ Guarantee Employment? Effects of the 1988 Wage
       Increase,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 41: 251–75.
van de Walle, Dominique, 1985, “Population Growth and Poverty: Another Look at the India
       Time Series Data,” Journal of Development Studies 21(3): 429-39.
World Bank, 2012, World Development Report: Jobs. World Bank, Washington DC.




                                              33
                      Table 1: Summary statistics for               and


                             NSS                            Bihar Survey


               mean          236      2.4       95          171     1.1     76
               s.d.          205      1.5       48          100     0.8     38
               N             59129 13793 13793              3000 1201 1194
               min           9        0.1       8           13      0.1     1
               y(25)         143      1.3       67          109     0.6     60
               y(50)         193      2.0       87          149     0.9     70
               y(75)         267      3.2       110         202     1.3     100
               max           14738 7.0          2000        2376 7.0        890

Note: W is in rupees per day, calculated as the total wages received for casual manual work divided by the
total number of days of such work provide by the household; C is in rupees per person per week, calculated
as total household consumption per week divided by the number of people in the household; L is in days
per capita, calculated as total number of days of casual manual work divided by household size. y(p)
denotes the value of each variable at the p’th percentile.




                                               34
Table 2: Distribution across quintiles before and after adjustment (%,                    )


NSS all rural India


                      Quintiles           1        2          3     4     5      Total
                                     1    8.4      5.1        3.5   2.4   0.6    20.0
                                     2    11.6 3.1            3.0   1.7   0.7    20.0
                                     3    0.0      11.8 6.6         1.2   0.5    20.0
                                     4    0.0      0.0        7.0   12.2 0.9     20.0
                                     5    0.0      0.0        0.0   2.7   17.3 20.0
                                     Total 19.9 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.1 100.0


World Bank Bihar survey


                      Quintiles           1        2          3     4     5      Total
                                     1    11.0 4.6            2.2   1.9   0.5    20.2
                                     2    9.1      5.5        3.4   1.6   0.3    19.9
                                     3    0.0      9.9        7.6   2.2   0.4    20.0
                                     4    0.0      0.0        6.9   11.9 1.2     20.0
                                     5    0.0      0.0        0.0   2.4   17.6 20.0
                                     Total 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 100.0




       Table 3: Gini coefficients
                       Using original           Using consumption
                       consumption (            adjusted for welfare loss from work (

     NSS                      0.31                     0.39               0.56           0.78
     Bihar Survey             0.27                     0.31               0.39           0.50




                                                    35
        Table 4: Poverty measures with and without the adjustment for a welfare loss from
        casual manual work
                                 Unadjusted                Adjusted
                                 consumption               consumption

        NSS all rural India
        Poverty gap
                                          13.7                     20.9           34.8                  51.1
        index
        Squared poverty
                                           5.1                     14.7           43.4                  99.5
        gap index
        Bihar Survey
        Poverty gap
                                          14.2                     13.9           15.2                  17.2
        index
        Squared poverty
                                           5.6                     5.5            6.4                   8.1
        gap index
        Note: Median (            -       ) as the poverty line.



Table 5: Impacts of NREGS on poverty in Bihar with and without the adjustment for a
welfare loss from casual manual work

                                               -             50            50     50            50
                              Headcount                     48.5          49.2   49.6          49.6
                                               -
                              index
                                             Impact         -1.5          -0.8   -0.4          -0.4
               Population
               as a whole




                              Poverty          -            13.8          16.5   23.6          32.1
                              gap index        -            13.2           16    23.1          31.7
                                             Impact         -0.6          -0.5   -0.5          -0.4
                              Squared          -            5.3             8    17.4          35.5
                              poverty                       5.0           7.6    16.9           35
                                               -
                              gap index
                                             Impact         -0.3          -0.4   -0.5          -0.5
                                               -             60           62.4   67.3          68.1
                              Headcount                      54           59.5   65.4          66.7
                                               -
                              index
                                             Impact          -6           -2.9   -1.9          -1.4
               participants




                              Poverty          -            18.5          23.3   33.2          44.9
                NREGS




                              gap index        -            16.4          21.1   31.1          43.1
                                             Impact         -2.1          -2.2   -2.1          -1.8
                              Squared          -            7.8           11.7   23.6          45.3
                              poverty                       6.5           10.2   21.7          43.3
                                               -
                              gap index
                                             Impact         -1.3          -1.5   -1.9          -2.0

Note: The poverty lines are the adjusted medians for (adjusted) pre-NREGS distributions for the population as a
whole (       -      ).




                                                              36
Table 6: Impact on poverty of a welfare scheme providing an untargeted basic income with
                                  the same budget cost


                              -         50         50        50          50
        Headcount index                48.6       48.2      48.8        48.5
                            Impact     -1.4       -1.8      -1.2        -1.5
        Poverty gap index     -        13.8       16.5      23.6        32.1
                                       12.9       15.6      22.6        31.1
                            Impact     -0.9       -0.9      -1.0        -1.0
        Squared poverty       -         5.3         8       17.4        35.5
        gap index                       4.9       7.4       16.5        34.2
                            Impact     -0.4       -0.6      -0.9        -1.3




                                          37
Figure 1: Wage rates, unemployment and consumption per capita in rural India 2010




Note: P(unemployment) is an estimate of                               the conditional probability to have
at least one adult household’s member reporting at least one half day of unemployment in the week
ended in the NSS. Wages in Rupees per day.
Source: Authors’ calculations from the National Sample Survey for 2009/10.


                                                    38
Figure 2: Participation rate in casual manual work as a function of household consumption
per capita in NSS




Participation rate in casual manual work as a function of household consumption per
capita in World Bank Bihar survey




Note: This curve is an estimate of                                          , the conditional probability to
have at least on household’s member reporting at least one half day of casual manual work in the week
ended. The curve’s fit based on NSS allows for state fixed effects. The estimate for Bihar’s survey is
based on measure of casual manual work and consumption in the absence of the scheme.




                                                     39
   Figure 3: Kernel density estimation of          distribution

NSS all rural India                                     World Bank Bihar survey




   Figure 4: Cumulative Density Functions


NSS all rural India                                     World Bank Bihar survey




   Note: As explained in the main text the two welfare measures used here are not level comparable. For the
   purpose of this graph we normalize      such that it has same mean as and we comment in the text on
   the curvature of these cumulative density functions.




                                                      40
  Figure 5: Lorenz Curves


NSS all rural India          World Bank Bihar survey




                            41
Figure 6: NREGS participation rates

NSS all rural India




World Bank Bihar survey




Note: non-parametric regression function, estimates based on cubic splines.




                                                   42
Figure 7: NREGS participation rates for alternative parameter values

NSS rural India




World Bank Bihar survey




Note: non-parametric regression function, estimates based on cubic splines.



                                                   43
Figure 8: Net gains from NREGS using World Bank Bihar Survey

(rupees per year)




(share of post-NREGS consumption)




Note: Ranked by pre-NREGS consumption.



                                         44
