                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


               THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF COORDINATED ASSIGNMENT:
                      EVIDENCE FROM THE NYC HS MATCH

                                       Atila Abdulkadiro lu
                                         Nikhil Agarwal
                                         Parag A. Pathak

                                        Working Paper 21046
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21046

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge MA 20138
                             March 2015, Revised June 2017


We thank Neil Dorosin, Jesse Margolis, Sonali Murarka, and Elizabeth Sciabarra for their
expertise and for facilitating access to the data used in this study. Special thanks to Alvin E. Roth
for his collaboration, which made this study possible. Jesse Margolis provided extremely helpful
comments. We also thank Josh Angrist, Steve Berry, Stefan Bonhomme, Eric Budish, Francesco
Decarolis, Matt Gentzkow, Arda Gitmez, Jerry Hausman, Phil Haile, Ali Hortacsu, Peter Hull,
Yusuke Narita, Derek Neal, Alex Olssen, Ariel Pakes, Amy Ellen Schwartz, Jesse Shapiro, and
seminar participants at the University of Chicago, Harvard University, Federal Reserve Bank of
NY, London School of Economics, Yale University, and the NBER Market Design conference
for input. We received excellent research assistance from Alonso Bucarey, Red Davis, Weiwei
Hu, Danielle Wedde, and a hard-working team of MIT undergraduates. Agarwal acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1427231). Pathak acknowledges
support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (grant BR2012-068), National Science Foundation
(grant SES-1056325), and the William T. Grant Foundation. Abdulkadiroglu and Pathak are on
the Scientific Advisory Board of the Institute for Innovation in Public School Choice. The authors
declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research in this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21046.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Atila Abdulkadiro lu, Nikhil Agarwal, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Effects of Coordinated Assignment: Evidence from the NYC HS Match
Atila Abdulkadiro lu, Nikhil Agarwal, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 21046
March 2015, Revised June 2017
JEL No. C78,D47,D50,D61,I21

                                         ABSTRACT

Coordinated single-offer school assignment systems are a popular education reform. We show
that uncoordinated offers in NYC’s school assignment mechanism generated mismatches. One-
third of applicants were unassigned after the main round and later administratively placed at less
desirable schools. We evaluate the effects of the new coordinated mechanism based on deferred
acceptance using estimated student preferences. The new mechanism achieves 80% of the
possible gains from a no-choice neighborhood extreme to a utilitarian benchmark. Coordinating
offers dominates the effects of further algorithm modifications. Students most likely to be
previously administratively assigned experienced the largest gains in welfare and subsequent
achievement.

Atila Abdulkadirolu                             Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics, E52-426
Duke University                                 MIT
213 Social Sciences Building                    77 Massachusetts Avenue
Durham, NC 27708                                Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                        and NBER
atila.abdulkadiroglu@duke.edu                   ppathak@mit.edu

Nikhil Agarwal
Department of Economics, E52-460
MIT
77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
agarwaln@mit.edu




A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21046
1       Introduction
In recent years, market design theory has inspired dramatic changes in how children are assigned
to public schools across numerous American cities and around the world. The first new system
adopted was for placing 8th graders into high schools in New York City (NYC). NYC’s new
system has not only received widespread scientific and popular acclaim (Nobel 2012, Tullis 2014,
Roth 2015), but also became a template for reforms in other cities.1 Despite widespread adoption
of and apparent consensus on the value of market-design-inspired centralized assignment schemes,
there is remarkably little evidence on whether, why, and how much a coordinated assignment
system affects pupil allocation to schools or the extent to which the new system created losers
as well as winners. The empirical performance of alternatives to NYC’s deferred acceptance-
based scheme, the quantitative aspects of particular design trade-offs, and whether the new
mechanism is associated with improvements in downstream educational outcomes also remain
open questions.2
     Characterizing the state of the market prior to the new mechanism is a major challenge
because decentralized and uncoordinated systems do not usually generate systematic data. This
paper surmounts this hurdle by exploiting new data on the system used in New York before
2003 to study the effect of moving from an uncoordinated assignment system to a coordinated
single-offer system for allocating students to schools. Using our rich micro-data on applications,
assignments, and enrollments, we describe high school student placement in both systems and
assess whether students receive one of their preferred choices. Tracking students from application
to assignment allows us to comprehensively describe the drawbacks of NYC’s previous system, but
still leaves unanswered questions. First, we do not know whether the reform realized most of the
possible gains associated with a new assignment system or how those gains were distributed across
applicants. Second, we know little about the magnitude of further algorithmic improvements, as
considered by the market design literature compared to other design aspects. Our paper addresses
these questions using an estimated model of student preferences exploiting the straightforward
incentive feature of New York’s new system.
     Prior to 2003, rising NYC high school students applied to five out of more than 600 school
programs; they could receive multiple offers and be placed on wait lists. Students were allowed to
accept only one school and one wait list offer, and the cycle of offers and acceptances was repeated
two more times. The vast majority of students not assigned in these rounds went through an
administrative process that manually placed them at schools close to their residences. Since
admissions offers were not coordinated across schools, we refer to this as the uncoordinated
mechanism.3 In Fall 2003, this system was replaced by a single-offer assignment system, based
    1
     Cities that adopted new coordinated matching systems following NYC include Camden, Denver, New Orleans,
Newark, and Washington DC.
   2
     There is an active scholarly and policy debate about alternative designs. The OneApp process used in the
Recovery School District in New Orleans is based on an entirely different assignment algorithm that relaxes the
stability constraint in New York’s system (Abdulkadiroğlu, Che, Pathak, Roth, and Tercieux 2017). Abdulka-
diroğlu, Che, and Yasuda (2015) argue that ordinal strategy-proof mechanisms may not lead to improvements in
cardinal utility.
   3
     Although the offer timetable and number of rounds was uniform across schools, there was no coordination
among schools during admissions decisions.


                                                      1
on the student-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm (DA) for the main round. Applicants
were allowed to rank up to 12 programs for enrollment in 2004-05, and a supplementary round
placed students unassigned in the main round. Since the central office coordinated all schools into
a single offer, we refer to this new system as the coordinated mechanism. The mechanisms could
produce different allocations for three main reasons: 1) the new mechanism allows students to
rank up to 12 choices, whereas the old mechanism only allowed for five; 2) the old mechanism’s
limited number of offer and acceptance rounds led to congestion, as students held on to less-
preferred choices while waiting to be offered seats at more preferred schools after others decline;
and 3) unlike the new mechanism, the old mechanism invited strategic considerations on student
ranking, as schools were able to see the entire rank ordering of applicants in the old mechanism,
and some advertised they would only consider those who ranked them first.
     Offer processing and matriculation patterns provide rich details on how and why the new
mechanism improves on the old one. In the old mechanism, 18.6% of students matriculate at
schools different from their assignment at the end of the match compared to 11.4% under the
new mechanism. Multiple offers and short rank-order lists in the old mechanism advantage few
students but leave many without offers. Roughly one-fifth of students obtain multiple offers, while
half of applicants receive no first round offer, and 59% of these applicants are administratively
assigned. The take-up rates for administratively-assigned students are similar across mechanisms,
but the number of students assigned in that round is three times larger in the old mechanism.
In addition, in the old mechanism, 8.5% of applicants left the district after assignment in the
old mechanism while only 6.4% left under the new mechanism. Students are willing to travel
0.69 miles further to attend the schools they are assigned by the new mechanism. While these
observations suggest welfare improvements, it is nevertheless necessary to estimate a model of
school demand to quantify the distribution of student welfare effects and the relevance of design
issues that are central to the school matching market design literature.
     The new mechanism is based on DA, which is strategy-proof. This fact motivates treating
stated preferences as true preferences and sidesteps challenges associated with inferring pref-
erences from highly manipulable systems.4 As far as we know, our paper is the first to fit
econometric models of school demand using data generated by DA, though many have argued
for strategy-proof mechanisms because they generate credible preference data for guiding policy.5
Our preference estimates characterize the heterogeneous nature of student preferences and allow
us to quantify which aspects of school choice market design are most important for allocative
efficiency. That our estimates are robust to variations on our assumptions about ranking behav-
ior and evidence of in-sample and out-of-sample fit reassures us that using stated preferences is
suitable for welfare analysis.
     We use these estimates to evaluate the allocative and distributional aspect of various as-
signment mechanisms, an exercise that provides a quantitative counterpart to the theoreti-
cal literature on matching market design. To scale the magnitude of welfare effects, we first
  4
    In section 9.2 probes this assumption in greater detail.
  5
    The fact that strategy-proof mechanisms generate reliable demand data is a common argument in their favor
(see, e.g., Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth, and Sönmez (2006), Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth (2009), Sönmez
(2013)). Following our paper, Pathak and Shi (2014) examine the out-of-sample performance of school demand
forecasts using data from Boston’s DA-based system.


                                                     2
measure aggregate welfare from two benchmark cases: a neighborhood assignment allocation,
wherein each student was assigned to the closest school subject to capacity constraints, and
the utilitarian optimal assignment, which maximizes the equally weighted average of distance-
equivalent utility. The coordinated scheme achieves 80% of this idealized benchmark. Next, we
find relatively modest gains from relaxing the mechanism design constraints emphasized by a
large theoretical market design literature (Erdil and Ergin 2008, Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and
Roth 2009, Kesten 2010, Kesten and Kurino 2012). Had the mechanism produced a student-
optimal stable matching, the average student welfare would have improved by another 0.6% of
this range. An ex post Pareto efficient matching, which abandons the stability constraints in
the current mechanism, results in a further improvement of about 2.7% of the range. While
these alternatives are infeasible without sacrificing some appealing features of the mechanism,
this exercise shows that the magnitude of student welfare gains from any potential algorithmic
improvements are swamped by the effect of simply having choice in a coordinated system im-
plemented by deferred acceptance, as measured by the range between neighborhood assignment
and the assignment from the coordinated mechanism assignment.
    We then deploy several approaches to use our demand estimates to evaluate the transition
from an uncoordinated to a coordinated mechanism. The first approach evaluates welfare changes
by treating student behavior in the two mechanisms symmetrically, and the second approach
approximates the best-case scenario for the uncoordinated mechanism in which students behave
optimally. We find the new mechanism has made it easier for students to obtain a choice they
want, and this result is robust to how we interpret data from the uncoordinated mechanism. Even
though the coordinated mechanism produces school assignments that are geographically further
away, our estimated distribution of preferences indicates the degree to which students prefer these
assignments more than compensates for this difference. Under our estimate of an approximate
best-case for the uncoordinated mechanism, we estimate that admissions coordination represents
about a 45% improvement in the range for no choice to utilitarian optimum. Students across
all demographic groups, boroughs, and baseline achievement levels receive a more preferred
assignment on average from the new mechanism. The largest gains are for student groups that
were more likely to be unassigned after the old mechanism’s main round, a result that suggests
that the old mechanism’s congestion and ad-hoc placement of unassigned students are primarily
responsible for misallocation. This comparison also shows that eliminating congestion through
offer coordination via DA dominates the allocative effect of further modifications to the matching
algorithm within the coordinated system. Finally, we show both test scores and graduation rates
increase for students who were most likely to be administratively assigned in the old mechanism.
    This paper relates to two distinct literatures on school choice and matching mechanisms.
Our focus aligns with research interested in understanding how choice affects student assign-
ment and sorting (Epple and Romano 1998, Urquiola 2005) rather than the competitive effects
of choice on student achievement (Hoxby 2003, Rothstein 2006). Further, we concentrate on
allocative efficiency, and only briefly examine subsequent achievement (Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist,
Dynarski, Kane, and Pathak 2011, Deming, Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2014, Walters 2014,
Neilson 2014). The allocative issues on which we focus are likely important for understanding
potential long-term effects on residential choices and school productivity. A number of recent


                                                3
papers use micro data from assignment mechanisms to understand school demand (Hastings,
Kane, and Staiger 2009, He 2012, Ajayi 2017, Agarwal and Somaini 2014, Calsamiglia, Fu, and
Guell 2014, Hwang 2014, Burgess, Greaves, Vignoles, and Wilson 2015), typically using data from
highly manipulable mechanisms like the Boston mechanism based on specific models of student
information and sophistication. While some of these papers have compared the Boston mech-
anism and DA, ours is the first to examine congestion in an uncoordinated school assignment
system. An approach based on estimated preferences complements survey data for comparing
mechanisms. For instance, Budish and Cantillon (2012) use survey data on a multi-unit course
allocation mechanism and find that more students are assigned to preferable choices in a strategy-
proof mechanism than in the strategic draft mechanism used at the Harvard Business School.
Finally, our work relates to comparisons of decentralized and centralized medical labor markets
by Niederle and Roth (2003), who show the distance between a gastroenterologist’s medical
school and residency location increases with a centralized clearinghouse.


2        High School Choice in NYC
2.1        School Options
Aspiring high school students may apply to any school or program throughout New York City.
A single school may host several programs that have curricula ranging from the arts to sciences
to vocational training. The 2002-03 High School directory describes program types. Specialized
High Schools, such as Stuyvesant and Bronx Science, have only one type of program, which
admits students by admissions test performance on the Specialized High Schools Admissions
Test (SHSAT).6 There are three ways in which student screening differs for non-Specialized high
schools. Unscreened programs admit students by random lottery, in some cases giving priority
to students from specific residential zones or to students who attend the school’s open house.
Screened programs evaluate students individually using an assortment of criteria, including
grades, standardized/diagnostic test scores; attendance and punctuality; interviews; and essays.
Such programs might also evaluate students for proficiency in specific performing or visual arts,
music, or dance. Education Option programs also evaluate students individually, but only for
half of their seats. The other half is allocated by lottery. Seat allocation in each half targets
the following student ability distribution as measured by citywide 7th grade English language
arts scores: 16% of seats should be allocated to high performing readers, 68% percent to middle
performers, and 16% to low performers.
    Throughout the last decade, the NYC Department of Education (DOE) closed and opened
new small high schools throughout the city, each with roughly 400 students. A big push for
these small high schools came as part of the New Century High Schools Initiative launched
by Mayor Bloomberg and Chancellor Klein. Eleven new small high schools were opened in
2002, 23 new small schools were opened in 2003, and small high school openings peaked in 2004
(Abulkadiroğlu, Hu, and Pathak 2013). Most of these schools are small and have about 100
students per entering class. As a result, the new small high schools have a relatively minor effect
    6
        Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2014) describe their admissions process in more detail.



                                                          4
on overall enrollment patterns during our study period, which focuses on school options available
in 2002-03 and 2003-04.

2.2    Uncoordinated Admissions in 2002-03
Forms of high school choice have existed in New York City for decades. Before 2002, high school
assignment in New York City featured many choice options, mostly controlled by borough-wide
high school superintendents. Significant admissions power resided with school administrators,
who could directly enroll students. Admissions to the Specialized High Schools and the La-
Guardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, however, have been traditionally
administered as a separate process, which did not change with the new mechanism.7 Our study
therefore focuses on admissions to non-Specialized public schools.
    About 80,000 students interested in regular high schools visit schools and attend city-wide
high school open houses before submitting their preferences in the fall. In the Main round in
2002-03, students could apply to at most five regular programs in addition to the Specialized
High Schools. Programs receiving a student’s application were able to see the applicant’s entire
preference list, including where their program was ranked. Programs then decided whom to
admit, place on a waiting list, or reject. Applicants were sent a decision letter from each program
to which they had applied, and some obtained more than one offer. Students were allowed to
hold on to at most one admission and one wait-list offer. After receiving responses to the first
letters, programs with vacant seats could make new offers to students from waiting lists. After
the second round, students who did not have a zoned high school were allowed to participate
in a Supplementary round known as the variable assignment process. In the Supplementary
round, students could rank up to eight choices and were assigned based on seat availability
negotiations between the enrollment office and high school superintendents. After replies to the
second letter were received, a third round of letters were mailed. New offers did not necessarily
go to rejected or wait-listed students in a predetermined order. Unassigned students were either
placed at their zoned programs or administratively placed as close to home as possible by the
central office. We refer to this final stage as the Administrative round.8
    Three features of this assignment scheme motivated the NYC DOE to abandon it in fa-
vor of a new mechanism. First, there was inadequate time for offers, wait list decisions, and
acceptances to clear the market for school seats. DOE officials reported that in some cases, high-
achieving students received acceptances from all of the schools to which they applied, while many
other students received none (Herszenhorn 2004). Comments by the Deputy Schools Chancellor
summarized the frustration: “Parents are told a school is full, then in two months, miracles of
miracles, seats open up, but other kids get them. Something is wrong” (Gendar 2000).
   7
     The 1972 Hecht-Calandra Act is a New York State law that governs admissions to the original four Specialized
High Schools: Stuyvesant, Bronx High School of Science, Brooklyn Technical, and Fiorello H. LaGuardia High
School of Music & Performing Arts. City officials indicated that this law prohibits including these schools within
the common application system without action by the state legislature.
   8
     Students who are new to New York City or did not submit an application participate in an “over-the-counter”
round over the summer. Our analysis follows applicants through to assignment and therefore does not consider
students who joined the process after the high school match. Arvidsson, Fruchter, and Mokhtar (2013) provide
further details on the over-the-counter round.


                                                        5
      Second, some schools awarded admissions priority to students who ranked them first on
  their application forms. The high school directory advises that when ranking schools, students
  should “determine what [their] competition is for a seat in this program” (DOE 2002). This
  recommendation reflects strategic incentives for ranking decisions. Students have to consider
  both the limited number of potential applications and whether the school only considers first-
  choice applicants.
      Third, a number of schools managed to conceal capacity to fill seats later on with more pre-
  ferred students. For example, the Deputy Chancellor stated, “before you might have a situation
  where a school was going to take 100 new children for ninth grade, they might have declared
  only 40 seats, and then placed the other 60 outside the process” (Herszenhorn 2004). Overall,
  critics alleged that the old mechanism disadvantaged low-achieving students and those without
  sophisticated parents (Hemphill and Nauer 2009).

  2.3    Coordinated Admissions in 2003-04
  The new mechanism was designed with input from economists (see Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak,
  and Roth (2005) and Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth (2009)). When publicizing the new
  mechanism, the DOE explained that its goals were to utilize school places more efficiently and
  reduce the gaming involved in obtaining school seats (Kerr 2003). As in previous years, in the
  first round, students apply to Specialized High Schools when they take the SHSAT. Offers are
  produced according to a serial dictatorship with priority given by SHSAT scores.9
       In the Main round, students can rank up to twelve regular school programs in their ap-
  plications, which are due in November. The DOE advises parents: “You must now rank your
  12 choices according to your true preferences,” because this round is built on Gale and Shapley
  (1962)’s student-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm. Schools with programs that prioritize
  applicants based on auditions, test scores or other criteria are sent lists of students who ranked
  the school, but these lists do not reveal where on the preference lists the schools were ranked.
  Schools return orderings of applicants to the central enrollment office. Schools that prioritize ap-
  plicants using geographic or other criteria have those criteria supplied by the central office. That
  office uses a single lottery to break ties among students with the same priority, thus generating
  a strict student order at each school.
       The centralized clearinghouse assigned schools using DA with inputs that include student
  preferences, school capacities, and schools’ strict ordering. After lottery numbers are drawn, DA
  works as follows:

Step 1) Each student proposes to her first choice. Each school tentatively assigns seats to its
        proposers one at a time, following their priority order. The student is rejected if no seats
        are available at the time of consideration.

         In general, in
     9
      There is very limited overlap between the specialized round and subsequent rounds. In 2003-04, 4,175 out of
  4,553 of students offered a Specialized High School placement accepted that offer.




                                                        6
Step k) Each student who was rejected in the previous step proposes to her next best choice. Each
        school considers the students it has tentatively assigned together with its new proposers
        and tentatively assigns its seats to these students one at a time following the school’s
        priority order. The student is rejected if no seats are available when she is considered.

  The algorithm terminates either when there are no new proposals or when all rejected students
  have exhausted their preference lists.
      DA is run for all students in February. In this first round, only students who receive a
  Specialized High School offer receive an offer letter from a regular school, and they are asked to
  choose. After they respond, students who accept are removed from the pool, school capacities
  are adjusted, and the algorithm is re-run with the remaining students. After the Main round,
  all students receive a letter notifying them of their assignment or whether they are unassigned
  after the Main round.
      Students unassigned after the Main round receive a list of programs with vacancies and
  are asked to rank up to twelve of these programs. In 2003-04, the admissions criteria at the
  remaining school seats were ignored in this Supplementary round. Students are ordered by
  their random number, and DA is run with this ordering in place at each school. Students who
  remain unassigned in the Supplementary round are assigned administratively. These students
  and any appealing students are processed on a case-by-case basis in the Administrative round.


  3        Data and Sample Restrictions
  3.1      Students
  For this study, the NYC DOE provided us with several data sets: student choices and as-
  signments, student demographics, and October student enrollment. Each student has a unique
  identification number used across all data sets. For 2002-03, the assignment files record students’
  Main round rank-order list, their offers and rejections for each round, whether they participate
  in the Supplementary round, and their final assignment at the conclusion of the assignment
  process as of July 2003. For 2003-04, the assignment files contain students’ choice schools in
  order of preference, priority information for each school, assignments at the end of each round,
  and final assignment as of early August 2004. The student demographic files for both years
  contain information on home address, gender, race, limited English proficiency status, special
  education status, and performance on 7th grade citywide tests. We use addresses to compute
  the road distance between each student and his/her school and to place each student in a census
  block group.10 We also have access to similar files for 2004-05. Further details are in the Data
  Appendix.
      Our analysis sample makes two restrictions. First, since we do not have demographic infor-
  mation for private school applicants, we restrict the analysis to students in NYC’s public middle
  schools in the year prior to application. Second, we focus on students who are not assigned to
      10
      Though we use road distance, we also computed subway distance using the Metropolitan Transportation
  Authority GIS files; the overall correlation between driving distance and subway commuting distance for all
  student-program pairs is 0.96.



                                                      7
Specialized High Schools because that part of the assignment process did not change in the new
mechanism. Given these restrictions, we have two main analysis files: the mechanism comparison
sample and the demand estimation sample.
    The mechanism comparison sample is used to compare the assignment across the two mech-
anisms. This sample is the largest set of students assigned through the high school assignment
mechanism to a school that exists when the high school directory is printed. A key property of
the mechanism comparison sample is that every student has an assignment. Columns 1 and 2 of
Table 1 summarize student characteristics in the mechanism comparison samples across years.
3,500 fewer students are involved in the mechanism comparison sample in the coordinated mech-
anism, a difference mainly due to the students assigned either to schools created after the high
school directory was printed or to closed schools (as shown in Appendix Table C2).
    New York City is the nation’s largest school district, and like many urban districts, the
majority of students are low-income and non-white. Nearly three-quarters of students are black
or Hispanic, and about 10% of students are Asian. Brooklyn has the largest number of applicants,
followed by Queens and the Bronx, both of which account for roughly one quarter of students.
Manhattan and Staten Island account for a considerably smaller shares of students at about
13% and 7%, respectively. Consistent with the sudden announcement of the new mechanism,
applicant characteristics are similar across years.
    The demand sample, drawn from the assignment files, contains participants in the Main round
in the new mechanism. These students’ school choices represent the overwhelming majority of
students. From the set of Main round participants, we exclude a small fraction of students who
are classified as the top 2 percent because these students are guaranteed a school only if they
rank it first, and this may distort their incentives to rank schools truthfully. Additional details
on the sample restrictions are in the Data Appendix.

3.2   Schools
School data were taken from New York State report card files provided by NYC DOE. Program
information comes from the official NYC High School Directory made available to students before
they submit an application. Table 2 summarizes school and program characteristics across years.
The number of schools increases from 215 to 235, and the number of students enrolled in 9th
grade per school decreases by about 14 students. This decrease is driven by the replacement of
some large schools with smaller schools that took place concurrently in 2003-04, as described
above. Despite these shifts, there is little change in either average school achievement level or
school demographic composition as measured by the report card data. We are not aware of other
significant changes in school inputs, recruitment campaigns, or materials, including the format
of the high school directory.11
    Students can choose from among roughly 600 programs throughout the city. Programs vary
substantially in focus, post-graduate orientation, and educational philosophy. For instance, the
Heritage School in Manhattan is an Educational Option program where the arts play a substan-
tial role in the curriculum, while Townsend Harris High School in Queens is a Screened program
 11
    Appendix Figure A3 shows that the market share of most programs, except for about 20 rarely-ranked
programs in the uncoordinated mechanism, is similar across years.


                                                  8
with a rigorous humanities department, making it among the most competitive in the city. Using
information from high school directories, we identify each program’s type, language orientation,
and specialty. With the new mechanism, there are more Unscreened programs and fewer Edu-
cational Option programs, a change driven by converting many Educational Option programs
to Unscreened programs. This change in labeling was due to overlapping admissions criteria
and similarity of educational programming. We code language-focused programs as Spanish,
Asian, or Other, and we categorize program specialties as Arts, Humanities, Math and Science,
Vocational, or Other. Not all programs have specialties, though about 70% fall into one of
these categories. (Details on our classification scheme are in the Data Appendix). The menu of
language program offerings and program specialties changes little across years.


4        Congestion and Changes in Assignments
The similarity of student and school attributes in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that there were few
major systematic changes in either participant attributes or school supply across years. Moreover,
there is no large-scale change in student location across years, as shown in Figure 1, which maps
both student and school locations. Taking these facts into consideration, we attribute differences
in allocations between 2002-03 and 2003-04 primarily to the assignment mechanism rather than
changes in student participation or range of school options.

4.1      Congestion in the Main Round
Table 3 reports the number of students assigned across rounds of the uncoordinated and coor-
dinated mechanisms. The most noteworthy pattern is that, in the uncoordinated mechanism,
more students obtain their final assignments in the Administrative round than in the first round.
Panel A of the Table shows that 37% of students are assigned administratively, compared to 34%
in the first round. Panel B shows that only 33,894 students obtained one or more first-round
offers. This is consistent with application patterns that are concentrated at relatively few schools
and conservative yield management practices. As a consequence, only 23,867 students received
their final assignment in the first round; 10,027 students with a first round offer were finalized
with offers made in subsequent rounds. These students were processed as schools revised offers
based on first-round rejections and made new offers in the second and third rounds. However,
the relatively small number of students placed in the second and third round indicates that three
rounds were insufficient to process all students. That only half of the students were placed in
the Main round of the old mechanism contrasts sharply with the new mechanism, wherein 82%
of students were placed in the Main round.12
    These observations about the old mechanism are characteristic of congestion, as described in
Roth and Xing (1997)’s study of the labor market for entry-level clinical psychologists. In that
market, training position offers were made in an uncoordinated fashion during a 7-hour window,
and Roth and Xing (1997) argue that uncoordinated processing and a small market-clearing
window led to mismatch. In NYC, holding few rounds and serially processing batches of offers,
    12
   The marked shift in the number assigned in the Main round also appears in the second year of the coordinated
mechanism, where even more students, 87.3%, were placed in the Main round (shown in Appendix Table B1).


                                                      9
so that programs waited for previous offers to be rejected before making new offers, combined to
have similar effects. In addition to insufficient offer processing, the small number of applications
allowed in the old mechanism also led to situations where students who applied to oversubscribed
schools fell through the cracks. Since rank-order lists were short, the mechanism considered a
smaller number of alternate choices for these students than a mechanism that allowed students
to rank more choices. Had more applications been allowed, schools where these students were
ultimately placed may have been assigned in the Main round.
    The new mechanism relieved congestion by increasing both the number of choices students
can rank and the number of rounds of offer processing. To investigate the role of these two
forces – short rank order lists and limited offer processing – in producing administrative assign-
ments, we used data from the coordinated mechanism to simulate two variations: 1) the Main
round, with only the top five choices considered and no restriction in the number of rounds,
and 2) the Main round with twelve choices, but only three sets of proposals from the deferred
acceptance algorithm. The first simulation is intended to illustrate the role of five choices, while
the second illustrates the role of few offer-processing rounds. Since we do not model student
behavioral responses, we only intend this exercise to shed light on mechanical features gener-
ating administrative assignments in the uncoordinated mechanism. The five-choice constraint
with an unlimited number of rounds leaves about one quarter of applicants unassigned. The un-
constrained mechanism with three proposal rounds leaves roughly half of applicants unassigned.
Relative to the uncoordinated mechanism, then, the new coordinated mechanism appears to
reduce administrative assignments by computerizing offer processing and avoiding the need for
active student and school participation once preferences are submitted. Short rank-order lists
also generate administrative assignments, but perhaps less so than fewer offer processing rounds.

4.2    Distance, Exit, and Matriculation
Across mechanisms, there are stark differences in distance to assigned school and offer take-
up. Figure 2 reports the distribution of distance between students’ residences and their assigned
schools in both mechanisms. New York City spans a large geographic range, with nearly 45 miles
separating the southern tip of Staten Island from the northernmost areas of the Bronx, and 25
miles separating the western edge of Manhattan near Washington Heights from Far Rockaway
at the easternmost tip of Brooklyn.13 The closest school for a typical student is 0.82 miles from
home, and students in the uncoordinated mechanism on average traveled 3.36 miles to their
assigned school. In the coordinated mechanism, the average distance is 4.05 miles. Panels A
and C of Table 3 show that average distances were lower in the uncoordinated system because a
large number of students were administratively assigned to schools close to their homes.
    The increased distance between home and assigned school parallels Niederle and Roth (2003)’s
study of the gastroenterology labor market, wherein physician mobility increased following a
centralized match. While these observations may suggest that coordinated mechanisms expand
market scope, in the school choice context daily travel to school imposes a cost on students. It
  13
    Our analysis focuses on road distance, which correlates highly with subway distance. Appendix B presents a
detailed comparison of both measures.



                                                     10
is therefore essential to measure how students value proximity relative to other aspects of their
school choices to assess whether improved assignments compensate for the distance increase.
     Student enrollment patterns documented in Table 3 indicate that student assignments in
the uncoordinated mechanism, particularly those made in the Administrative round, are less
desirable than assignments made in the coordinated mechanism. After receiving an assignment,
a student may opt for a private school, leave New York, or even drop out. Families may switch
schools after their final assignments are announced, but before the school year starts.14 In the
uncoordinated mechanism, principals had greater discretion to enroll students, and the DOE
officials quoted above alleged that students with sophisticated parents might just show up at
a school in the fall and ask for a seat at the school. The exit rate from city public schools is
higher in the uncoordinated mechanism (8.5% compared to 6.4%), and the fraction of students
who enroll at a school other than their assignment is higher (18.6% compared to 11.4%).
     In the uncoordinated mechanism, students assigned in earlier rounds appear more satisfied
with their assignments than those assigned in later rounds. The fraction of students who exit
NYC public schools is 13.3% among administrative placements, compared to 5.2% among those
assigned in the first round. More than a quarter of students assigned in the Administrative round
who are still in NYC public schools matriculate at schools other than those to which they were
assigned. By comparison, the take-up of offered assignments is much higher for those assigned in
the first three rounds. Based on exit and matriculation, students with multiple offers in the first
round are more satisfied with their assignment than students with zero or one offers. Students
with multiple offers also travel further to their final assignments or enrolled schools. In contrast,
the majority of students with no offers are assigned through the Administrative round, which
likely accounts for their higher rates of exit and enrollment at a school other than their assign-
ment. Even though the coordinated mechanism has substantially fewer administratively assigned
students, the exit rates are highest and the matriculation rates are lowest for the participants in
that round.15

4.3    Mismatch in Administrative Round
To further evaluate student assignments in the Administrative round, we compare the attributes
of schools that students wanted (i.e. ranked) to the attributes of schools to which they were
assigned. Students processed in earlier rounds are assigned to schools with attributes more
similar to the schools they ranked than students processed in later rounds. Table 4 shows that,
in both mechanisms, students assigned in the Main round generally ranked schools with similar
or better attributes, with the exception of distance, than the schools they received. For instance,
ranked schools have higher Math and English performance, more students attending four-year
colleges, and higher attendance rates. Ranked and assigned schools are similar in terms of
teacher experience, poverty (as measured by the percent of students receiving subsidized lunch),
and racial make-up.
  14
    Narita (2016) theoretically and empirically studies mechanisms to handle post-match reassignments.
  15
    In the second year of the mechanism, the average distance to the assigned school is 4.07 miles and the average
exit rate is 6.6% (shown in Table B1). The take-up rate is higher than the first year and the fraction in the
Administrative round decreases to 5.4%.



                                                       11
    For students placed in the Supplementary round, assigned schools are also less desirable than
ranked schools, and many of the gaps are wider than in the Main round. In the uncoordinated
mechanism, for instance, the Math performance gap between ranked and assigned schools is 0.7
percentage points for those assigned in the Main round and 2.5 points in the Supplementary
round. The gap between ranked and assigned alternatives for 9th grade size is quite pronounced
under both mechanisms. For example, in the uncoordinated mechanism, ranked schools have
about 200 fewer 9th graders than the schools where students are assigned. Since students who
participate in the Supplementary round when they did not obtain a Main round assignment, it is
not surprising that the difference between what students wanted and what they received widens.
    The most striking pattern in Table 4, however, is for students who are administratively
assigned. As noted above, the uncoordinated mechanism produces three times more students
assigned in this round in the uncoordinated mechanism. Panel C shows that, in the uncoordinated
mechanism, administratively-assigned students ranked schools, on average, 5.1 miles away from
home and were assigned to schools only 1.6 miles away in the uncoordinated mechanism, a much
larger gap than in either the Main or Supplementary round. For other school characteristics,
the difference between what students wanted and what they were assigned widens relative to the
Supplementary round, suggesting that mismatch is greatest for students in the Administrative
round. For instance, the 2.5 point spread in Math achievement in the Supplementary round is
4.4 points in the Administrative round, and the fraction of students going on to four-year colleges
similarly widens. The difference in 9th grade size is also considerable for the administratively
assigned: ranked schools have more than 400 fewer students than assigned schools.
    In the coordinated mechanism, the difference between ranked and assigned schools also widen
for later rounds. Rank and assigned schools differences in Math and English achievement and
four-year college going are narrower for the Administrative round of the coordinated mechanism
than for the uncoordinated one. On the other hand, assigned schools are not as close to home
in the coordinated mechanism. Therefore, it is not possible to assert which mechanism’s Ad-
ministrative round generates better matches. What is clear, however, is that being processed
in the Administrative round is undesirable for students in both mechanisms. As a result, it is
reasonable to expect that significant changes in student welfare produced by the coordinated
mechanism will be driven by reducing the number of administratively assigned students.

4.4   Offer Processing by Student Characteristics
Table 5 reports student attributes across rounds compared to the overall applicant population.
Students from Manhattan, those with high math baseline scores, and those who have applied
to exam schools (as indicated by taking the SHSAT) tend to obtain offers earlier in the unco-
ordinated mechanism. These applicants are also overrepresented among students who receive
multiple first round offers (not shown). Students from Staten Island, students who are white,
and those from high income neighborhoods tend to systematically obtain offers later in the pro-
cess. Compared to the overall population, these groups are overrepresented in the Administrative
round.
    The coordinated mechanism distributes school access more evenly across rounds. That is,
the differences in the types of students assigned in each round are not as pronounced under

                                                12
the coordinated mechanism. This can be seen by comparing students across boroughs or racial
groups in column 4 of Table 5. The fraction of students assigned in the Main round is similar
across all five boroughs, as is the racial composition of students. Higher baseline applicants are
more likely to be assigned in the Main round in the new mechanism than low baseline applicants,
but are not as overrepresented as in the old mechanism.
    The coordinated mechanism assigned fewer students to schools that were undersubscribed in
the uncoordinated mechanism. Figure 3 reports the change in the number of students assigned
to a school compared to a measure of how oversubscribed the school was in the uncoordinated
mechanism. For example, in 2002-03, 1,455 students were assigned to the Louis Brandeis High
School, a struggling Manhattan high school with four-year graduation rates were among the
lowest in the city, but in 2003-04 only 911 students were assigned there.16 The upward sloping
line indicates that if a school is more oversubscribed in the old mechanism, the new mechanism
tends to assign more students to that school. This phenomenon suggests that the coordinated
mechanism was able to use the submitted preferences to more effectively place children into their
desired schools. The extent to which this change represents an improvement in student welfare
depends on the heterogeneity of student preferences, an issue we turn to next.


5        Estimating Student Preferences
5.1      Student Choices
Families in NYC obtain information about high school programs from many sources including
guidance counselors, teachers, and other families. Each year the DOE publishes the NYC High
School Directory, a booklet with information about school size, course offerings, Regents and
graduation performance, the school’s address, the closest bus and subway, and a description of
each program, including its extracurricular activities and sports teams. Families can also learn
about schools at high school fairs and open houses and from local newspapers, online guides,
and books (e.g., Hemphill (2007)).
    While a family may rank a school for reasons that we do not observe, the observable dimen-
sions of their choices display consistent regularities: students prefer closer and higher quality
schools as measured by student achievement levels, shown in Table 6.17 The first row of the
table shows that only 20% of applicants rank 12 school choices; the majority rank nine or fewer
choices, and nearly 90% rank at least three choices. A student’s top choice is on average 4.43
miles away from home. Since the closest school is on average 0.82 miles away, the school closest
to home is not most students’ first choice. The typical student’s first choice is 0.38 miles closer
to home than her second choice, and her second choice is 0.24 miles closer than her third choice.
Distance increases monotonically until the 9th choice, which is 5.65 miles away.
    16
     The NYC DOE announced the closure of this school in 2009. The largest size reduction is the Evander
Childs High School in the Bronx, which went from 1,739 to 453 9th graders. This high school had a longstanding
reputation for violence and disorder, and it was eventually closed in 2008.
  17
     Table B3 provides additional information on school assignments. 31.9% of students receive their top choice,
15.0% receive their second choice, and 2.4% receive a choice ranked 10th, 11th, or 12th. 17.5% of students are
asked to participate in the Supplementary round because they are unassigned in the Main round.



                                                      13
    Lower-ranked schools are also less desirable on other measures of school quality. Math per-
formance decreases going down rank-order lists. (English performance exhibits the same trends
as Math and is therefore not reported.) Other measures of performance (also not reported) such
as the percent of students attending a four-year college and the fraction of teachers classified as
inexperienced change monotonically going down rank-order lists. Schools enrolling lower shares
of poor students or a higher proportions of white students tend to be ranked higher.
    Using requests for individual teachers, Jacob and Lefgren (2007) find that parents in low-
income and minority schools value a teacher’s ability to raise student achievement more than
parents in high income and non-minority schools. In contrast, Hastings, Kane, and Staiger
(2009) report that higher-SES families are more likely than lower-SES parents to choose higher-
performing schools than lower-SES ones based on stated reports under Charlotte’s school choice
plan. This difference across groups motivates our investigation of how baseline ability and neigh-
borhood income influence ranking behavior. High-achieving students tend to rank schools with
higher Math achievement relative to low achievers, though both groups place less emphasis on
achievement as they move further down their preference list. Similarly, students from low-income
neighborhoods tend to put less weight on Math achievement than do students from high-income
neighborhoods, but both groups prefer higher achieving schools higher. These differences suggest
the importance of allowing for preferred school achievement levels to differ by baseline achieve-
ment and income groups in the demand model.
    Proxies for the quality of schools ranked in the uncoordinated mechanism, also shown in
Table 6, decrease with school achievement and income. For distance, however, the gradient is
lower relative to the coordinated mechanism. For instance, in the uncoordinated mechanism, the
distance to a students’ first choice school is 4.80 miles, while it is 4.79 miles for their fifth choice.
In the coordinated mechanism, the fifth choice is about one mile further than the first choice.
Such a pattern is consistent with students being more expressive with their choices in the new
mechanism, which would be expected given that more choices can be ranked.
    All else being equal, based on their submitted preferences, students prefer attending a school
closer to home. The fact that students in the new mechanism are assigned to schools further from
home might suggest that school assignments are worse on average than in the old mechanism. On
the other hand, students may prefer schools outside their neighborhood because these schools are
a better fit. To assess the new mechanism, we must therefore weigh the greater travel distance
in the new mechanism against changes in other aspects of the assigned school. Our next task
is to quantify how students evaluate distance relative to school attributes, including average
achievement levels, demographic composition, and size, based on their submitted preferences in
the coordinated mechanism.

5.2    Model and Estimation
Comparing the characteristics of schools ranked higher, lower, or not at all reveals students’
tastes over these characteristics. To quantify these trade-offs, we estimate a random utility
model, which represents the ordinal rankings in cardinal terms. Let i ∈ I index students and




                                                   14
j ∈ J index programs. The indirect utility of student i from program j is:

                                       uij = v(xj , zi , ξj , γi , εij ) − dij ,                               (1)

where xj is a vector of program j’s observed characteristics, zi is a vector of observed student
characteristics, ξj is a program-specific unobserved vertical characteristic, γi captures idiosyn-
cratic tastes for program characteristics, εij captures idiosyncratic tastes for programs, and dij
is distance between student i’s address and program j, measured in miles. Our main assumption
is
                                     (γi , εij ) ⊥
                                                 ⊥ dij zi , xj , ξj
which states that, conditional on observed student and school characteristics, and the vertical
school characteristics ξj , unobserved tastes for programs are independent of distance. This
assumption may be violated if students systematically reside near schools they prefer, given our
controls for student characteristics. In that case, we’re likely to underestimate the value of being
assigned to a nearby school. On the other hand, the assumption is plausible if the set of observed
characteristics is sufficiently rich. The specification also treats distance as the numeraire. All
else being equal, if students dislike traveling to school, then the coefficient of −1 on distance
is a scale normalization, which allows us to measure utility in distance units, expressed as a
“willingness to travel.” We also normalize v(·) = 0 if all of its arguments are zero.18
    To assist estimation in finite samples while allowing for a computationally tractable proce-
dure, we parametrize uij as follows:
                                           X                X
                               uij = δj +      αl zil xlj +   γik xkj − dij + εij ,              (2)
                                                   l                k
                          with    δj    = xj β + ξj .

We further assume that

                         γi ∼ N (0, Σγ ),        ξj ∼ N (0, σξ2 ),         εij ∼ N (0, σε2 ).

The vector of random coefficients, γi , capture idiosyncratic tastes for program characteristics. It
is worth noting that for our welfare calculations, we do not interpret the coefficients on school
characteristics as measuring the causal effect of different school characteristics. Throughout the
welfare comparisons, we examine the effects of different assignments on utility holding school
attributes fixed. This parametrization is an ordered choice version of the model in Rossi, McCul-
loch, and Allenby (1996), who show that these distributional assumptions allow for estimation
via Gibbs’ sampling.19 To this end, we specify conjugate priors for θ = (α, β, Σγ , σξ2 , σε2 ). For
additional details on the procedure and the specification of priors, see the Computational Ap-
pendix.
  18
      These scale and location normalizations are without loss of generality and equivalent to other normalizations
since the additively separable form of utilities is well defined only up to positive affine transformations.
   19
      We use Gibbs’ sampling rather than simulated maximum likelihood because of biases in datasets with a
large number of choices (Train 2009). The posterior means we report have the same asymptotic distribution as
maximum likelihood estimates (see chapter 10.1 in van der Vaart (2000)).



                                                         15
    Intuitively, the degree to which otherwise identical students’ propensity to rank a school
changes with distance reveals how important distance is relative to other factors. Since our
model is non-parametrically identified, these assumptions are made for tractability.20
    Our specification allows for students to have idiosyncratic tastes for schools that are not
captured by the student characteristics in our dataset. To exploit the richness of rank-ordered
data, we do not restrict the correlation across the dimensions of γi . Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes
(2004) show that data on top and second choices improves on estimates that only use first choice
by revealing common characteristics between subsequent rankings for a given student. Rank-
ordered data also allow us to relax the common assumption that random coefficients on choice
characteristics are independently distributed.
    We do not explicitly model an outside option because our primary interest is studying the
allocation within inside options rather than substitution outside of the NYC public school sys-
tem. Moreover, the commonly-used model of the outside option, which infers that a school is
unacceptable if not ranked, would require us to assume that students who have not ranked all 12
choices prefer their outside option to a NYC high school.21 To normalize the location of utilities,
we set the mean of uij to zero if all observables are zero.
    The demand sample for 2003-04 contains the rankings of 69,907 participants across 497 pro-
grams in 235 schools, for a total of 542,666 school choices. Our specifications follow other school
demand models and include average school test scores and racial attributes as characteristics
(see, e.g., Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2009)). We focus on four main school characteristics:
high Math achievement, percentage of students receiving subsidized lunch, percent white, and
9th grade size.
    We start by assuming that rankings reflect true preferences. For rank-order list ri = (ri1 , ..., riKi ),
let rik be the k th choice and Ki is the number of choices i ranks. In terms of indirect utilities,
we assume that

                                  uirik > uirik+1 for all k < Ki ,
                                uiriKi > uij        for all j 6= rik and k ≤ Ki .

This benchmark is motivated by the mechanism’s straightforward incentive properties and by
the advice the NYC DOE provided in the 2003-04 High School Directory and through their
information and outreach campaign. For instance, the DOE guide advises participants to “rank
your twelve selections in order of your true preferences” with the knowledge that “schools will no
longer know your rankings.” 22
  20
      In particular, under our assumption that there is one characteristic (distance) that is additively separable and
independent of the unobservable (γi ,ij ), we can use variation in distance to trace out the distribution of utility.
Identification for binary and multinomial models is studied by Ichimura and Thompson (1998), Lewbel (2000),
and Briesch, Chintagunta, and Matzkin (2002). Ordered choice data contains strictly more information than in
these settings. Agarwal and Somaini (2014) study identification in the school choice context with a potentially
manipulable mechanism. Non-parametric identification results in these settings apply to our case.
   21
      Table B3 shows that only about 14,000 students submit all 12 ranks and that students with incomplete
lists are also more likely to remain unassigned. Table B4 shows that the majority of these students enter the
supplementary round and are likely to accept an assignment in this round. This suggests that the choice of the
number of schools to rank is not directly related to preferences.
   22
      As mentioned above, this formulation ignores potential information about the relative value of schools less


                                                         16
    This model assumes that all programs are available to applicants, though in practice, 193
programs have an eligibility restriction whereby applicants are only eligible for a program if they
reside in particular boroughs. We therefore also consider a model in which each applicant’s
choice set only comprises the programs for which she is eligible. About 5% of students rank a
program for which they are ineligible and this corresponds to about 1% of all submitted choices.
In those cases, we include the ineligible program as part of the choice set.23 Section 9 reports on
variations on these assumptions.

5.3    Preference Estimates
We report select estimates for four different specifications in Table 7 and a larger set of specifi-
cations in Table A3.24 The first specification includes school characteristics (high Math achieve-
ment, percent subsidized lunch, percent white, and 9th grade size), but does not incorporate
interactions between school and student characteristics (i.e. αl = 0 for all l). Further, we do
not include additional achievement characteristics examined in Table 4, such as high English
achievement and percentage of students later attending a four-year college, because these both
closely relate to high Math achievement.
     The next three specifications include student-school interactions. Each specification includes
dummies for Spanish, Asian and Other Language Programs, which are interacted with students’
English proficiency status and whether they are Hispanic or Asian. The model in column 2
assumes that there are no random coefficients (γi = 0), while the model in column 3 places
no restriction on γi . Column 4 reports estimates wherein the choice set for each applicant is
restricted to the set of schools for which she is eligible.
     There are three main patterns in Table 7. First, student-school interactions are often esti-
mated precisely; for instance, high baseline math students tend to prefer higher-achieving schools
and minority students tend not to prefer schools with high white percentages. Second, the esti-
mates are similar between the model with no restriction on the choice set and the model where
the choice set only contains programs for which the student is eligible. Third, many of the ran-
dom coefficients are significant, thereby suggesting the importance of a flexible specification in
accounting for the underlying heterogeneity in student preferences. We further report on model
fit in Section 9. We use the estimates in column 3 for our primary calculations, because these
fully exploit all choice data in the most flexible model, and discuss other specifications in Section
9.
preferable than the Ki -th most preferred school. It is consistent with a model in which the student ranks all
schools that are preferable to an outside option, but does not require this to be the case.
  23
     This specification is similar in spirit to methods in Fack, Grenet, and He (2015) who advocate for restricting
the student choice set based on the set of schools that may be achievable for that student. Their setting has the
additional advantage that admission criteria for all schools are known, whereas we do not have direct information
on admissions criteria used for all screened schools.
  24
     Due to computational constraints, models presented in Table A3 to assess robustness of our results are
estimated from a 10% random sample of the data with containing about 7,000 students.




                                                        17
6        Comparing Alternative Mechanisms
6.1      Measuring Welfare
Our estimates allow us to compute measures of welfare for an assignment using the distribution
of student preferences. Let µ : I → J ∪ I denote a matching, such that each student is assigned
either to only one program or is unassigned (here, assigned to herself), and no program’s matches
exceed its capacity. µ(i) denotes student i’s assignment. The average student welfare under µ is
                                                        1 X
                                            W (µ) =         uiµ(i) ,
                                                       |I|
                                                             i∈I

where uij is the (indirect) utility student i associated with assignment to program j. Given the
normalization in equation (1), welfare is measured in the same distance (in miles).
    Since individual student utility not directly observed, we compute the expectation of the
utility for each student, E[uiµ(i) |ri , zi , xj , di ; θ], given the rank-order list ri , the observed charac-
teristics (zi , xj , di ), and the estimated distribution of preferences parameterized by θ. In what
follows, we drop the conditioning on (zi , xj , di ) and θ to simplify the notation. With this con-
vention, we estimate the average student welfare W̄ (µ) as the expectation of the expression in
the last display:
                                                       1 X
                                        W̄ (µ) =               E[uiµ(i) |ri ].
                                                      |I|
                                                        i∈I

    Evaluating the expectation of each student’s utility requires an assumption about the rela-
tionship between utilities and observed rank-order lists. If preferences are truthfully submitted to
coordinated mechanism, the k th ranked program yields the k th highest utility. This assumption
restricts values of unobserved tastes γi and εij . The expectation
               h                                                              i
              E uij | uir > . . . > uir
                           i1           ik−1
                                             > u ij > uirik+1 > . . . > uiriKi   if program j ranked k th ,
E[uij |ri ] =     h                                             i
              E uij | uir > . . . > uir > . . . > uir > uij                     if program j not ranked,
                           i1           ik            iKi

                                                                                                   (3)
where Ki is the number of programs listed on rank-order list ri . The conditioning events in
equation (3) translate observed rank-order lists ri into restrictions on unobserved tastes εij .
Intuitively, if program j is ranked among the top 12, it must yield higher utility than all unranked
programs. Since there are many unranked programs, this means that idiosyncratic tastes for
ranked programs are likely to be high. We compute the expression in equation (3) by fixing
the estimated parameters at their posterior means, and using a Gibbs sampler to draw from the
distribution of utilities given the rank order list.25 For a student who did not submit a rank-
order list in the Main round, we compute the mean utility conditional only on (zi , xj , di , θ). This
simulated value of the expectation of utility is fixed for welfare comparisons across assignments.
    The difference in average student welfare between two matchings, µ and µ0 , is given by:
    25
    For each applicant, we use 20,000 draws after burning the first 1,000 draws. This step is identical to the first
step in the Gibbs sampler in Appendix A.




                                                        18
                                                                               
                                    0     1 X
                      W̄ (µ) − W̄ (µ ) =       E[uiµ(i) |ri ] − E[uiµ0 (i) |ri ] .              (4)
                                         |I|
                                               i∈I

To report differences in average welfare for particular demographic groups, we simply restrict
the sample to the set of students with that demographic characteristic when computing equation
(4).

6.2     Evaluating Mechanism Design Features
For organizing the school admissions process, there are several possible coordinated mechanisms
that differ in how they deal with strategic considerations and school priorities. Before examining
these alternatives quantitatively, we summarize their theoretical properties.

6.2.1    Theoretical Mechanism Design Trade-offs

A typical school choice problem can be modeled as a matching problem between students and
schools. Each student ranks schools on her application. Each student is also granted an assign-
ment priority at every school for which she is eligible. Priorities may differ among schools and
may be determined, for instance, by whether the student resides in a particular borough or has
attended the school’s information session.
     An assignment of students to schools matches each student with at most one school for which
she is eligible, or leaves her unassigned, and capacity is not exceeded at any school. An assignment
mechanism produces an assignment using students’ reported preferences, school priorities, school
capacities, and a lottery to break ties amongst equal priority students to produce an assignment.
Once the ties are broken, every school ranks students in a linear order, first by priority at the
school and then by lottery numbers, which we will also refer as tie-breaker. A mechanism is
strategy-proof if submitting true preferences is a (weakly) dominant strategy for every student.
     To facilitate comparison of alternative allocations, we consider two benchmarks. Neighbor-
hood assignment is an allocation where students are assigned to the closest possible school
subject to capacity constraints. We compute this assignment by running deferred acceptance
(DA), described in Section 2.3, with applicants simply ranking schools in increasing order of dis-
tance and schools ranking students in increasing order of distance. This benchmark corresponds
to an extreme without school choice, where the market’s geographic scope is limited in a similar
fashion as the Administrative round of the uncoordinated mechanism.
     The second benchmark, utilitarian assignment, assigns students to obtain the greatest pos-
sible average student utility given school capacities. Given school capacities cj at each program
j, it solves the following program:
                             X                X          X
                        max      uij aij s.t.   aij ≤ 1,    aij ≤ cj , aij ∈ {0, 1},
                      a
                           ij              j              i

where a is |I|×|J| matrix with (i, j) element aij denoting that student i is assigned to program j.
Since no other allocation can yield higher average utility, the utilitarian assignment represents an
extreme, where a planner implements the best possible allocation with knowledge of the cardinal
distribution of student preferences.

                                                     19
          While the utilitarian assignment yields the maximal possible student welfare, it is difficult
     to achieve for two reasons. First, there are over 200 screened programs in New York City, so
     implementing this allocation would ignore school-side rankings in those programs. For instance,
     the utilitarian assignment could allow a lower-scoring student or a student in a lower priority
     group to be assigned to a school over a student with a higher score or higher priority who
     also wanted that school.26 More formally, a student-school pair blocks an assignment if the
     student strictly prefers the school to his assignment, is eligible for it, and the school either has
     an available seat or is assigned another student with lower priority. An assignment is stable
     if it is not blocked by any student-school pair, and if every student prefers her assignment to
     remaining unassigned. The utilitarian assignment may not be stable.
          Second, the utilitarian assignment uses cardinal information, which is not elicited by the co-
     ordinated mechanism.27 An alternative notion of efficiency would only consider students’ ordinal
     rankings of schools. An assignment Pareto dominates another, if in the latter assignment ev-
     ery student is assigned to a weakly-preferred choice but some students are assigned to a strictly
     preferred choice than in the former assignment. An assignment is Pareto efficient if it is not
     Pareto dominated by another assignment; in other words, if there is space to match some students
     with better schools in their choice lists without hurting other students.
          When priorities do not include any ties, the student-proposing DA used in the coordinated
     mechanism produces the unique student-optimal stable matching (Gale and Shapley 1962). That
     is, it produces a stable matching that is not Pareto dominated by any stable assignment. Fur-
     thermore, DA is strategy-proof (Dubins and Freedman 1981, Roth 1982). When priorities include
     ties, however, DA must include a tie-breaker. Tie-breaking opens the door to multiple student-
     optimal stable matchings and DA may fail to find a student-optimal stable matching (Erdil and
     Ergin 2008, Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth 2009).
          Based on this observation, Erdil and Ergin (2008) suggest an algorithm to find a student-
     optimal stable matching when priorities include ties. The algorithm uses a stable matching (such
     as the one produced by DA) as its input and looks for stable improvement cycles to improve
     on this matching. A stable improvement cycle is an ordered set of students such that (i) every
     student is assigned a school but prefers the assigned school of the next student, and the last
     student prefers the assigned school of the first student (so that we obtain a cycle); (ii) moreover,
     each student in the set has the highest priority at the assigned school of the next student among
     all students who prefer that school to their assignment.
          By modifying the original assignment by moving each student to the school to which the next
     student in this cycle is assigned, we can find an assignment that is both stable and Pareto dom-
     inates the original assignment. Consequently, they propose the following stable improvement
     cycles algorithm:

  Step 1) Start with the assignment produced by the deferred acceptance algorithm.

Step k>1) If a stable improvement cycle exists in the assignment produced by step k − 1, obtain a
       26
          Budish, Che, Kojima, and Milgrom (2013) and He, Miralles, Pycia, and Yan (2015) describe alternative
     utilitarian mechanisms that can take into account how programs rank students.
       27
          Bogomolnaia and Moulin (2001) argue that focusing on ordinal mechanisms can be “justified by the limited
     rationality of agents participating in the mechanism.”


                                                          20
             new stable assignment by moving each student to the assigned school of the next student
             in the cycle.

     Since each step improves upon the assignment of each student in the cycle without creating
     blocking pairs, the resulting new assignment is stable and Pareto dominates the previous one.
     The algorithm terminates when no more stable improvement cycle is found. While the stable
     improvement cycles assignment is a student-optimal stable matching, no mechanism is student
     optimal stable and strategy-proof when priorities include ties (Erdil and Ergin 2008).
         A student-optimal stable assignment may still fail to be Pareto efficient (Roth 1982), thus
     leaving room for improvement in student assignments at the expense of creating blocking pairs. In
     order to measure the efficiency loss from imposing stability, we find a Pareto efficient assignment
     that Pareto dominates the stable improvement cycles assignment by employing Gale’s top
     trading cycles algorithm as follows:28

   Step 1) Start with a student-optimal stable assignment. Initialize all students to be available.

Step k>1) Given an assignment, each available student points to her most preferred school, each
          school points to the highest ranked available student that is assigned to the school, and
          if no available student is assigned the school, it points to the the highest ranked available
          student.
             A top trading cycle is an ordered list of student-school pairs such that each student points
             to her paired school and the school points to the student of the next pair, where “next pair”
             for the last pair is the first pair in the ordered list.
             Since the number of students and schools is finite, a top trading cycle exists, and each
             student in the cycle is assigned the school he points to and is then removed.
             The algorithm terminates when no more top trading cycles are found.

     This mechanism is not strategy-proof, and in general, there is no strategy-proof mechanism
     that Pareto dominates the deferred acceptance or stable improvement cycles mechanism with or
     without ties in school priorities (Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth 2009, Kesten 2010, Kesten
     and Kurino 2012).

     6.2.2     Quantifying Mechanism Design Trade-offs

     The first column of Table 8 shows that the difference in distance-equivalent utility between the
     neighborhood and utilitarian assignment is 18.96 miles. In other words, the average student is
     willing to travel 18.96 miles further for the school she is assigned under the utilitarian assignment
     compared to the neighborhood assignment. To compute the coordinated mechanism, we run DA
     for 100 different lottery draws.29 The coordinated mechanism achieves about 80% of the 18.96
     mile range, since the difference in willingness to travel from the utilitarian assignment for the
       28
           This version of the top trading cycles algorithm starts with the DA outcome in contrast to the version defined
     by Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (2003).
        29
           For students unassigned after the Main round, we implement NYC’s Supplementary round by using preferences
     from the demand model and assigning students under a serial dictatorship according to the lottery number.


                                                             21
average student is 3.73 miles shown in column 2.30 The gains from a choice system are smaller
for whites and Asians compared to blacks and Hispanics. Gains are also considerably smaller for
residents of Staten Island, which has on average better-performing schools than other boroughs.
     As discussed above, DA does not produce a student-optimal stable matching when priorities
involve ties, but no strategy-proof mechanism does. Any potential gains from a Pareto-dominant
stable assignment can therefore be viewed as cost of providing straightforward incentives for
students. We quantify this cost by computing a student-optimal stable assignment that Pareto
dominates the DA assignment. To this end, we run the stable improvements cycle algorithm for
each of the 100 lottery draws. Across these draws, 2,348 students on average obtain a better
assignment in a student-optimal stable matching without harming other students. The difference
in distance-equivalent utility is 0.11 miles on average compared to the assignment produced by
the coordinated mechanism. Because the student-optimal matching Pareto dominates the DA
assignment for every lottery draw, this difference is non-negative for every realization of utilities
and is therefore statistically significant.
     A stable assignment constrains student welfare through its treatment of school priorities
and preferences. We next compute welfare from a Pareto-efficient assignment that dominates
the student-optimal stable assignment via Gale’s top trading cycles algorithm (Shapley and
Scarf 1974). Since this mechanism does not produce a stable outcome, it is possible that schools
benefit by offering students seats outside of the assignment process. The difference in aggregate
student welfare under this Pareto-efficient assignment and the student-optimal stable matching
may therefore be viewed as the cost of providing incentives for schools for participating in the
system.31
     For each of the 100 lottery draws, we calculate a Pareto-efficient matching that dominates
each student-optimal stable matching and report the average welfare relative to the utilitarian
assignment in column 4 of Table 8. A total of 10,882 students obtain a more preferred assignment
at a Pareto-efficient matching. An ordinal Pareto-efficient allocation still produces substantially
lower welfare than the utilitarian optimum. The utility difference for the average student is 3.11
miles. Relative to the coordinated mechanism, the cost of limiting the scope for strategizing by
schools (i.e. by imposing stability) is 0.62 miles.
     In summary, these comparisons show that the difference in student welfare between having
a choice system with the coordinated mechanism and neighborhood assignment is much larger
than possible welfare gains from fine-tuning the algorithm used in coordinated mechanism. That
is, the ability to choose schools generates substantial student welfare when preferences are het-
erogeneous. Further optimizing the matching algorithm in NYC is likely to produce relatively
little gain in the best case, even if it were possible to implement cardinal allocation schemes.
This conclusion does not imply that the matching scheme is unimportant especially in light of
the large number administratively assigned in the uncoordinated mechanism. To see where the
  30
      The standard error across parameter draws is 0.04. For a fixed parameter draw, the variance of this difference
is small because our sample has 69,907 students.
   31
      Balinski and Sönmez (1999) and Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (2003) provide an alternative equity rationale
for stability. Note that no stable mechanism eliminates strategic participation issues for schools (Sönmez 1997,
Ekmekci and Yenmez 2016), although this may not be an issue in markets with many participants (Kojima and
Pathak 2009).


                                                        22
uncoordinated mechanism lies in the 18.96 mile range, we next turn to analyzing its properties.


7        Comparing the Coordinated and Uncoordinated Mechanisms
7.1      Approach
We use the estimated preference parameters and observed data to quantify the difference in wel-
fare between assignments produced by the coordinated and uncoordinated mechanisms. Results
presented in the previous section used information embedded in a student’s submitted ranking
when evaluating the expectation of her utility for the observed assignment using equation (3).
This exercise relied on the fact that the coordinated mechanism has straightforward incentives.
Interpreting rankings submitted in the uncoordinated system, however, is significantly more chal-
lenging since the uncoordinated mechanism is not strategy-proof and, consequently, submitted
rankings depend on applicant beliefs and behavior.32 This difficulty is not unique to our setting
and is likely a challenge in evaluating other assignment systems where the incentive properties
of the mechanism are not well understood and agent behavior is difficult to model. We therefore
analyze the uncoordinated mechanism using two extreme models of agents’ behavior: truthful
reporting and optimal reporting. Neither extreme is a plausible characterization of behavior
under the uncoordinated mechanism, but the former is focal, and the latter represents a best-case
analysis for the uncoordinated system and therefore represents a lower bound on the difference
between the coordinated and uncoordinated mechanisms.
    Truthful reporting parallels the assumption made for the coordinated mechanism. Although
we do not presume all participants were truthful, it is a natural definition of unsophisticated
behavior.33 Sub-optimal reporting is consistent with the fact that about one third of applicants
who submitted preferences ended up unassigned, shown in Table 3. Had applicants anticipated
they would be unassigned in the Main round, they may have ranked schools that would admit
them.
    To formally describe our approach, let I be the set of students in the coordinated mechanism
and I 0 be the set in the uncoordinated mechanism. Suppose µ is the matching produced by
the coordinated mechanism and µ0 is the matching produced by the uncoordinated mechanism.
Given our estimate of θ from the coordinated mechanism, we estimate the difference in average
student welfare assuming truthful reporting in the uncoordinated mechanism as follows:

                                               1 X                  1 X
                    W̄ T (µ) − W̄ T (µ0 ) =        E[uiµ(i) |ri ] − 0     E[uiµ0 (i) |ri ],                   (5)
                                              |I|                  |I | 0
                                                  i∈I                     i∈I

where each expectation is computed as equation (3).34
    32
      Recent work by Kapor, Neilson, and Zimmerman (2016) surveys parents to elicit their beliefs about admissions
probabilities in the New Haven choice mechanism and incorporate them as part of an empirical strategy to simulate
alternative mechanisms. Budish and Cantillon (2012) utilize survey data from a manipulable mechanism to make
statements about changes in mechanism design. Unfortunately, similar survey data does not exist in our setting.
   33
      For experimental, empirical and theoreitical studies in a related context, the Boston mechanism, see, e.g.,
Chen and Sönmez (2006), Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2009), Pathak and Sönmez (2008).
   34
      Under the assumption of truthful reporting, it would be possible to estimate demand directly from rank-order
lists submitted in the uncoordinated mechanism. We did not do that because some applicants may not have


                                                        23
    Optimal reporting assumes that applicant rank-order lists are optimal given their (correct)
beliefs on admissions probabilities. While it is unlikely that all applicants are sophisticated
enough to respond optimally, considering this alternative generates a lower bound on the dif-
ference in average student welfare between the coordinated and uncoordinated mechanism. To
see why, let Oi be the set of schools that make an offer to student i in the Main round of the
uncoordinated mechanism. For each applicant i, let pji (ri ) be the probability that student i is
offered a seat at program j given report ri in the Main round. We assume that students have
private information about their preferences, and correct forecasts about their admissions chances
at various schools, which depend on the ranking strategies of all other students. We omit the
dependence on these ranking strategies for notational simplicity. pji (ri ) is zero if program j is
not ranked in ri . Since the uncoordinated mechanism is not a single-offer mechanism, Oi may
have more than one element. Each student picks her most preferred option in Oi . Therefore,
given Oi , her utility from the most preferable assignment in the main round is maxj∈Oi uij . If
an applicant does not receive any offers, she expects to participate in the Supplementary and
Administrative rounds. Let qi be a probability vector giving the odds student i is assigned to
program j, qij , in these rounds. The expected utility from submitting ri is, therefore,
                                                                       X j
                      EU (ri ; ui ) = E max uij ri ; ui + P (Oi = ∅|ri )  qi uij .              (6)
                                          j∈Oi
                                                                               j

The first term in the right-hand side of expression (6) reflects the fact that applicants obtain
utility from their most preferred school when they have more than one offer. The second term
represents the expected utility when an applicant is not offered any school in the Main round.
       (k)                                                               (k)
Let ui be the utility for the k th best program given ui , and let pi be the probability of an
offer at that program. Expression (6) can be written without the Oi notation as
                           J      k−1
                                                               " J               # J
                              (k)           (`)      (k)                 (k)
                           X      Y                             Y                 X j
           EU (ri ; ui ) =   ui       (1 − pi (ri ))pi (ri ) +     (1 − pi (ri ))    qi uij . (7)
                           k=1      `=1                              k=1                j=1

   Suppose a student knows the probability of receiving an offer from a program given her
rank-order list. The rank-order list r∗i is an optimal report if it maximizes her expected utility:

                                          r∗i ∈ arg max
                                                     0
                                                        EU (r0i ; ui ).                                    (8)
                                                     ri

The average student welfare of the uncoordinated assignment when each student submits an
optimal report is
                                       1 X
                                W̄ ∗ = 0      E[EU (r∗i ; ui )],
                                      |I |  0       i∈I

where the expectation is calculated by drawing from the estimated distribution of ui given
submitted truthful reports, and so we felt more comfortable using the preference estimates obtained from the
coordinated mechanism. Instead, we interpret the results in this section as providing a range for the plausible
answers.




                                                       24
(zi , xj , di , θ, ξ) and solving for r∗i .35 The definition of r∗i implies that

                               E[EU (r∗i ; ui )] ≥ E[EU (ri ; ui )]    for any ri .

The average student welfare when each applicant submits an optimal report, therefore, provides
a best-case scenario across possible application strategies in the uncoordinated mechanism.
    This exercise assumes that students in 2002-03 were submitting optimal reports, and these
reports generated p and q, the equilibrium reduced-form admissions probabilities, which we
estimate. The approach imposes consistency of the admissions probabilities in the data and
ranking strategies. It does not imply that the welfare associated with the old mechanism is the
best possible equilibrium given the 2002-03 mechanism. Students might have, for instance, all
done better by coordinating and ranking the school they obtain from the student-optimal stable
matching. However, such a strategy would not be optimal given the strategies and admissions
rules that generated the data. This approach of computing W̄ ∗ differs from our approach un-
der truthful reporting, which uses data on applicant rank-order lists and assignments from the
uncoordinated mechanism directly. Given the large number of choices and no analytic formula
for what rankings imply about unobserved tastes in the uncoordinated mechanism, we only use
data from the uncoordinated mechanism to measure (p, q).
    While optimal reporting provides a valuable lower bound, we need to tackle two issues in
solving the optimization problem given by equation (8). First, we must specify the information
students have about (p, q). Second, given (p, q) solving equation (8) requires iterating through
all possible rank orderings of length up to 5 to find the maximum for each applicant. When the
number of schools is large, this is computationally infeasible.36
    We estimate (p, q) using data from the uncoordinated mechanism, using a simple reduced
form for school admissions decisions. Given a dataset of applications ri and offers, we fit the
logit equation
                                                                                  !
                   j
                                            X
                                                l l l                   r    a
                  pi (ri ) = G τj + zi λ1 +    η zi xj + 1{ri1 = j}(1, nj , nj )λ2 ,          (9)
                                                   l

where G is the standard logistic function, τj is a program fixed-effect, zi is a vector of the same
student characteristics as in the demand models with comformable parameter λ1 , xj are program-
type dummies with parameter η, 1{ri1 = j} is an indicator if applicant i ranked program j first,
nrj and naj are the number of students that ranked and were admitted to program j, and λ2
is a three-dimensional column vector. The admission probability depends on the program (via
the program fixed effect), student characteristics, and their interaction (via the interaction of
program type and student characteristics). Since schools could observe the student’s rank-order
lists, it also distinguishes between the probability of an offer from a school based on whether it
was ranked first, and differentially so based on the number of students that ranked the program
  35
     θ is set to the posterior mean. For 423 programs that existed in 2003-04, ξ is set to the posterior mean. For
the remaining programs, ξ is drawn from N (0, σξ2 ). For each applicant, we use 1,000 draws of (γi , i ) from their
respective distribution given θ.
  36
     With 612 programs, this requires a search over 612*612*611*610*609 (since it is possible to submit an in-
complete list) or more than 85 trillion possible rank orderings.


                                                        25
and were admitted.37 We estimate qi as the empirical frequency of school assignments for
unassigned students in the same geographic area defined by student i’s zoned high school. For
the vast majority of students, the student’s zoned high school predicts a greater than a three-
quarters chance of assignment into a single program. The zone school is almost a perfect predictor
of the school to which a student will be administratively assigned.
    Given our estimate of (p, q), to solve the optimization problem, we approximate student
welfare from optimal reports by limiting the set of reports a student considers to include only a
subset of programs based on her preferences. In particular, we assume that agents consider the
set of programs which give the highest utility for a student given our estimate θ. Given a utility
vector ui for student i, let Ji` be the set of the `-highest utility schools for applicant i. Define
the optimal report, given that only the top ` choices are considered, as:

                                         r∗,`
                                          i ∈ arg 0 max
                                                     0
                                                        EU (r0i , ui )                                          (10)
                                                     ri ,rik ∈Ji`

and the corresponding student welfare as:
                                                  1 X h          ∗,`
                                                                            i
                                      W̄ ∗,` =            E EU (ri   , u i .
                                                                          )                                     (11)
                                                 |I 0 | 0
                                                     i∈I

    As ` increases, the Ji` approaches the set of all schools. Therefore, the expected utility of the
optimal report from this restricted set, r∗,`
                                           i , approaches the expected utility from the optimal
report when considering all programs, r∗i . As a result, our approximation of W̄ ∗ improves as `
increases and equals the best-case average student welfare when ` equals the size of the choice
set. In the analysis that follows, we consider three different values of ` = 10, 15, and 20. We
have not been able to compute equation (10) for larger values of `, but seeing how the estimate
changes for the three values of ` we can compute will be informative about what to expect from
larger values of `.

7.2    Estimates
Under the truthful reporting assumption for the uncoordinated mechanism, the improvement
in average student welfare between the uncoordinated and coordinated mechanism equals 10.62
miles with a standard error of 0.64 miles.38 Figure 4 shows the distribution of welfare from the
two mechanisms. The bimodal distribution of utility in the uncoordinated mechanism is driven
by students who are assigned in the Administrative round. In the coordinated mechanism, most
of the mass in the first mode shifts rightward, a phenomenon driven by the sharp reduction
in administrative placements. The shift in the distribution is broad-based: each student group
shown in Table 9 experiences a positive gain from the coordinated mechanism.
  37
     Specifications that allowed the probability to differ if a program is ranked second show little evidence of a
systematic second-choice effect.
  38
     To convert the willingness-to-travel metric into a dollar value, we translate 10.62 miles into roughly 30 minutes
per day (15 minutes each way to and from school) using the travel time estimates from ArcGIS. For 70,000 students
per year, 180 school days per year, and 4 years of high school, this corresponds to 25.2 million hours per cohort.
The US DOT estimates the cost of commuting is $12 an hour, resulting in a $300 million estimate per cohort.
The corresponding net-present value assuming a 5% discount rate is $6 billion.


                                                           26
    We’ve seen in Table 3 that the new mechanism assigned students 0.69 miles further from
home. The magnitude of the difference in average student welfare far exceeds this increased
travel distance. The lowest gains in Table 9 are for Manhattan residents, who experience no
increase in travel distance. However, the welfare gains are not solely driven by changes in
distance. For instance, Staten Island pupils only travel 0.34 miles further, but they experience
the largest improvement of any borough at 22.62 miles. This suggests mismatch was particularly
severe in Staten Island and is consistent with the substantially larger fraction of Staten Island
residents who are administratively assigned in the uncoordinated mechanism.39
    The welfare gains in the coordinated mechanism are larger for many disadvantaged groups, as
seen in Table 9, a pattern consistent with Hemphill and Nauer (2009)’s claim that the uncoordi-
nated mechanism advantaged high-achieving students and those with sophisticated parents. For
instance, welfare gains are larger for low baseline math students than for high baseline math stu-
dents. Gains are also higher for limited English proficient students than for SHSAT test-takers.
However, the difference for Staten Island, which has a larger white population and wealthier
neighborhoods, plays a significant role in the fact that whites and those from rich neighborhoods
experience larger welfare gains than blacks, Hispanics, and those from poorer neighborhoods.
    The estimates discussed above may be optimistic because they are not based on the best-
case scenario for the uncoordinated mechanism. Table 10 reports the extent to which truthful
reporting may be biased in favor of the uncoordinated mechanism. Specifically, the Table reports
                               1 X h           ∗,`
                                                          i    1 X 
                       ∆` =                                                   T
                                                                                      
                                       E EU (r i   , u i )  −          E EU (ri , ui )  ,
                              |I 0 | 0
                                                              |I 0 | 0
                                   i∈I                                    i∈I

for ` = 10, 15, and 20 where rTi is the truthful report, i.e. rik
                                                               T is the program with the k th highest

utility in ui , and a student only ranks a school if it is preferred to remaining unassigned in
the main round. The difference between our approximation of optimal reporting and truthful
reporting in the uncoordinated mechanism indicates the the range under which our behavioral as-
sumptions about rankings submitted in the uncoordinated mechanism may alter the conclusions
about the two mechanisms.40
    There is a large difference in behavior between estimates that assume truthful reporting and
our approximation of optimal reporting. Using our approximation computed from the top 10
choices, only about one tenth of applicants submit the same rank ordering as they would if they
  39
      The 22.62 mile difference in Staten Island is larger than the 13.82 mile difference between the neighborhood
and utilitarian assignment in Table 8, a result that suggests the uncoordinated assignment is actually worse than
neighborhood assignment in Staten Island. In the uncoordinated mechanism, there are 1,054 students who ranked
Staten Island Technical, a highly sought-after screened school. Only 16% are assigned there, and about 75% do not
obtain a Main round offer and are subsequently administratively assigned. In the coordinated mechanism, there
is also a large reduction in the number assigned to four main Staten Island schools: New Dorp, Tottenville, Port
Richmond, and Curtis. Staten Island students submitting rankings were unlikely to highly rank these schools.
   40
      If applicants submitted truthful reports in the uncoordinated mechanism and (p, q) represents the corre-
sponding admissions probabilities, then
                                                         1 X
                                         W̄ T (µ0 ) =            E[EU (rTi , ui )],
                                                        |I 0 | 0
                                                            i∈I

        0
where µ is assignment in the uncoordinated mechanism.


                                                             27
submitted preferences truthfully. As we improve our approximation by considering larger choice
sets, the fraction of applicants who have the same optimal report increases. Roughly half of
applicants submit the same rank list when optimizing over their top ten choices compared to
their top 15 choices. That is, r∗,10
                                i    = r∗,15
                                        i    for about half of the applicants. When we compare r∗,15 i
and r∗,20
      i    , nearly three quarters have the   same choices.  Consistent  with  this fact, the difference
between truthful and optimal reporting from a menu of top 20 choices is ∆20 = 2.08 miles, which
is only slightly larger than the difference with optimal reporting and a menu of top 15 choices
∆15 = 1.94. These findings suggest that we would not find a large difference if we were able to
approximate optimal reports from the full choice menu.
    The difference between assuming truthful reporting and our approximation of optimal report-
ing changes the 10.62 mile estimate in Table 9 by about 2.08 miles overall, or a 20% difference.
The conclusion that the coordinated mechanism generated significant welfare improvement over
the uncoordinated mechanism appears robust to a best-case analysis for the uncoordinated mech-
anism. The gains are largest for groups that experienced high rates of administrative assignment
in the uncoordinated mechanism. Nearly all of the patterns across demographic groups remain
the same when considering optimal reports among the top 20: Manhattan residents gained the
least, while Staten Island residents gained the most; low baseline students gained more than
SHSAT test takers. Since optimal reporting provides the best case for the uncoordinated mecha-
nism and there is evidence that our approximation may be close to optimal reporting, the average
improvement in student welfare is likely to be more than 8.6 miles.
    The large gains associated with assignment offers need not correspond to differences in ma-
triculation patterns observed earlier, especially if the uncoordinated mechanism’s aftermarket is
more flexible.41 Coordinating admissions occurred with greater central control over enrollment,
which may mean the more rigid aftermarket in the coordinated mechanism is actually worse for
students. Table 3 shows that students enrolled in schools further away on average than where
they were assigned in the uncoordinated mechanism, but the opposite pattern is true in the
coordinated mechanism. Column 2 of Table 9 also reports the utility associated with the schools
at which students enroll in October of the following school year. Compared to assignments, the
gains from the coordinated mechanism measured by enrollment are somewhat smaller, but they
are still large. For instance, the distance-equivalent utility for the average student is 9.25 miles
(with standard error 0.56 miles), which is 87% of the gain from the assignment. The change in
travel distance to enrolled school is also lower than the change in travel distance to assignment.
Though a smaller gain from enrollment suggests some of the old mechanism’s mismatch was un-
done in its aftermarket, these facts weigh against the argument that post-market reallocation has
undone a large fraction of misallocation. Relatedly, since the exit rate in the coordinated mech-
anism is lower than in the uncoordinated mechanism, more students preferred accepting their
coordinated offer over enrolling in a high school outside of the system. This finding suggests that
our welfare estimate may understate the overall effect for all public school 8th graders.
    Figure 5 summarizes the comparisons across the alternative mechanisms. The scale corre-
sponds to 18.96 miles from neighborhood to utilitarian assignment. Under our approximation to
  41
    Similar arguments are often made in the context of auction design in the presence of resale markets. See, e.g.,
Milgrom (2004).



                                                        28
the best-case for the uncoordinated mechanism, the difference between it and the coordinated
mechanism represents 45% of the total range. This is more than double the possible range as-
sociated with further tweaks to the matching algorithm, which is at most 20%. This finding
informs a broader debate in the market design literature about the importance of sophisticated
market clearing mechanisms. In the context of auctions, Klemperer (2002) argued that “most of
the extensive auction literature is of second-order importance for practical auction design,” and
that “good auction design is mostly good elementary economics.” Consistent with this point of
view, for school matching market design, coordinating admissions produces much larger gains
than algorithm refinements within the coordinated system.


8     Comparison for the Administratively Assigned
A key difference between mechanisms is the number of students administratively assigned. Table
4 shows that being administratively assigned is undesirable: students are assigned to schools that
differ substantially from the schools they ranked. These facts suggests that students who are
administratively assigned loom large in comparisons between mechanisms. In this section, we
investigate what our demand estimates imply for this group, and we also examine achievement
outcomes.
    To begin, we estimate the likelihood that a student is administratively assigned in the unco-
ordinated mechanism based on demographic characteristics and geographic location. Denote ai
as an indicator if a student is administratively assigned. We fit a probit model:

                                         ai = Φ(zi ρ + πt )                                   (12)

where zi is a vector of student characteristics (same as the demand model) with co-efficient vector
ρ, πt are census tract effects for tracts indexed by t, and Φ is the standard normal CDF. The
specification includes census tract dummies to account for neighborhoods that may or may not
have zoned high schools, which are a guaranteed fallback option for some students.
    Equation (13) allows us to construct an index, based on each student’s observed character-
istics, that quantifies a student’s risk of being administratively assigned. With this index, we
compare students from the uncoordinated mechanism with students in the coordinated mecha-
nism that are similar on this dimension.

8.1   Welfare
Figure 6 shows that students who were likely to be administratively assigned in the old mechanism
realized higher student welfare under the new mechanism. To produce this figure, we compute
the expected utility for student i under mechanism m, where m ∈ {coordinated, uncoordinated}
from equation (3). Then we relate the fitted values âi to this expected utility using a flexible
functional form:
                                       yim = gm (âi ) + im                                  (13)
where gm is estimated via local linear regressions with normal kernel, with twice Silverman’s
rule-of-thumb bandwidth.

                                                29
    For a grid of points a ∈ {a1 , ..., aK }, Figure 6 reports the difference in gm for the coordi-
nated and uncoordinated mechanism. This provides a non-parametric estimate of the difference
in utility for students with administratively assignment propensity a.42 Consistent with the
descriptive facts in Tables 3 and 4, there is a clear monotonic pattern between administrative
assignment propensity and welfare improvement, whether comparing utility differences including
either distance or net of distance.

8.2    Test Scores and Graduation
We next examine whether the allocative differences on which we’ve focused influence educational
outcomes. This exercise not only complements our focus on allocative effects, but it is also of
independent interest. As far as we know, there is no previous evidence on how changes in school
assignment mechanisms translate into differences in downstream educational outcomes. Com-
parisons between mechanisms are challenging because they are aggregate market-wide shocks,
making it difficult to disentangle changes in the mechanism from other contemporaneous changes.
Our approach considers groups of students who are more likely to benefit from the new mech-
anism based their likelihood of being assigned administratively in the old mechanism. Because
our findings suggest that effects are largest for those most likely to have been administratively
assigned, we anticipate that the downstream consequences are largest for that group.
    Figure 7 reports estimates of Math and English Regents and graduation based on the prob-
ability a student is administratively assigned, constructed in the same way as Figure 6. The
top panel shows the difference in Regents Math and English achievement is largest for students
who were most likely to be administratively assigned in the uncoordinated mechanism, and the
difference in achievement mirrors the difference in utility shown in Figure 6. The bottom panel
shows that these differences translate into differences in graduation rates, with a nearly 10%
graduation increase for students who were most likely to be formerly administratively assigned.


9     Model Fit and Alternate Behavioral Assumptions
9.1    Model fit
Since our goal is to make statements about welfare, it is important to examine how well our
demand estimates match the data. We first investigate within-sample fit to see what our estimates
imply for the aggregate patterns by rank in Table 6. Figure A2 reports on measures of fit using
the main specification in column 3 of Table 7. We plot the observed versus predicted pattern
of three school characteristics – high Math achievement, percent subsidized lunch, and percent
white – as we go down a student’s choice list. The panels include three pairs of lines for the entire
sample and for the low and high baseline math applicants. For these three characteristics, our
estimates capture the broad pattern of the choices, matching both the level and slope of these
characteristics. For instance, the average high math achievement is 10.0, and the range from the
top choice to the 12th choice is 16.7 to 10.4. Our estimates imply that for first choices, a school’s
  42
     These results are similar if the expected utility under the uncoordinated assignment mechanism is computed
under the assumption of optimal reporting rather than under truthful reporting.


                                                      30
fraction high math achievement is 18.4, which drops to 11.8 for the 12th choice. Our model also
captures high baseline math applicants’ greater sensitivity of high baseline math applicants to
school math performance is also captured by our model. Furthermore, first choices for percent
white are 19.1, while we predict them to be 19.8 on average, and the average percent white across
New York’s schools is only 10.8. Relative to the average attributes of schools, the model fit is
much closer to the actual ranked distribution.
     In the last panel of Figure A2, we report the fit for distance. Here, we find that while the
increase in distance observed for lower-ranked choices mirrors that predicted by our model, there
is a greater divergence in the level of distance. This pattern appears in all of the models we have
estimated with random coefficients. It is worth noting that the difference in levels between our
model and the data is small compared to the difference between the average distance to a high
school in New York (12.7 miles from home) and the closest school (less than a mile from home).
     Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004) emphasize the importance of mixture models in the
context of rank data for automobiles. In particular, they emphasize that when examining the
within-consumer relationship between the attributes of alternatives ranked first and second,
models without random coefficients do a poor job. This concern may be particularly important
in our context. For instance, a high correlation between the first and second ranked schools’
size may indicate taste for large schools. In Table A1, we report on the correlation between the
first and second choice, the first and third choice, and the second and third choice. Consistent
with earlier work, we see that the observed correlation between choices is much closer in our
preferred specification than in the simpler model within sample. When we examine a more
demanding out-of-sample test, which compares the 2003-04 preference estimates to examine the
correlation pattern of choice made in 2004-05, we also see that the correlation pattern in our
main specification is closer to the observed pattern than that from a demand model without
student interactions.

9.2     Behavioral Assumptions on Ranking
Motivated by the detailed information in school brochures and the incentive properties of the
deferred acceptance algorithm, the preference estimates that we reported come from models that
assume students are well-informed and truthful in the coordinated mechanism. We examine some
potential objections to this assumption in this subsection.

9.2.1    Stability of Preferences

In an influential field experiment, Hastings and Weinstein (2008) sent Charlotte-area parents
clear information about schools. The percentage of applicants who requested to change schools
increased by about 6.6% (with a standard error of 3.6%).43 The authors interpret this finding
as showing that how school information is framed can influence school choices. In NYC, the
information available to participants about school characteristics was similar in the uncoordinated
mechanism and the first few years of the coordinated mechanism. Consistent with this fact,
  43
    This paper also reports that when NCLB-eligible students are given additional information about schools, an
additional 5% of applicants chose a different first choice.



                                                      31
Figure A4 shows that school market shares are fairly stable in the first and second year of the
new mechanism.
    Enrollment patterns also support the idea that choices are deliberate and contain welfare-
relevant information. Table B4 reports assignment and enrollment decisions for students who
are assigned in the Main round. The table shows that 92.7% of students enroll in their assigned
choice, and this number varies from 88.4% to 94.5%, depending on which choice a student
receives. Interestingly, take-up is higher for students who receive lower-ranked choices, while
the fraction of students who exit is highest among students who obtain one of their top three
choices. This suggests that either families are unconcerned with differences among later choices
and simply enroll where they obtain an offer or that families deliberately investigate later choices
and are therefore willing to enroll in lower-ranked schools. If families are more uncertain about
lower-ranked choices, then using all submitted ranks may provide a misleading account of student
preferences. To examine how sensitive our conclusions are to this assumption, we fit a demand
model that considers only students’ top three choices in column 4 of Table 7.

9.2.2   Assumptions about Ranking Behavior

A second concern with treating submitted rankings as truthful is that parents rank schools using
heuristics carried over from the previous system. Despite the theoretical motivation and the
DOE’s advice, parents might still deviate from truth-telling because of misinformation. Table
B3 shows that students are more likely to be assigned their last choice than their penultimate
choice. This pattern may be caused by strategic behavior if students apply to schools that
they like, and, as a safety option, rank last a school in which they have a higher admissions
chance. For instance, Calsamiglia, Haeringer, and Kljin (2010) present laboratory evidence that
a constraint on rank-order lists encourages students to rank safer options. However, it may also
be fully consistent with truth-telling. For example, students usually obtain borough priority or
zone priority for schools in their neighborhoods. Ranking these schools improves their likelihood
of being assigned to them in case they are rejected by their higher choices. If students consider
applying and higher-achieving schools further away from their neighborhoods, they may as well
stop ranking schools below their neighborhood schools once such considerations no longer justify
the cost of their commute. Alternatively, search costs may induce parents to stop their search
for schools before they identify twelve schools for their children and rank their neighborhood
school as last choice. This preference pattern would produce the observed assignment pattern.
To examine how sensitive our conclusions are to this assumption, we fit demand models that
drop the last choice of each student.
    Another issue with assuming truthful preferences is that students can rank at most 12 pro-
grams on school applications. When a student is interested in more than 12 schools, she has
to carefully reduce the choice set down to 12 schools. If a student is only interested in 11 or
fewer schools, this constraint in principle should not influence ranking behavior (Abdulkadiroğlu,
Pathak, and Roth 2009, Haeringer and Klijn 2009). It is a weakly dominant strategy to add an
acceptable school to a rank-order list as long as there is room for additional schools on the appli-
cation form. However, 20.3% of students in our demand sample rank 12 schools. Some of these
students may drop highly-sought-after schools from the top of their choice lists because of this

                                                32
constraint. To examine how sensitive our conclusions are to this assumption, we fit a demand
model that drops students who have ranked all twelve choices.
    In Table A2, we report on our evaluation of mechanism design choices under these alternative
specifications: 1) using choices among eligible programs, 2) using only the top 3 choices, 3)
excluding applicants who have ranked all 12 programs, and 4) dropping applicants’ last choice.
Because of computational constraints, we only estimate the first model for the entire sample and
estimate a 10% random sample for the other three models. (Table A3 reports the corresponding
preference estimates). The full sample is used to compute all counterfactuals. For all demand
models, the coordinated mechanism in column 2 is more than three quarters of the way from the
neighborhood assignment to the utilitarian assignment. It therefore appears that our conclusions
on the value of choice relative to changes within the coordinated mechanism are robust to these
alternative ways of using the submitted rank-order lists in the coordinated mechanism.
    Panel B of Table A2 reports on how the comparison between mechanisms varies with our de-
mand specification using participants’ full ranking information. Given that Staten Island has the
highest fraction of students who are assigned administratively and experiences the largest welfare
gain, we re-estimate preferences excluding any applicant from Staten Island. Our conclusions are
unaltered by this modification. The table does show, however, that preference heterogeneity gen-
erates a larger role for school choice compared to neighborhood assignment. This phenomenon
can be seen by comparing the estimates from our main specification to those from specifications
without student interactions and without random coefficients. The neighborhood assignment is
more appealing according to those two demand models, since they are only 15.5 and 16.2 miles
away from the utilitarian assignment, compared to 21.5 miles from the main specification in the
10% sample.


10    Conclusion
The reform of NYC’s high school assignment system provides a unique opportunity to study,
with detailed data on preferences, assignments, and enrollment, the effects of centralizing and
coordinating school admissions. We find that the new coordinated mechanism is an improvement
relative to the old uncoordinated mechanism in a variety dimensions. More than a third of stu-
dents were assigned through an ad-hoc administrative process in the uncoordinated mechanism
after multiple offers with few choices and few rounds of clearing left a large number of students
without offers after the Main round. Students placed in the Administrative round were as-
signed to schools with considerably worse characteristics than the schools they ranked. The new
mechanism relieved this congestion and assigned more students to schools where they applied.
    The coordinated mechanism assigns students 0.69 miles further from home compared to
the uncoordinated mechanism. However, the benefit of being assigned through the coordinated
mechanism is significantly larger than the cost of additional travel. The gains are positive on
average for students from all boroughs, demographic groups, and baseline achievement categories.
Welfare improvements are also seen whether utility is measured based on assignments made at
the end of the high school match or subsequent school enrollment. The largest gains are for
students who were more likely to be processed in the Administrative round of the uncoordinated


                                               33
mechanism. These conclusions are robust to alternative behavioral assumptions on preferences
submitted in both the uncoordinated and coordinated mechanism. Cross-sectional differences
in Regents test performance and graduation also coincide with the fact that students who were
most likely to be assigned administratively in the old mechanism experienced the largest gains.
    These gains are measured by a rich specification of student demand that implies significant
estimated heterogeneity in willingness to travel for school. Preference heterogeneity is important
for measuring the allocative effects of choice when there is a shortage of good schools. Our
estimates reveal that the benefits of coordinated choice with deferred acceptance are much larger
than than those associated with modifications to the assignment algorithm within the coordinated
mechanism. This does not imply that the mechanism design is not important, however, because
the gap in average student welfare between the uncoordinated and coordinated mechanism is
large.
    The increase in student welfare due to the new mechanism illustrates that there are consid-
erable frictions to exercising choice in poorly designed assignment systems. The 2003 change in
NYC took place in an environment where participants already had some familiarity with choice
since both the uncoordinated and coordinated system had a common application. In other
cities, the school choice market is even less well organized, without readily available information
on admissions processes and application timelines. For instance, admissions in Boston’s growing
charter sector are uncoordinated, and the schools have only recently adopted a standardized
application timeline. Recently, there have been efforts to unify enrollment across school sectors
(Vaznis 2013, Fox 2015). The relative value of policies such as common timelines, common ap-
plications, single vs. multiple offers, sophisticated matching algorithms, and good information
and decision aides is an interesting avenue for future research.




                                                34
                                          Table 1. Characteristics of Student Sample
                                                    Mechanism Comparison                                    Demand Estimation
                                           Uncoordinated                Coordinated                           Coordinated
                                             Mechanism                  Mechanism                              Mechanism
                                                  (1)                       (2)                                   (3)
Number of Students                              70,358                    66,921                                69,907

Female                                           49.4%                          49.0%                               49.0%

Bronx                                            23.7%                          23.3%                               23.7%
Brooklyn                                         31.9%                          34.1%                               33.3%
Manhattan                                        12.5%                          11.8%                               12.0%
Queens                                           25.0%                          24.8%                               24.7%
Staten Island                                    6.9%                           6.0%                                6.3%

Asian                                            10.6%                          10.9%                               10.6%
Black                                            35.4%                          35.7%                               35.7%
Hispanic                                         38.9%                          40.4%                               40.3%
White                                            14.7%                          12.6%                               13.0%
Other                                            0.4%                           0.4%                                0.4%

Subsidized Lunch                                 68.0%                         67.4%                                67.8%
Neighborhood Income                              38,360                        37,855                               37,920

Limited English Proficient                       13.1%                          12.6%                               12.6%
Special Education                                8.2%                           7.9%                                7.5%
SHSAT Test-Taker                                 22.4%                          24.3%                               23.9%
Notes: Means unless otherwise noted. Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the
2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. Neighborhood income is the median census block group family income from the 2000
census: table reports the mean neighborhood income across students. SHSAT stands for Specialized High School Achievement Test.
                      Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Schools and Programs
                                                           Uncoordinated          Coordinated
                                                             Mechanism             Mechanism
                                                                 (1)                  (2)
                                                                        A. Schools
Number                                                          215                   235

High Math Achievement                                                  10.2                      10.0
High English Achievement                                               19.1                      19.3
Percent Attending Four Year College                                    47.8                      47.2
Fraction Inexperienced Teachers                                        54.7                      55.6
Attendance Rate (out of 100)                                           85.5                      85.7
Percent Subsidized Lunch                                               62.5                      62.6
Size of 9th grade                                                      465.7                     451.3

Percent White                                                          10.9                       10.9
Percent Asian                                                           8.7                        8.6
Percent Black                                                          38.5                       38.4
Percent Hispanic                                                       41.9                       42.1



                                                                                B. Programs
Number                                                                  612                       558

Screened                                                                233                       208
Unscreened                                                               63                       119
Education Option                                                        316                       119

Spanish Language                                                         27                        24
Asian Language                                                           10                         9
Other Language                                                            6                         7

Arts                                                                     80                        80
Humanities                                                               89                        93
Math and Science                                                         53                        60
Vocational                                                               55                        59
Other Specialties                                                       163                       162
Notes: Panel A reports means and Panel B reports counts, unless otherwise noted. Uncoordinated mechanism refers to
the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the 2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance.
The data appendix presents information on the availability of school characteristics. High Math and High English
Achievement is the fraction of students who scored more than 85% on the Math A and English Regents tests in New
York State Report Cards, respectively. Inexperienced teachers are those who have taught for less than two years.
                                                                           Table 3. Offer Processing across Mechanisms
                                                                                     Distance to School (in miles)        Exit from NYC Public                           Enrolled in School Other than
                                              Number of Students                Assignment                Enrollment             Schools                                            Assigned
                                                     (1)                             (2)                      (3)                  (4)                                                 (5)
                                                                                      A. Uncoordinated Mechanism - By Final Assignment Round
Overall                                               70,358                        3.36                     3.50                 8.5%                                                  18.6%

First Round                                           23,867                           4.23                           4.11                           5.2%                                9.6%
Second Round                                           5,780                           4.55                           4.44                           4.8%                               11.4%
Third Round                                            4,443                           4.35                           4.26                           4.9%                               14.2%
Supplementary Round                                   10,170                           4.61                           4.37                           7.8%                               25.4%
Administrative Round                                  26,098                           1.64                           2.11                          13.3%                               26.8%

                                                                                      B. Uncoordinated Mechanism - By Number of First Round Offers
No Offers                                             36,464                           2.80                 3.12                   10.4%                                                24.4%
One Offer                                             21,328                           3.89                 3.85                    7.1%                                                13.8%
Two or More Offers                                    12,566                           4.07                 4.03                    5.7%                                                 9.8%

                                                                                          C. Coordinated Mechanism - By Final Assignment Round
Overall                                               66,921                           4.05                  3.91                    6.4%                                               11.4%

Main Round                                            54,577                           4.02                           3.86                          6.1%                                 9.9%
Supplementary Round                                    5,201                           5.10                           4.90                          4.8%                                10.4%
Administrative Round                                   7,143                           3.50                           3.52                          9.6%                                23.6%
Notes: Columns 2-5 report means. Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the 2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. Student distance is
calculated as road distance using ArcGIS. Assignment is the school assigned at the conclusion of the high school assignment process. Enrollment is the school in which a student enrolls in October following
application. Assigned students exit New York City if they are not enrolled in any NYC public high school in October following application. Enrolled in School other than Assigned means student is in NYC Public,
but in a school other than that assigned at end of match. Final assignment round is the round during which an offer to the final assigned school was first made.
                         Table 4. Ranked vs. Assigned Schools by Student Assignment Round
                                             Uncoordinated Mechanism                  Coordinated Mechanism

                                           Ranked Schools       Assigned              Ranked Schools       Assigned
                                                (1)                (2)                      (3)               (4)
                                                                           A. Main Round
Distance (in miles)                             4.82              4.30                     5.10              4.00

High Math Achievement                            12.4             11.7                      13.0             10.7
High English Achievement                         20.9             20.2                      22.1             19.1
Percent Attending Four Year College              49.1             47.1                      50.6             48.3
Fraction Inexperienced Teachers                  45.3             45.6                      46.6             43.8
Attendance Rate (out of 100)                     85.1             84.6                      85.7             83.8
Percent Subsidized Lunch                         60.0             60.5                      57.6             56.7
Size of 9th grade                               694.3            698.8                     675.0            819.2
Percent White                                    15.1             14.7                      16.7             17.8

                                                                     B. Supplementary Round
Distance (in miles)                             4.87              4.59                    5.87               5.17

High Math Achievement                            11.8             9.3                       16.6             14.2
High English Achievement                         19.9             15.8                      26.5             20.0
Percent Attending Four Year College              48.6             44.9                      54.1             50.1
Fraction Inexperienced Teachers                  46.0             41.5                      45.3             36.9
Attendance Rate (out of 100)                     85.1             82.2                      87.4             83.2
Percent Subsidized Lunch                         62.0             61.8                      53.5             51.0
Size of 9th grade                               685.3            908.0                     638.5            1129.7
Percent White                                    13.8             13.3                      17.4             15.3

                                                                     C. Administrative Round
Distance (in miles)                             5.11              1.62                     5.33              3.43

High Math Achievement                            14.9              10.5                    14.3               10.7
High English Achievement                         24.3              17.5                    24.2               19.2
Percent Attending Four Year College              52.0              46.7                    51.7               47.9
Fraction Inexperienced Teachers                  41.9              39.4                    47.8               42.1
Attendance Rate (out of 100)                     85.8              80.8                    86.7               82.9
Percent Subsidized Lunch                         53.8              50.4                    57.2               53.1
Size of 9th grade                               760.6             1181.9                  607.6              984.0
Percent White                                    18.5              19.1                    17.6               17.9
Notes: Means unless otherwise noted. Analysis restricts the sample to students from the welfare sample with observed
assignments. Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the
2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. Main round in the uncoordinated mechanism corresponds to the
first round. Rankings used are those submitted in the main round of the process. Student distance is calculated as road
distance using ArcGIS. See Table 2 notes for details on school characteristics.
                                                                         Table 5. Offer Processing by Student Type
                                                                         Uncoordinated Mechanism                                                    Coordinated Mechanism
                                                       Main Round            Supplementary        Administrative                        Main            Supplementary    Administrative
                                                           (1)                     (2)                  (3)                              (4)                  (5)             (6)
Students                                                 48.5%                    14.5%                37.1%                            81.6%                7.8%           10.7%

Female                                                    51.0%                    14.3%                    34.7%                       82.1%                  7.7%                   10.2%

Bronx                                                     53.3%                    20.2%                    26.5%                       81.7%                  6.7%                   11.6%
Brooklyn                                                  49.8%                    16.2%                    33.9%                       82.9%                  8.0%                    9.1%
Manhattan                                                 66.8%                    19.2%                    14.0%                       78.9%                  7.4%                   13.7%
Queens                                                    43.1%                    8.3%                     48.6%                       79.2%                  10.0%                  10.8%
Staten Island                                             11.9%                    0.0%                     88.1%                       88.3%                  2.4%                    9.3%

Asian                                                     46.1%                    5.4%                     48.5%                       82.3%                  7.3%                   10.3%
Black                                                     53.2%                    18.4%                    28.4%                       81.3%                  8.7%                   10.0%
Hispanic                                                  51.2%                    17.3%                    31.5%                       81.8%                  7.9%                   10.3%
White                                                     31.5%                    3.8%                     64.7%                       81.4%                  5.0%                   13.6%

High Baseline Math                                        57.3%                    7.4%                     35.3%                       85.2%                  5.1%                    9.7%
Low Baseline Math                                         46.8%                    19.8%                    33.4%                       79.9%                  7.2%                   12.9%

Subsidized Lunch                                          51.8%                    15.9%                    32.3%                       82.7%                  7.7%                    9.6%
Bottom Neighborhood Income Quartile                       55.4%                    23.3%                    21.3%                       81.8%                  7.2%                   11.0%
Top Neighborhood Income Quartile                          41.3%                    8.1%                     50.6%                       80.8%                  7.4%                   11.8%

Limited English Proficient                                46.9%                    16.3%                    36.8%                       81.8%                  7.6%                   10.7%
Special Education                                         38.9%                    18.8%                    42.3%                       71.8%                  0.0%                   28.2%
SHSAT Test-taker                                          61.9%                    10.3%                    27.8%                       82.6%                  7.3%                   10.0%
Notes: Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the 2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. Table reports on final assignment round,
which is the round during which an offer to the final assigned school was accepted. Neighborhood income is median family income from the 2000 census.
                                                          Table 6. School Characteristics by Rank of Student Choice
Choice                                          Mechanism              1st        2nd          3rd           4th                          5th            6th             9th            12th
                                                                                                   A. All Students
Students Ranking Choice                         Coordinated          69,907      93.4%        88.7%         82.8%                       76.2%           69.1%          49.7%           20.3%
                                                Uncoordinated        59,277      93.5%        85.8%         71.7%                       46.7%

Distance in Miles - Mean                        Coordinated                4.43            4.81           5.05            5.21           5.38            5.49           5.65            5.12
                                                Uncoordinated              4.80            4.91           4.94            4.88           4.79
  Median                                        Coordinated                3.51            3.95           4.20            4.37           4.57            4.63           4.78            4.24
                                                Uncoordinated              3.87            4.00           4.05            4.05           4.02

High Math Achievement                           Coordinated                16.7           15.3            14.7           13.9            13.4            12.8           11.5            10.4
                                                Uncoordinated              14.1           13.3            12.8           12.1            11.7
Fraction Subsidized Lunch                       Coordinated                51.4           53.4            54.5           56.2            57.4            58.7           61.3            63.1
                                                Uncoordinated              56.6           58.0            59.1           60.7            62.0
Size of 9th Grade                               Coordinated                713.4          708.1           689.3          668.0           655.3          635.9           608.8          649.2
                                                Uncoordinated              720.7          720.7           709.3          696.5           686.6
Percent White                                   Coordinated                19.1           16.7            15.7           14.4            13.3            12.2           10.4            9.0
                                                Uncoordinated              14.6           13.4            12.5           11.4            10.8

Split by High Math Achievement                                                                             B. Student Subgroups
 Students with Low Baseline Math                Coordinated                10.9            10.9           10.5         10.1              10.0             9.7            9.4            8.8
                                                Uncoordinated               9.5             9.5            9.4          8.9               8.7

 Students with High Baseline Math               Coordinated                26.0            21.4           20.5            19.1           18.2            17.3           15.2            12.8
                                                Uncoordinated              21.5            19.0           17.8            16.9           16.1
Split by Neighborhood Income
 Students from Bottom Neighorhood Coordinated                              11.4            10.9           10.5            10.4           10.1             9.9            9.6            8.7
 Income Quartile                  Uncoordinated                             9.5             9.6            9.5             9.1            8.7

  Students from Top Neighorhood                 Coordinated                23.3            20.7           19.6            18.7           17.7            16.8           15.0            12.7
  Income Quartile                               Uncoordinated              21.4            18.5           17.6            16.5           16.1
Notes: Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the 2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. Student distance is calculated as
road distance using ArcGIS. High Math achievement is the fraction of students who scored over 85% on the Math A Regents in New York State Report Cards. High baseline math students score above
the 75th percentile for 7th grade middle school math; low baseline math students score below the 25th percentile. Neighborhood income is median family income from the 2000 census.
                                                                   Table 7. Select Preference Estimates for Different Demand Specifications
                                                                         No Student Interactions                                            School Characteristics x Student Characteristics
                                                                                                                                                                       Models with Random Coefficients
                                                                                                             Without Random Coefficients
Specifications:                                                                                                                                               All Choices                    Choice Among Eligible Programs
                                                                                    (1)                                   (2)                                      (3)                                    (4)
High Math Achievement
   Main effect                                                          0.016            (0.016)               0.027              (0.014)               -0.029             (0.018)               -0.058             (0.039)
   Baseline Math                                                                                               0.031              (0.001)                0.039             (0.001)                0.050             (0.001)

Percent Subsidized Lunch
  Main effect                                                          -0.085            (0.007)               -0.057             (0.004)               -0.069             (0.009)               -0.113             (0.058)

Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)
   Main effect                                                         -0.164            (0.036)               -0.092             (0.032)               -0.113             (0.048)               -0.153             (0.178)

Percent White
  Main effect                                                          -0.002            (0.014)               0.070              (0.012)               0.062              (0.016)               0.093              (0.062)
  Asian                                                                                                        -0.054             (0.002)               -0.075             (0.003)               -0.100             (0.004)
  Black                                                                                                        -0.084             (0.002)               -0.124             (0.002)               -0.189             (0.003)
  Hispanic                                                                                                     -0.047             (0.002)               -0.084             (0.002)               -0.119             (0.003)

Standard Deviation of ε                                                 7.226            (0.010)               7.385              (0.011)               7.858              (0.013)               10.059             (0.022)
Standard Deviation of ξ                                                 3.519            (0.121)               2.954              (0.100)               3.676              (0.129)               5.151              (0.650)

Random Coefficients (Covariances)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)        Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)                                                                                        1.584              (0.009)               1.837              (0.012)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)        Percent White                                                                                                      -0.006             (0.001)               -0.009             (0.001)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)        Percent Subsidized Lunch                                                                                           -0.002             (0.000)               -0.002             (0.000)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)        High Math Achievement                                                                                              -0.011             (0.001)               -0.015             (0.001)
  Percent White                      Percent White                                                                                                      0.008              (0.000)               0.013              (0.000)
  Percent White                      Percent Subsidized Lunch                                                                                           -0.001             (0.000)               -0.002             (0.000)
  Percent White                      High Math Achievement                                                                                              0.005              (0.000)               0.007              (0.000)
  Percent Subsidized Lunch           Percent Subsidized Lunch                                                                                           0.002              (0.000)               0.003              (0.000)
  Percent Subsidized Lunch           High Math Achievement                                                                                              0.000              (0.000)               -0.001             (0.000)
  High Math Achievement              High Math Achievement                                                                                              0.016              (0.000)               0.022              (0.000)

                                                                                                                           X                                        X                                        X
                                                                                                                           X                                        X                                        X

                                                                                69,907                                    69,907                                    69,907                                  69,907
                                                                                542,666                                   542,666                                  542,666                                  542,666
Notes: Select estimates of demand system with submitted ranks over 497 program choices in 235 schools. Student distance is calculated as road distance using ArcGIS. Dummies for missing school attributes are estimated
with separate coefficients. Column 1 contains no interactions between student and school characteristics. Column 2 contains interactions among school characteristics and baseline achievement, gender, race, special
education, limited English proficiency, subsidized lunch, and median 2000 census block group family income. Columns 3-4 include random coefficients on school size, percent white, percent subsidized lunch, and Math
achievement, with unrestricted covariance across characteristics. High Math achievement is the fraction of student who score more than 85% on the Math A Regents in New York State Report Cards. Models estimate the
utility differences amongst inside options only. Column (4) restricts each applicant's choice set to include eligible programs. If an applicant ranked an ineligible program, that program is included in the choice set. A total
of 193 programs have eligibility restrictions and 3,854 students rank an ineligible program. Standard errors in parenthesis.
                         Table	  8.	  Welfare	  Comparison	  of	  Alternative	  Mechanisms	  Compared	  to	  Utilitarian	  Assignment
                                                                                                                  School	  Choice
Assignment	  Mechanism:                      Neighborhood	                                                     Student-­‐Optimal	            Ordinal	  Pareto	  Efficient	  
                                               Assignment                 Coordinated	  Mechanism                     Matching                       Matching	  
                                                        (1)                              (2)                                  (3)                              (4)
All                                                 -­‐18.96                          -­‐3.73                              -­‐3.62                          -­‐3.11
Female                                              -­‐18.90                          -­‐3.71                              -­‐3.59                          -­‐3.07

Asian                                                                               -­‐18.08                                         -­‐3.53                                                 -­‐3.43                                                 -­‐3.01
Black                                                                               -­‐19.43                                         -­‐3.89                                                 -­‐3.79                                                 -­‐3.25
Hispanic                                                                            -­‐19.37                                         -­‐3.80                                                 -­‐3.67                                                 -­‐3.10
White                                                                               -­‐17.07                                         -­‐3.21                                                 -­‐3.11                                                 -­‐2.82

Bronx                                                                               -­‐21.39                                         -­‐4.63                                                 -­‐4.46                                                 -­‐3.72
Brooklyn                                                                            -­‐18.48                                         -­‐3.21                                                 -­‐3.14                                                 -­‐2.70
Manhattan                                                                           -­‐20.07                                         -­‐5.40                                                 -­‐5.25                                                 -­‐4.43
Queens                                                                              -­‐18.02                                         -­‐3.39                                                 -­‐3.29                                                 -­‐2.96
Staten	  Island                                                                    -­‐13.82                                         -­‐1.25                                                 -­‐1.10                                                 -­‐1.03

High	  Baseline	  Math	                                                          -­‐18.53                                         -­‐3.29                                                 -­‐3.18                                                 -­‐2.61
Low	  Baseline	  Math	                                                           -­‐19.40                                         -­‐4.28                                                 -­‐4.18                                                 -­‐3.63

Subsidized	  Lunch                                                                 -­‐19.16                                         -­‐3.78                                                 -­‐3.66                                                 -­‐3.12
Bottom	  Neighborhood	  Income	  Quartile                                        -­‐19.89                                         -­‐4.25                                                 -­‐4.12                                                 -­‐3.46
Top	  Neighborhood	  Income	  Quartile                                           -­‐17.44                                         -­‐3.63                                                 -­‐3.51                                                 -­‐3.15

Special	  Education                                                                -­‐19.41                                         -­‐4.83                                                 -­‐4.73                                                 -­‐4.11
Limited	  English	  Proficient                                                    -­‐19.81                                         -­‐3.74                                                 -­‐3.64                                                 -­‐3.16
SHSAT	  Test-­‐Takers                                                              -­‐19.13                                         -­‐4.17                                                 -­‐4.05                                                 -­‐3.41
Notes:	  Utility	  from	  alternative	  assignments	  relative	  to	  utilitarian	  optimal	  assignment	  computed	  using	  actual	  preferences	  ignoring	  all	  school-­‐side	  constraints	  except	  capacity.	  	  Utility	  
computed	  using	  estimates	  in	  column	  3	  of	  Table	  7.	  	  Mean	  utility	  from	  the	  utilitarian	  optimal	  assignment	  normalized	  to	  zero.	  	  Column	  1	  is	  computed	  by	  running	  the	  student-­‐proposing	  
deferred	  acceptance	  algorithm	  where	  applicants	  simply	  rank	  schools	  in	  order	  of	  distance.	  	  Column	  2	  is	  from	  100	  lottery	  draws	  of	  student-­‐proposing	  deferred	  acceptance	  with	  single	  tie-­‐
breaking	  using	  the	  demand	  estimation	  sample.	  	  If	  a	  student	  is	  unassigned,	  we	  mimic	  the	  Supplementary	  Round	  by	  assigning	  students	  according	  to	  a	  serial	  dictatorship	  using	  preferences	  
drawn	  from	  the	  preference	  distribution	  estimated	  in	  column	  3	  of	  Table	  7.	  Student	  optimal	  matching	  in	  column	  3	  computed	  by	  taking	  each	  deferred	  acceptance	  assignment	  and	  applying	  the	  
Erdil-­‐Ergin	  (2008)	  stable	  improvement	  cycles	  algorithm	  to	  find	  a	  student-­‐optimal	  matching.	  	  Ordinal	  Pareto	  Efficient	  Matching	  in	  column	  4	  computed	  by	  applying	  Gale's	  top	  trading	  cycles	  to	  
the	  economy	  where	  the	  student-­‐optimal	  matching	  determine	  student	  endowments,	  followed	  by	  the	  Abdulkadiroglu-­‐Sonmez	  (2003)	  version	  of	  top	  trading	  cycles	  with	  counters.
                         Table 9. Welfare Comparison between Coordinated and Uncoordinated Mechanism

                                                       Change in Utility Net Distance (in miles)                  Change in Distance (in miles)
                                                          Assignment            Enrollment                       Assignment         Enrollment
                                                              (1)                   (2)                               (3)                 (4)
All Students                                                 10.62                 9.25                              0.69                0.38
Female                                                       10.01                 8.59                              0.68                0.37

Asian                                                          11.91                      10.11                       0.63                      0.33
Black                                                           8.97                       7.83                       0.74                      0.45
Hispanic                                                       10.21                       9.11                       0.66                      0.39
White                                                          15.46                      13.03                       0.56                      0.22

Bronx                                                           9.46                       8.54                       0.93                       0.64
Brooklyn                                                       10.57                       9.49                       0.52                       0.33
Manhattan                                                       5.10                       4.33                       0.00                      -0.09
Queens                                                         11.30                       8.78                       1.13                       0.57
Staten Island                                                  22.62                      22.42                       0.34                       0.00

High Baseline Math                                              8.85                       6.85                       0.53                      0.20
Low Baseline Math                                              10.61                       9.83                       0.57                      0.33

Subsidized Lunch                                               10.13                       8.93                       0.65                      0.38
Bottom Neighborhood Income Quartile                             8.81                       8.18                       0.57                      0.42
Top Neighborhood Income Quartile                               12.02                       9.71                       0.71                      0.25

Special Education                                              10.30                       9.10                       0.76                      0.43
Limited English Proficient                                     11.62                      10.58                       0.60                      0.38
SHSAT Test-Takers                                               6.91                       5.51                       0.55                      0.25
Notes: Utilities are in distance units (miles) averaged across students in the mechanism comparison sample in Table 1 using preference estimates in column 3
of Table 7. Utility estimates assume truthful reports. Assignment is the school assigned at the conclusion of the high school assignment process. Enrollment is
the school student in which the student enrolls in October following application. If a student enrolls in the assigned school, we use the assigned program to
compute the utility of enrollment. If a student enrolls at another school, we use the program-size weighted average of utilities from all programs at that
school. 2002-03 offer process reports the fraction of students with row characteristic first offered school finally assigned in the Main round (rounds 1-3), the
Supplementary round, or the Administrative round. Student distance calculated as road distance using ArcGIS. High baseline math students score above the
75th percentile for 7th grade relative to citywide distribution; low baseline math students score below the 25th percentile. Subsidized lunch, not available pre-
assignment, comes from enrolled students as of the 2004-05 school year. Neighborhood income is median census block group family income from the 2000
census.
                                Table 10. Welfare Comparison for Alternative Selection Rules
                                                            Difference in Expected Utility from Truthful Reporting
 Optimal Reporting Computed from Choice Menu              Top 10                   Top 15                    Top 20
                 Consisting of:                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)
All Students                                               1.57                      1.94                     2.08
Female                                                     1.51                      1.85                     1.98

Asian                                                                        2.18                            2.68                            2.86
Black                                                                        1.39                            1.73                            1.87
Hispanic                                                                     1.39                            1.71                            1.84
White                                                                        2.07                            2.52                            2.66

Bronx                                                                        1.43                            1.76                            1.89
Brooklyn                                                                     1.66                            2.07                            2.21
Manhattan                                                                    1.24                            1.52                            1.63
Queens                                                                       1.77                            2.19                            2.36
Staten Island                                                                1.56                            1.82                            1.90

High Baseline Math                                                           1.60                            1.91                            2.01
Low Baseline Math                                                            1.53                            1.93                            2.10

Subsidized Lunch                                                             1.49                            1.83                            1.97
Bottom Neighborhood Income Quartile                                          1.29                            1.59                            1.71
Top Neighborhood Income Quartile                                             1.81                            2.22                            2.36

Special Education                                                            1.56                            1.96                            2.12
Limited English Proficient                                                   1.62                            2.01                            2.16
SHSAT Test-Takers                                                            1.60                            1.94                            2.05
Notes: Utilities are in distance units (miles) averaged across students in the mechanism comparison sample in Table 1 using preference estimates in column 3 of
Table 7. Table reports difference in expected utility between coordinated and uncoordinated mechanism and an estimate of optimal reports from 2002-03
where students best respond to the empirical distribution given the top 10, top 15, and top 20 choices based on the preference distribution estimated from
2003-04. 11.6% of applicants have the same application from truthful reporting as optimal reporting optimizing over a choice menu with the applicant's top 10
choices. 55.8% of applicants have the same application from optimal reporting optimizing over a choice menu with the applicant's top 10 choices and the
applicant's top 15 choices. 75.5% of applicants have the same application from optimal reporting optimizing over a choice menu with the applicant's top 15
choices and the applicant's top 20 choices.
                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                     	  
	  
       Figure	  1.	  School	  Locations	  and	  Students	  by	  New	  York	  City	  Census	  Tract	  in	  2002-­‐03	  and	  2003-­‐04	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                        	  
                                                                                        	  
                                               Figure	  2.	  Distribution	  of	  Distance	  to	  Assigned	  School	  in	  	  
                                           Uncoordinated	  (2002-­‐03)	  and	  Coordinated	  (2003-­‐04)	  Mechanism	  	  	  
Mean	  (median)	  travel	  distance	  is	  3.36	  (2.25)	  miles	  in	  2002-­‐03	  and	  4.05	  (3.04)	  miles	  in	  2003-­‐04.	  	  Top	  and	  bottom	  1%	  are	  not	  shown	  in	  
  figure.	  Line	  fit	  from	  Gaussian	  kernel	  with	  bandwidth	  chosen	  to	  minimize	  mean	  integrated	  squared	  error	  using	  STATA’s	  kdensity	  
                                                                                          command.	  
            Figure 3. Change in Number Assigned by Oversubscription in Uncoordinated Mechanism

The figure shows the change in the number of students assigned to the school in the new mechanism minus the old mechanism (on
   the vertical axis) compared to oversubscription in the uncoordinated mechanism (on the horizontal axis). Oversubscription is
                 measured as the log of the number of applications divided by the number assigned to the program.
                                                                                                 	  




                                                                                                                                                                                            	  
                                                                               	  
                            Figure	  4.	  Student	  Welfare	  from	  Uncoordinated	  and	  Coordinated	  Mechanism	  	  
Distribution	  of	  utility	  (measured	  in	  distance	  units)	  from	  assignment	  based	  estimates	  in	  column	  3	  of	  Table	  A1	  with	  mean	  utility	  in	  
 2003-­‐04	  normalized	  to	  0.	  Top	  and	  bottom	  1%	  are	  not	  shown	  in	  figure.	  	  Line	  fit	  from	  Gaussian	  kernel	  with	  bandwidth	  chosen	  to	  
                                       minimize	  mean	  integrated	  squared	  error	  using	  STATA’s	  kdensity	  command.	  
Figure 5. Coordinating Assignments vs. Algorithm Improvements
           30
           20
       Miles
           10
           0




                 0                      .2                .4              .6                                   .8                      1
                                                Probability Administratively Assigned

                                ∆ Utility (incl. distance)                                    ∆ Utility (net distance)
                                ∆ Distance                                                    95% Confidence Interval

                              Figure 6. Change in Student Welfare by Propensity to be
                             Administratively Assigned in the Uncoordinated Mechanism
    Probability of administrative assignment estimated from probit of administrative assignment indicator on student census tract dummies and all student
    characteristics in the demand model except for distance in the uncoordinated mechanism. If student lives in a tract where either all or no students are
administratively assigned, all students from those tracts are coded as administratively assigned. For a grid of points of administrative assignment propensity, we
    plot the difference between local linear regression fits of utility including distance and net of distance from coordinated and uncoordinated mechanism
computed as in Table 9. Bandwidth is twice STATA’s kdensity optimal bandwidth. Standard errors constructed using 100 draws of parameter values taken from
  the posterior distribution and re-estimated utility distributions. For each draw of the parameter, we updated x and obtained utility draws consistent with
   observed rank-ordered data using a Gibbs' sampler. Programs that are not ranked by anyone are assigned a draw of x from its unconditional distribution.
                      .2
          Difference between years
         0      .05     .1
                      −.05    .15
                                     0      .2             .4              .6            .8          1
                                                 Probability Administratively Assigned

                                         ∆ Regents Math                       ∆ Regents English
                                         95% Confidence Interval




                       .15
          Difference between years
              .05      0  .1




                                     0      .2             .4              .6            .8           1
                                                 Probability Administratively Assigned

                                         ∆ Ever Graduated                     ∆ Regents Diploma
                                         95% Confidence Interval


Figure 7. Change in Student Achievement and Graduation by Propensity to be
         Administratively Assigned in the Uncoordinated Mechanism
    Probability of administrative assignment estimated from probit of administrative assignment indicator on student
     census tract dummies and all student characteristics in the demand model except for distance in uncoordinated
   mechanism. If student lives in a tract where either all or no students are administratively assigned, all students from
   those tracts are coded as administratively assigned. For a grid of points of administrative assignment propensity, we
     plot the difference between local linear regression fits of Regents Math, English, and graduation outcomes from
       coordinated and uncoordinated mechanisms. Bandwidth is twice STATA’s kdensity optimal bandwidth. Data
                             appendix contains details on Regents and graduation outcomes.
References
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. Angrist, and P. Pathak (2014): “The Elite Illusion: Achievement
 Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools,” Econometrica, 82(1), 137–196.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. D. Angrist, S. M. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, and P. A. Pathak
 (2011): “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters
 and Pilots,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 699–748.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., Y.-K. Che, P. Pathak, A. Roth, and O. Tercieux (2017): “Mini-
 mizing Justified Envy in School Choice: The Design of New Orleans OneApp,” NBER Working
 Paper Working Paper 23265.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., Y.-K. Che, and Y. Yasuda (2015): “Expanding “Choice” in School
 Choice,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(1), 1–42.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2005): “The New York City High
 School Match,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), 364–367.

         (2009): “Strategy-proofness versus Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesign-
  ing the New York City High School Match,” American Economic Review, 99(5), 1954–1978.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, A. E. Roth, and T. Sönmez (2006): “Changing
 the Boston Public School Mechanism: Strategy-proofness as Equal Access,” NBER Working
 paper, 11965.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., and T. Sönmez (2003): “School Choice: A Mechanism Design Ap-
 proach,” American Economic Review, 93(3), 729–747.

Abulkadiroğlu, A., W. Hu, and P. A. Pathak (2013): “Small High Schools and Student
 Achievement: Lottery-Based Evidence from New York City,” NBER Working Paper, 19576.

Agarwal, N., and P. Somaini (2014): “Demand Analysis using Strategic Reports: An Appli-
 cation to a School Choice Mechanism,” NBER Working Paper, 20775.

Ajayi, K. (2017): “School Choice and Educational Mobility: Lessons from Secondary School
  Applications in Ghana,” Unpublished working paper, Boston University.

Arvidsson, T. S., N. Fruchter, and C. Mokhtar (2013): “Over the Counter,
  Under the Radar:       Inequitably Distributing New York City’s Late-Enrolling High
  School Students,” Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University, Avail-
  able at:     http://annenberginstitute.org/publication/over-counter-under-radar-inequitably-
  distributing-new-york-city%E2%80%99s-late-enrolling-high-sc, Last accessed: October 2013.

Balinski, M., and T. Sönmez (1999): “A Tale of Two Mechanisms: Student Placement,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 84, 73–94.



                                              52
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (2004): “Differentiated Products Demand Systems
  from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 112(1), 68–105.

Bogomolnaia, A., and H. Moulin (2001): “A New Solution to the Random Assignment
 Problem,” Journal of Economic Theory, 100, 295–328.

Briesch, R., P. Chintagunta, and R. Matzkin (2002): “Semiparametric Estimation of
 Brand Choice Behavior,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97, 973–982.

Budish, E., and E. Cantillon (2012): “The Multi-Unit Assignment Problem: Theory and
 Evidence from Course Allocation at Harvard,” American Economic Review, 102(5), 2237–2271.

Budish, E., Y.-K. Che, F. Kojima, and P. Milgrom (2013): “Designing Random Allocation
 Mechanisms: Theory and Applications,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 585–623.

Burgess, S., E. Greaves, A. Vignoles, and D. Wilson (2015): “What Parents Want:
 School Preferences and School Choice,” Economic Journal, 125(587), 1262–1289.

Calsamiglia, C., C. Fu, and M. Guell (2014): “Structural Estimation of a Model of School
 Choices: the Boston Mechanism vs. Its Alternatives,” Unpublished paper, UAB.

Calsamiglia, C., G. Haeringer, and F. Kljin (2010): “Constrained School Choice: An
 Experimental Study,” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1860–1874.

Chen, Y., and T. Sönmez (2006): “School Choice: an Experimental Study,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Theory, 127, 202–231.

Dee, T. S., B. A. Jacob, J. McCrary, and J. Rockoff (2016): “The Causes and Con-
 sequences of Test Score Manipulation Evidence from the New York Regents Examination,”
 NBER Working Paper 22165.

Deming, D. J., J. S. Hastings, T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “School Choice,
 School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment,” American Economic Review, 104(3), 991–
 1013.

DOE (2002): “Directory of the New York City Public High Schools: 2002-2003,” New York City
 Department of Education.

Dubins, L. E., and D. A. Freedman (1981): “Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley algorithm,”
 American Mathematical Monthly, 88, 485–494.

Ekmekci, M., and M. B. Yenmez (2016): “Integrating Schools for Centralized Assignment,”
 Working paper, Boston College.

Epple, D., and R. Romano (1998): “Competition Between Private and Public Schools, Vouch-
  ers, and Peer Group Effects,” American Economic Review, 88(1), 33–62.



                                           53
Erdil, A., and H. Ergin (2008): “What’s the Matter with Tie-Breaking? Improving Efficiency
  in School Choice,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 669–689.

Fack, G., J. Grenet, and Y. He (2015): “Beyond Truth-telling: Preference Estimation with
  Centralized School Choice,” Working paper, Rice University.

Fox, J. C. (2015): “Plan would simplify Boston public school enrollments,” Boston Globe, Metro
  Section, September 17.

Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley (1962): “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage,”
 American Mathematical Monthly, 69, 9–15.

Gelman, A., and D. Rubin (1992): “Inference from Iterative Simulation Using Multiple Se-
 quences,” Statistical Science, 7(4), 457–472.

Gendar, A. (2000): “Simpler HS Entry Eyed Ed Board Aims to Trim Selection Process, Improve
 Schools,” New York Daily News, October 21.

Haeringer, G., and F. Klijn (2009): “Constrained School Choice,” Journal of Economic
 Theory, 144(5), 1921–1947.

Hastings, J., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2009): “Heterogenous Preferences and the
 Efficacy of Public School Choice,” Working paper, Yale University.

Hastings, J., and J. M. Weinstein (2008): “Information, School Choice and Academic
 Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4),
 1373–1414.

He, Y. (2012): “Gaming the Boston Mechanism in Beijing,” Unpublished mimeo, Toulouse.

He, Y., A. Miralles, M. Pycia, and J. Yan (2015): “A Psuedo-Market Approach to Allo-
 cation with Priorities,” Working paper, UCLA.

Hemphill, C. (2007): New York City’s Best Public High Schools: A Parent’s Guide, Third
 Edition. Teachers College Press.

Hemphill, C., and K. Nauer (2009): “The New Marketplace: How Small-School Reforms
 and School Choice have Reshaped New York City’s High Schools,” Center for New York City
 Affairs, Milano the New School for Management and Urban Policy.

Herszenhorn, D. M. (2004): “Council Members See Flaws in School-Admissions Plan,” New
 York Times, Metropolitan Desk, November 19.

Hoxby, C. (2003): “School Choice and School Productivity (Or, Could School Choice be a
 Rising Tide that Lifts All Boats),” in The Economics of School Choice, ed. by C. Hoxby.
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hwang, S. I. M. (2014): “A Robust Redesign of High School Match,” University of Chicago,
 Working Paper.

                                             54
Ichimura, H., and T. S. Thompson (1998): “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a Binary
  Choice Model with Random Coefficients of Unknown Distribution,” Journal of Econometrics,
  86(2), 269–295.

Jacob, B., and L. Lefgren (2007): “What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical
  Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  122(4), 1603–1637.

Kapor, A., C. Neilson, and S. Zimmerman (2016): “Heterogeneous Beliefs and School
 Choice,” Working paper, Princeton University.

Kerr, P. (2003): “Parents Perplexed by High School Admissions Rule: Reply,” New York Times,
 November 3.

Kesten, O. (2010): “School Choice with Consent,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3),
 1297–1348.

Kesten, O., and M. Kurino (2012): “On the (im)possibility of improving upon the student-
 proposing deferred acceptance mechanism,” WZB Discussion Paper SP II 2012-202.

Klemperer, P. (2002): “What Really Matters in Auction Design,” Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives, 16(1), 169–189.

Kojima, F., and P. A. Pathak (2009): “Incentives and Stability in Large Two-Sided Matching
 Markets,” American Economic Review, 99(3), 608–627.

Lewbel, A. (2000): “Semiparametric qualitative response model estimation with unknown het-
  eroscedasticity or instrumental variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 97(1), 145–177.

Milgrom, P. R. (2004): Putting Auction Theory to Work. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
 bridge.

Narita, Y. (2016): “Match or Mismatch: Learning and Inertia in School Choice,” Working
 paper, MIT.

Neilson, C. (2014): “Targeted Vouchers, Competition among Schools and the Academic
 Achievement of Poor Students,” Unpublished working paper, Yale University.

Niederle, M., and A. E. Roth (2003): “Unraveling reduced mobility in a labor market:
  Gastroenterology with and without a centralized match,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(6),
  1342–1352.

Nobel (2012): “Scientific Background on the Svergies Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in
 Memory of Alfred Nobel: Stable Allocations and the Practice of Market Design,” Compiled
 by the Economic Sciences Prize Committee of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

Pathak, P. A., and P. Shi (2014): “Demand Modeling, Forecasting, and Counterfactuals, Part
  I,” NBER Working Paper, 19859.


                                              55
Pathak, P. A., and T. Sönmez (2008): “Leveling the Playing Field: Sincere and Sophisticated
  Players in the Boston Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1636–1652.

Rossi, P. E., G. M. Allenby, and R. McCulloch (2005): Bayesian Statistics and Market-
 ing. Wiley.

Rossi, P. E., R. E. McCulloch, and G. M. Allenby (1996): “The Value of Purchase
 History Data in Target Marketing,” Marketing Science, 15(4), 321–340.

Roth, A. E. (1982): “The Economics of Matching: Stability and Incentives,” Mathematics of
 Operations Research, 7, 617–628.

        (2015): Who Gets What — And Why: The New Economics of Matchmaking and Market
  Design. Eamon Dolan.

Roth, A. E., and X. Xing (1997): “Turnaround Time and Bottlenecks in Market Clearing: De-
 centralized Matching in the Market for Clinical Psychologists,” Journal of Political Economy,
 105(2), 284–329.

Rothstein, J. (2006): “Good Principals or Good Peers: Parental Valuation of School Charac-
 teristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdictions,”
 American Economic Review, 96(4), 1333–1350.

Shapley, L., and H. Scarf (1974): “On Cores and Indivisibility,” Journal of Mathematical
  Economics, 1, 23–28.

Sönmez, T. (1997): “Manipulation via Capacities in Two-Sided Matching Markets,” Journal of
  Economic Theory, 77, 197–204.

        (2013): “Bidding for Army Career Specialties: Improving the ROTC Branching Mech-
  anism,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1), 186–219.

Train, K. (2009): Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.

Tullis, T. (2014): “How Game Theory Helped Improve New York City’s High School Applica-
 tion Process,” NY Times, December 5.

Urquiola, M. (2005): “Does school choice lead to sorting? Evidence from Tiebout variation,”
 American Economic Review, 95(4), 1310–1326.

van der Vaart, A. W. (2000): Asymptotic Statistics. Cambridge Series in Statistical and
  Probabilistic Mathematics.

Vaznis, J. (2013): “Barros Proposes Single Application for City, Charter Schools,” Boston Globe,
  Education Desk, June 5.

Walters, C. (2014): “The Demand for Effective Charter Schools,” NBER Working Paper 20640.



                                              56
                                         Table A1. Model Fit of Correlation between Choices across Demand Specifications
                                   Correlation between            Coordinated Mechanism (2003-04)                Coordinated Mechanism (2004-05)
                                                                                    Specification                                  Specification
                                                                              Main           No Student                      Main           No Student
School Characteristic              Choice        Choice      Observed      Specification     Interactions   Observed      Specification     Interactions
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)          (6)            (7)                (8)
Distance                              1             2           0.47           0.16              0.09         0.50            0.17               0.07
                                      1             3           0.39           0.15              0.09         0.41            0.16               0.07
                                      2             3           0.44           0.17              0.12         0.47            0.16               0.07
High Math Performance                 1             2           0.35           0.39              0.03         0.39            0.42               0.03
                                      1             3           0.32           0.36              0.03         0.35            0.38               0.03
                                      2             3           0.34           0.33              0.03         0.39            0.36               0.03
Percent Free Lunch                    1             2           0.61           0.49              0.30         0.66            0.49               0.34
                                      1             3           0.54           0.46              0.28         0.60            0.47               0.33
                                      2             3           0.55           0.43              0.26         0.62            0.45               0.31
Percent White                         1             2           0.55           0.55              0.29         0.60            0.56               0.37
                                      1             3           0.47           0.52              0.26         0.54            0.54               0.36
                                      2             3           0.48           0.48              0.24         0.56            0.51               0.35
Size of 9th Grade                     1             2           0.29           0.60              0.07         0.34            0.59               0.09
                                      1             3           0.21           0.58              0.06         0.24            0.57               0.09
                                      2             3           0.27           0.56              0.06         0.33            0.56               0.08
Notes: Table reports the observed correlation between the school characteristic of the choice in column 1 with the choice in column 2 for the main specification (shown in column 3 of Table
7) and the specification with no student interactions (shown in column 1 of Table 7).
                                                   Table A2. Welfare Comparisons for Alternative Demand Specifications
                                                                                                                 School Choice
                                                             Neighborhood            Coordinated                Student Optimal                                    Ordinal Pareto Efficient
                                                              Assignment              Mechanism                     Matching                                              Matching
                                                                   (1)                     (2)                         (3)                                                   (4)
                                                                                          A. Alternative Behavioral Assumptions
Choice Among Eligible Programs                                   -25.22                  -5.48                        -5.33                                                    -4.68
Top 3 Choices                                                    -19.47                   -3.82                       -3.70                                                    -3.19
Excluding Full Lists                                             -18.81                   -3.71                       -3.59                                                    -3.09
Excluding Last Choice                                            -18.70                   -3.69                       -3.58                                                    -3.07

                                                                                             B. Alternative Samples and Demand Model Interactions
Main Specification                                                     -18.96                         -3.73                    -3.62                                           -3.11
Excluding Staten Island                                                -19.68                         -3.93                    -3.82                                           -3.28
No Student Interactions                                                -15.32                         -3.29                    -3.19                                           -2.76
No Random Coefficients                                                 -15.95                         -3.22                    -3.12                                           -2.67

Number of students reassignments relative to                                                                                               2,344                              10,881
column (2)
Notes: Utility from alternative assignments relative to utilitarian assignment computed using actual preferences and ignoring all school-side constraints except capacity. See notes to Table
8 for details on mechanism calculations. All mechanism counterfactuals used these estimates for all applicants in the mechanism comparison sample. Choice among eligible programs
restricts each applicant's choice set to include eligible programs. If an applicant ranked an ineligible program, that program is included in the choice set. Top 3 choices refers to estimates
that only use the top 3 choices of applicants. Excl. Full lists refers to estimates that only use rankings of students who rank fewer than 12 choices. Excl. Last choice refers to estimates that
use all rankings except the last one. No student interactions and No random coefficient refers to the specification in column 1 and 2 of Table 7, respectively.
                                               Table A3. Posterior Means of Preference Estimates for Alternative Demand Specifications
                                                                  No Student                                              Models with Random Coefficients
                                                                 Interactions                                                             Students that                 Choice
                                                                                 Without                                                   ranked less   Drop Staten    Among
                                                                                 Random                        Top Three      All except     than 12        Island      Eligible
                                                                                Coefficients     All Choices    Choices      last Choice     schools      students     Programs
                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)
High Math Achievement
   Main effect                                                      0.016           0.027          -0.029        -0.010        -0.026        -0.024         -0.032      -0.058
                                                                   (0.016)         (0.014)         (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.017)        (0.045)     (0.039)
  Baseline Math                                                                     0.031           0.039         0.051         0.039         0.038          0.040       0.050
                                                                                   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
  Baseline English                                                                  0.025           0.039         0.047         0.039         0.041          0.040       0.049
                                                                                   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)
  Subsidized Lunch                                                                 -0.008          -0.016        -0.015        -0.016        -0.016         -0.018      -0.018
                                                                                   (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
  Neighborhood Income (in 1000s)                                                    0.004           0.012         0.012         0.011         0.011          0.013       0.012
                                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.001)
  Limited English Proficiency                                                      -0.002           0.000        -0.009         0.000         0.000         -0.001      -0.003
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.003)     (0.004)
  Special Education                                                                -0.007          -0.006         0.003        -0.006         0.002         -0.005      -0.008
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.005)
Percent Subsidized Lunch
  Main effect                                                      -0.085          -0.057          -0.069        -0.044        -0.064        -0.067         -0.103      -0.113
                                                                   (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.062)     (0.058)
  Asian                                                                            -0.009          -0.012        -0.022        -0.012        -0.012         -0.016      -0.021
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.003)
  Black                                                                             0.005           0.009        -0.004         0.008         0.007          0.005      -0.012
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
  Hispanic                                                                          0.031           0.043         0.049         0.043         0.043          0.041       0.043
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
  Subsidized Lunch                                                                  0.007           0.011         0.013         0.011         0.011          0.011       0.012
                                                                                   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
  Neighborhood Income (in 1000s)                                                   -0.004          -0.008        -0.011        -0.008        -0.009         -0.008      -0.010
                                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)
Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)
   Main effect                                                     -0.164          -0.092          -0.113        -0.151        -0.077        -0.039         -0.188      -0.153
                                                                   (0.036)         (0.032)         (0.048)       (0.054)       (0.043)       (0.043)        (0.192)     (0.178)
  Baseline Math                                                                    -0.017          -0.026        -0.036        -0.026        -0.022         -0.027      -0.031
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.008)     (0.008)
  Baseline English                                                                 -0.038          -0.066        -0.108        -0.066        -0.075         -0.067      -0.087
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.010)        (0.008)     (0.009)
  Subsidized Lunch                                                                  0.016           0.038         0.039         0.036         0.050          0.032       0.062
                                                                                   (0.003)         (0.012)       (0.015)       (0.011)       (0.014)        (0.013)     (0.013)
  Neighborhood Income (in 1000s)                                                   -0.011          -0.012        -0.005        -0.013        -0.019         -0.010      -0.017
                                                                                   (0.001)         (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)
  Special Education                                                                -0.031          -0.048        -0.087        -0.048        -0.044         -0.049      -0.058
                                                                                   (0.005)         (0.022)       (0.028)       (0.021)       (0.027)        (0.022)     (0.025)
Percent White
  Main effect                                                      -0.002           0.070           0.062         0.104         0.069         0.076          0.062       0.093
                                                                   (0.014)         (0.012)         (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.059)     (0.062)
  Asian                                                                            -0.054          -0.075        -0.094        -0.075        -0.079         -0.082      -0.100
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.004)
  Black                                                                            -0.084          -0.124        -0.157        -0.124        -0.132         -0.139      -0.189
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)
  Hispanic                                                                         -0.047          -0.084        -0.095        -0.084        -0.089         -0.099      -0.119
                                                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)
Spanish Language Program
  Limited English Proficient                                                       14.042          15.437        16.004        15.415        16.213          15.769     20.022
                                                                                   (0.282)        (0.307)       (0.543)       (0.312)       (0.378)         (0.328)    (0.412)
  Limited English Proficient x                                                      -9.452        -10.502       -10.184       -10.509       -10.889         -10.765    -14.152
                                                                                   (0.407)        (0.445)       (0.672)       (0.449)       (0.503)         (0.472)    (0.577)
Asian Language Program
   Limited English Proficient                                                      10.623          11.814        12.466       11.811         11.994         12.066      15.221
                                                                                   (0.108)         (0.120)       (0.219)      (0.119)        (0.152)        (0.125)     (0.158)
  Limited English Proficient x                                                      -6.373          -7.091        -8.299       -7.086         -6.870         -7.259      -8.960
Other Language Program                                                             (0.342)         (0.378)       (0.657)      (0.385)        (0.417)        (0.390)     (0.490)
  Limited English Proficient                                                         6.538           7.448         8.538        7.450          7.656          7.597       9.873
                                                                                   (0.183)         (0.204)       (0.320)      (0.206)        (0.249)        (0.210)     (0.269)
  Standard Deviation of ε                                           7.226            7.385           7.858         8.032        7.857          7.869          8.025     10.059
                                                                   (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.013)       (0.022)      (0.013)        (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.022)
  Standard Deviation of ξ                                           3.519            2.954           3.676         3.936        3.609          3.554          4.155       5.151
                                                                   (0.121)         (0.100)         (0.129)       (0.131)      (0.121)        (0.119)        (0.817)     (0.650)
Random Coefficients (Covariances)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)     Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)                                       1.584         2.351         1.584         1.967          1.651       1.837
                                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.013)        (0.010)     (0.012)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)      Percent White                                                   -0.006        -0.010        -0.006        -0.005         -0.007      -0.009
                                                                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)      Percent Subsidized Lunch                                        -0.002        -0.004        -0.002        -0.003         -0.003      -0.002
                                                                                                   (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)
  Size of 9th Grade (in 100s)      High Math Achievement                                           -0.011        -0.015        -0.011        -0.009         -0.012      -0.015
                                                                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
  Percent White                    Percent White                                                    0.008         0.010         0.008         0.008          0.009       0.013
                                                                                                   (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)
  Percent White                    Percent Subsidized Lunch                                        -0.001         0.000        -0.001        -0.001         -0.001      -0.002
                                                                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
  Percent White                    High Math Achievement                                              0.005          0.006         0.005          0.004         0.005         0.007
                                                                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
  Percent Subsidized Lunch         Percent Subsidized Lunch                                           0.002          0.005         0.002          0.003         0.003         0.003
                                                                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
  Percent Subsidized Lunch         High Math Achievement                                              0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000        -0.001
                                                                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
  High Math Achievement            High Math Achievement                                              0.016          0.021         0.016          0.016         0.017         0.022
                                                                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Program Type Dummies                                                                                    X              X             X              X             X             X
Program Specialty Dummies                                                                               X              X             X              X             X             X

Number of Students                                                 69907            69907            69907          69907          69907         55695           65518         69907
Number of Ranks                                                    542666          542666            542666         197245         55323         372122         530861         542666
Notes: Estimates of demand system with submitted ranks over 497 program choices in 235 schools. All columns use all students. See Table 7 and Table A2 for additional details.
                          a) Percent Subsidized lunch                          b) Percent white




                    c) Baseline Math Standardized Score                           d) Distance




            Figure A1. Comparison of Characteristics of Enrolled Students at Each School
                       between Uncoordinated and Coordinated Mechanism
This figure reports school characteristics measured by the attributes of students enrolled at each school across mechanisms.
                        The dotted line is the 45 degree line; the solid line is the least squares line fit.
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
a)	  High	  Math	  Achievement	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	             b)	  Percent	  Subsidized	  Lunch	                                          	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	                                                                                             	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	                                                                                               	  
c)	  Percent	  White	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  d)	            	  	  	  istance	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  D                                       	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              	                                                                                               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure	  A2.	  Model	  Fit	  
	  
                                                                                                         This	  figure	  reports	  the	  observed	  and	  estimated	  school	  characteristics	  for	  different	  student	  ranked	  choices	  
                                                                                                                                  The	  estimates	  are	  from	  the	  main	  specification	  in	  column	  3	  of	  Table	  7.	  
              Figure A3. Comparison of School Market Shares between
      2002-03 Uncoordinated Mechanism and 2003-04 Coordinated Mechanism

This figure plots school market shares defined as the count of applicants ranking a program at a given
school divided by the total number of choices expressed for schools to which students can apply to in
           2002-03 and 2003-04. Market shares are normalized within this set to sum to 1.
                             Figure A4. Comparison of School Market Shares between
                       2003-04 Coordinated Mechanism and 2004-05 Coordinated Mechanism

 This figure plots school market shares defined as the count of applicants ranking a program at a given school divided by the total
number of choices expressed for schools to which students can apply in 2003-04 and 2004-05. Market shares are normalized within
                              this set to sum to 1. The slope of the line fit is 0.93 and the R2 is 0.86.
                              Online Appendix for
                “The Welfare Effects of Coordinated Assignment:
              Evidence from the New York City High School Match”

                 Atila Abdulkadiroğlu             Nikhil Agarwal              Parag A. Pathak

                                                 November 2016


A     Appendix: Computational (Not for Publication)
The demand model is an ordered version of the model in Rossi, McCulloch, and Allenby (1996).
We assume that the utility for student i for program j can be written as:
                                         X                X
                            uij = δj +       αl zil xlj +   γik xkj − dij + εij ,
                                                  l                k
                        with    δj     = x j β + ξj .

We parametrize the random coefficients as follows:

                       γi ∼ N (0, Σγ ),          ξj ∼ N (0, σξ2 ),          εij ∼ N (0, σε2 ).

The priors for β, α, Σγ , σξ2 , and σε2 are as follows:

                                     β ∼ N (0, Σ̄β ),        α ∼ N (0, Σ̄α )

                 Σγ ∼ IW(Σ̄γ , νγ ),      σξ2 ∼ IW(σ̄ξ2 , νξ ),        and     σε2 ∼ IW(σ̄ε2 , νε ),
where IW is the inverse Wishart distribution. Following Chapter 5 of Rossi, Allenby, and Mc-
Culloch (2005), we set diffuse priors as follows: the prior variances of β and α are 100 times the
identity matrix, and

                           (Σ̄γ , νγ ) = ((3 + dim(γi ))Idim(γi ) , 3 + dim(γi )),

                         (σ̄ξ2 , νξ ) = (1, 2)    and (σ̄ε2 , νε ) = (3 + J, 3 + J),
where Ik is the identity matrix of dimension k.
   The Gibbs sampler iterates through the following steps (where, for notational simplicity, we
omit conditioning on the observed data and the priors). First, we iterate through the observed
rank-ordered lists to update the values of uij . We then draw utilities for the unranked options
by observing that their indirect utility must be at most the indirect utility of the lowest ranked
option. This step can be written as

                                           uij |ui−j , ri , β, ξ, γi , α,

where each simulation is from a (two-sided) truncated normal.


                                                         1
   Given the utilities, the posteriors of ξ, β and α are multivariate normal distributions that
can be computed as follows:

                                        ξ | u, γ, β, α, σξ2 ,
                                        β | u, γ, ξ, α, Σ̄β ,
                                        α | u, γ, β, α, Σ̄α ,

where u and γ stack the utilities and random coefficients for all students. We then update the
student-specific random coefficients:

                                         γi |ui , β, ξ, α, Σγ .

The priors and distribution of εij imply that a posterior is a multivariate normal distribution
for each student. Finally, we sample from the posteriors σε2 |ε, σξ2 |ξ and Σγ |γ, which are given by
inverse Wishart distributions.
    For the Full sample estimates in the main specification, we iterate through the Markov
Chain 1.25 million times, and discard the first 0.75 million draws as “burn in” to ensure mixing.
We diagnosed mixing by examining trace plots and computing the Potential Scale Reduction
Factor (PSRF) following Gelman and Rubin (1992). Because of computational constraints in
drawing from separate chains, we split the draws after the burn-in period into three equally sized
continguous pieces and computed the PSRF using the first and third pieces. The PSRFs for
almost all parameters were within 1.1 and were within 1.3 for all parameters. Trace plots for the
few parameters with PSRFs higher than 1.1 did not indicate any obvious convergence issues.
    Estimates of the 10% samples were computed by iterating through the Markov Chain 1 million
times and discarding the first 0.75 million draws. We obtained estimates from three distinct
chains initiated from dispersed starting values. We compared variances within each chain and
the variance between chains, by computing both within and across PSRF chain values. For nearly
all parameters, the PSRF is close to one, which suggests we have reached the target distribution.
    Our estimates report the posterior mean and standard deviations. We examined the his-
tograms of the marginal distributions of the posteriors to assess the skew. These histograms
indicate that the means, modes and medians of the parameters in the main specification are
similar.




                                                   2
B    Appendix: Subway Distances (Not for Publication)
In New York, high school students who live within 0.5 miles of a school are not eligible for trans-
portation. If a student lives between 0.5 and 1.5 miles from a school, the Metropolitan Transit
Authority provides them with a half-fare student Metrocard that works only for bus transporta-
tion. If they reside 1.5 miles or more from a school, they obtain full-fare transportation with a
student Metrocard that works for subways and buses and is issued by the school transportation
office.
     Since subway is a common mode of transportation in New York City, this appendix assesses
how the driving distance measure we utilize in the paper differs from commuting distance using
NYC’s subway system. Subway distance is defined as the sum of distance on foot to the student’s
nearest subway station, travel distance on the subway network to a school’s nearest subway
station, and the distance on foot from that station to the school. To compute these distances,
we used ESRI’s ArcGIS software and information on the NYC subway system from GIS files
downloaded from Metropolitan Transit Authority’s website. Details on these sources are in the
Data appendix.
     The overall correlation between driving distance and total commuting distance for all student-
program pairs is 0.96. A regression of commuting distance on driving distance yields a coefficient
of 0.77. Table B2 provides a summary of the correlations by the student and school borough.
The correlations are higher than 0.84, except for schools in Staten Island, where the subway
system is not quite as extensive as in other boroughs. In fact, it may be that driving distances
are a more accurate measure than subway distance of Staten Island.
     Panels B and C show that most students are assigned to schools in their borough in both
the uncoordinated and coordinated mechanisms. In both mechanisms, a very small number of
students who do not live in Staten Island are assigned to schools there, and conversely, only a
small number of students living in Staten Island are assigned to schools in a different borough.




                                                3
                                          Table B1. Offer Processing in the Second Year of the Coordinated Mechanism (2004-05)
                                                                             Distance to School (in miles)
                                                                                                                                                                         In NYC Public, but at
                                                                                                                          Exit from NYC Public                            School Other than
                                             Number of Students                   Assignment           Enrollment                Schools                                      Assigned
                                                    (1)                                (2)                 (3)                     (4)                                           (5)
                                                                                           Coordinated Mechanism - 2004 - 2005
Overall                                               69,013                          4.07                3.96                    6.6%                                             6.9%

Main Round                                            60,251                          4.11                           3.99                           6.5%                           6.4%
Supplementary Round                                    5,475                          4.16                           4.03                           8.5%                          13.6%
Administrative Round                                   3,287                          3.25                           3.26                           4.9%                           5.4%
Notes: Columns 2-5 report means. Coordinated mechanism for 2004-05 based on deferred acceptance. Student distance is calculated as road distance using ArcGIS. Assignment is the school assigned
at the conclusion of the high school assignment process. Enrollment is the school in which a student enrolls in October following application. Assigned students exit New York City if they are not
enrolled in any NYC public high school in October following application. Enrolled in School other than Assigned means the student is in NYC Public but in a school other than that assigned at end of
match. Final assignment round is the round during which an offer to the final assigned school is first made.
                                      Table B2. Subway and Driving Distance and Cross-Borough Travel
                                                                      School Borough
                                             Bronx       Brooklyn       Manhattan       Queens       Staten Island                                  Total
Student Borough                                (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)                                        (6)
                                                           A. Correlation between Subway and Driving Distance
Bronx                                         0.90          0.93           0.97           0.91           0.76                                         …
Brooklyn                                      0.90          0.91           0.95           0.91           0.92                                         …
Manhattan                                     0.96          0.95           0.98           0.95           0.76                                         …
Queens                                        0.91          0.91           0.95           0.87           0.85                                         …
Staten Island                                 0.84          0.92           0.85           0.89           0.73                                         …

                                                                   B. Cross-Borough Travel in Uncoordinated Mechanism
Bronx                                          15,187                41           1,382             66            1                                16,677
Brooklyn                                         13                20,877         1,073            502           12                                22,477
Manhattan                                        89                  42           8,604             24            1                                 8,760
Queens                                           15                 493            586            16,498          0                                17,592
Staten Island                                     2                  13             59               4          4,774                               4,852

                                                                    C. Cross-Borough Travel in Coordinated Mechanism
Bronx                                          13,335                85           2,049             84             8                               15,561
Brooklyn                                         39                20,035         1,858            846            40                               22,818
Manhattan                                       238                 108           7,492             52             7                                7,897
Queens                                           26                 584           1,028           14,972           9                               16,619
Staten Island                                     3                  37            69                4          3,913                               4,026
Notes: Panel A reports on the correlation between student-school distance as computed by road distance and subway distance. Subway distance is the sum of
distance on foot to the student's nearest subway station, travel distance on the subway network to a school's nearest subway station, and the distance on foot
from that station to the school. Both distance measures are computed using ArcGIS. Panels B and C report on the number of students in each borough who are
assigned to schools in each borough.
                                    Table B3. Main Round Assignments in Coordinated Mechanism, by Length of Rank Order List
                                                                                    Length of Rank Order List
   Choice Assigned             All          1        2        3         4        5        6         7          8      9                     10      11       12
        Total                69,907       4,597    3,282    4,128     4,622    4,952    4,776     4,406      4,390  4,558                  6,135   9,849   14,212

         1                    31.9%             88.6%        40.7%        35.2%       31.9%        27.9%   28.6%   27.1%   25.7%   25.6%   25.4%   26.2%   25.2%
         2                    15.0%                          39.8%        17.7%       15.1%        14.8%   14.6%   13.7%   13.9%   13.9%   15.2%   14.7%   14.6%
         3                    10.2%                                       24.3%       11.6%        11.6%   10.6%   10.0%   10.8%    9.9%   10.4%   10.4%   10.5%
         4                    7.3%                                                    18.0%         9.3%    8.1%    7.9%    8.0%    7.6%    7.6%    7.8%    8.2%
         5                    5.4%                                                                 12.8%    7.0%    7.0%    6.3%    6.1%    6.6%    6.2%    6.7%
         6                    3.9%                                                                         10.2%    5.7%    4.9%    5.0%    4.9%    4.8%    5.3%
         7                    2.9%                                                                                  8.1%    4.3%    4.4%    4.0%    4.1%    4.3%
         8                    2.0%                                                                                          5.8%    3.4%    3.3%    2.9%    3.5%
         9                    1.5%                                                                                                  4.0%    2.8%    2.7%    2.8%
        10                    1.1%                                                                                                          3.2%    2.3%    2.6%
        11                    0.8%                                                                                                                  2.6%    2.2%
        12                    0.5%                                                                                                                          2.5%
     Unassigned               17.5%             11.4%        19.5%        22.8%       23.3%        23.6%   20.9%   20.6%   20.3%   20.1%   16.7%   15.3%   11.6%
Notes: This table reports choices assigned after the main round in the coordinated mechanism in 2003-04.
                                                        Table B4. Assignment and Enrollment Decisions of Students in Coordinated Mechanism by Rank Order List Length
                                                                                                                                Length of Rank Order List
                                                            All          1st       2nd        3rd          4th          5th         6th         7th        8th       9th                                              10th           11th           12th
                                                                                                               A. Students Offered Assignment in Main Round
Number of Students                                        57,658       4,072      2,641      3,187        3,545        3,782       3,776       3,497      3,499     3,642                                            5,113          8,340          12,564
Average Rank of Assignment                                 3.00         1.00      1.49        1.86         2.21        2.53         2.76        3.04       3.20      3.35                                            3.49           3.60            3.93

Accept Main Round Assignment                               92.7%           91.2%          88.5%          88.4%           90.2%          91.2%          92.3%           91.9%          93.0%          93.6%           94.5%          94.6%          94.3%
Enroll in Private School                                    2.5%            6.9%           7.4%           6.1%            4.5%           2.9%           2.4%            2.1%           1.9%           1.2%            1.0%           0.7%           1.0%
Remain in Current School                                    1.2%            1.2%           2.0%           2.3%            1.9%           2.1%           1.4%            1.8%           1.4%           1.2%            0.9%           0.7%           0.6%
Attend Specialized or Alternative School                    0.1%            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.1%           0.1%            0.2%           0.1%           0.1%            0.2%           0.1%           0.0%
Participate in Supplementary Round                          0.3%            0.1%           0.2%           0.2%            0.4%           0.5%           0.6%            0.3%           0.6%           0.3%            0.3%           0.2%           0.3%

                                                                                                                                  B. Students Unassigned after Main Round
Number of Students                                         12,249           525            641            941            1,077          1,170      1,000        909                    891            916            1,022          1,509          1,648
Participate in Supplementary Round                         52.6%           26.1%          44.8%          54.0%           54.1%          56.2%      55.6%       55.7%                  52.7%          46.5%           43.5%          49.6%          68.2%
Enroll at Supplementary Round Assignment                   72.9%           73.0%          85.0%          76.0%           75.5%          77.8%      73.0%       75.9%                  74.5%          68.8%           71.7%          69.5%          66.3%
Enroll in Private School                                    2.8%            6.7%           6.1%           4.7%            3.5%           3.8%       2.2%        1.7%                   1.6%           1.9%            2.2%           1.4%           1.9%
Remain in Current School                                    3.2%            6.7%           6.2%           5.6%            5.3%           4.4%       3.2%        3.3%                   2.5%           2.0%            1.5%           0.9%           1.8%
Attend Specialized or Alternative School                    0.3%            0.8%           0.5%           0.6%            0.2%           0.1%       0.3%        0.3%                   0.3%           0.1%            0.2%           0.5%           0.1%
Notes: Assignment and enrollment decisions of students in the demand estimation sample under the coordinated mechanism. Panel A restricts to students who received an assignment to an NYC Public School in the Main Round. Panel B restricts to students who
did not receive an assignment in the Main Round.
C     Appendix: Data (Not for Publication)
The data for this study come from the NYC Department of Education (DOE), the 2000 US Cen-
sus, ArcGIS Business Analyst toolbox, and GFTS NYC subway data from the NYC Metropolitan
Transit Authority. These sources provide us with data on students, schools, the rank-order lists
submitted by students, assignments of students to schools, or the distance between students and
schools on either the road network or the subway system. Students and programs are uniquely
identified by a number that can be used to populate fields and merge across DOE datasets. We
geocode student and school addresses to merge with geo-spatial data.
    We use three samples of students in our analysis: one sample to estimate demand and two to
infer the welfare effects of the mechanism change. The welfare samples consist of public middle
school students who matriculate into NYC Public High Schools in the academic years 2003-04
and 2004-05. The demand sample consists of public middle school students who participated in
the Main round of the mechanism in 2003-04. The demand sample and the welfare sample from
2003-04 are not nested because students participating in the mechanism may choose to enroll
in schools outside the NYC Public School system, whereas other students may be assigned to
public schools outside the main assignment process.

C.1    Students
Assignment and Rank Data

Data on the assignment system come from the DOE’s enrollment office. The files indicate all
final assignments of students in both analysis years. We use these assignments as the basis of
our baseline welfare calculations. In addition, the assignment system also provides separate files
that detail the rank orders, applications, or processes through which a student is assigned to a
given school.
     We use the records from the Main round in the new mechanism to obtain the rank-order
lists submitted by students and the assignment proposed by the mechanism. A total of 87,355
students participated in the main round.
     For the old mechanism, the assignment system provides student choice and decision files for
the Main round. The former contains the ranked applications submitted by the students and the
latter provides the school decisions to accept/reject/waitlist students and the students’ responses
to these offers, if any. A total of 84,272 students participated in the Main round.
     The old assignment system also contains several files documenting the supplementary variable
assignment process (VAS) round.

Assignment Rounds and Offers in the Old Mechanism

The files in the old mechanism do not contain direct information on how students were assigned
to their programs. However, we are able to determine whether a student applied to a particular
program/school in the Main process or the supplementary VAS process. We first append fields
indicating whether a student applied to her assigned program in the main process. We also
append a field indicating whether a student applied to her assigned school in the supplementary


                                                8
VAS process. It turns out that no final assignment appears in both the Main and the VAS files.
We therefore categorize the former assignments as Main-round assignments and the latter as
VAS assignments. We assume all other assignments occur in the Administrative round. Based
on conversations with DOE officials, we surmise that students were typically assigned to the
school closest to home that had open seats. Our understanding is that most students who
participated in the VAS process did not have a default local school. Analyzing the geographic
distribution if students assigned administratively, as per our definition, supports this; many parts
of NYC have no students assigned administratively.
    Finally, we also append the number of offers made to a particular student using a file with
the initial school response to the student application.

Assignment Rounds in the New Mechanism

We use the NYC assignment files described above to determine the process through which a
student was assigned a given school.
    The assignment files in the new mechanism contain, for every student program-pair ranked in
either the Main or the Supplementary round, two fields indicating whether the student is eligible
for the school and if the student was assigned to that school. A final assignment is treated as a
Main round assignment if it appears as an eligible assignment in the Main round. Assignments
not made in the Main round are treated as Supplementary round assignments if they appear in
the Supplementary round files. All other assignments are treated as Administrative assignments.

Student Characteristics

The records from the NYC Department of Education contain students’ street address, previous
and current grade, gender, ethnicity, and whether the student was enrolled in a public middle
school. Each student is identified by a unique number that allows us to merge these data with
additional NYC DOE data on student scores in middle school standardized tests, Limited English
Proficiency status, and Special Education status. A separate file indicates subsidized lunch status
as of the 2004-05 enrollment. If a student is not in that file, we code the student as not receiving
a subsidized lunch.
    There are several standardized tests taken by middle school students in NYC. To avoid the
concern that two different tests may not be comparable indicators of student achievement, we
identify the modal standardized math and reading tests taken by students in our sample. These
are the May tests with codes CTB and TEM respectively. Of the students who did not take either
of these tests in May, at most 10% (<2% of the full sample) took a different standardized test
in the same subject while in middle school. We verify that test score distribution and support
are similar across the two years in our sample. Some students took the test multiple times. The
highest score obtained by a student was used in these instances.
    In 2002-03, the math and reading scores are missing for 13.56% and 17.55% of students,
respectively, from our final sample. For the 2003-04 welfare sample, scores are missing for
8.29% and 13.57% students, respectively, for math and reading. In the demand sample the
corresponding fractions are 7.13% and 12.56%.


                                                 9
Geographic Data

We use the 2000 US Census to obtain block group family income. Student home address and
distances to school were calculated using ArcGIS. Corrections to the addresses, when necessary,
were made using Google Map Tools followed by manual checks and corrections.
    The final address set was geocoded using ArcGIS geocoder with the address-set in the Business
Analyst toolbox (ver. 10.0). We first used an exact match to determine if a student’s address
can be geocoded precisely to a rooftop. If the results were unreliable, we coded the student
to the zip code centroid. The vast majority of students were rooftop geocoded. The OD Cost
matrix tool in the Network Analyst toolbox was used to compute the distance by road for each
student-school pair. The road network is also obtained from Business Analyst.
    Our computation of subway distances assumes that a student first walks to the closest subway
stop, then uses the subway system to travel to the subway stop closest to the school, and finally
walks from the subway to the school. The Subway stop locations are taken from the GTFS
and geodata data on the NYC Metropolitan Transit Authority website. The Network Analyst
toolbox is used to compute the walking distance and the GTFS data is used to compute the
distance on the subway system between every pair of subway stops.

Merging Student Records

Assignment and other DOE files are matched using the unique student identifier linking these
data. Each 8th-grade non-private middle school student in the Department of Education records
could be merged uniquely with a student in the NYC assignment records. Less than 0.45% of
students with known assignments in the records of the NYC assignment system records could
not be merged with a student in the DOE records. These students were not included in the
analysis.

C.2    Applicant Sample Construction
Our goal is to consider first-time applicants to the NYC public (unspecialized) high school system
who live in New York City and attend a public middle school in 8th grade. Below, we describe
the procedure used to construct the samples. The selection procedure is also summarized in
Table B1.

Welfare Sample

The welfare samples are constructed from the NYC DOE’s records for all students enrolling in
9th grade at a high school in the academic years 2003-04 and 2004-05.
    Because our choice set in the demand analysis will be restricted to unspecialized, non-charter
high schools in the public school system, the welfare sample does not include students who
matriculated to such schools.
    Of the 92,623 8th grade students matriculating into 9th grade at a NYC public school in 2002-
03, 11,790 (12.73%) students went to a private middle school and were dropped. Another 8,051
(8.69%) students were not included in the analysis because their assignments were unknown, or


                                               10
because they matriculated to either a Specialized high school or a charter school. Finally, we
exclude students in schools that were closed (i.e. no assignments in the new system).
    In 2003-04, about 1.3% of students had also participated in the old mechanism, presumably
because these students repeated 8th grade. These students were considered part of the 2002-03
sample and only their 2002-03 high school assignment is considered in our analysis. We also
drop private middle school students and those not assigned to public school. These fractions
were similar to the 2002-03 numbers, at 12.21% and 8.13% respectively. We also drop students
who were assigned to new schools.
    These selections into the sample leave us with 70,358 students in 2002-03 and 66,921 students
in 2003-04. Students who may have been assigned to a high school program through a process
other than the Main round are included in these samples.

Demand Sample

This sample is sourced from the NYC Assignment system’s records on the participants in the
Main round of the mechanism. As discussed in the text, we use data only from the Main round
of the mechanism because this round has the most desirable incentive properties.
    We do not want to exclude students on the basis of final assignment to avoid selecting on
the choice to leave the public school system. In order to most closely match welfare sample
construction, we select the demand sample only on characteristics that can be considered as
exogenous at the time of participation.
    Since we focus on first-time applicants in 8th grade, we exclude 747 students who were part
of the 2002-03 files and 5,311 students who were 9th graders. Presumably, these students were
held back in 8th or 9th grade. This leaves us with a sample of 81,297 8th grade students.
    Of the 8th-grade participants, 9,301 (11.44%) students were from private middle schools
and were dropped. We also excluded students designated as belonging to the top 2% of their
middle school classes because these students are prioritized at education option schools, creating
incentives to misreport their preferences. These are 2.5% of the non-private 8th grade population.
    A total of 216 students did not rank any public schools in our sample. After excluding these
students, a total of 69,907 students remain in the sample we use for the demand analysis.

C.3    Programs/Schools
NYC Department of Education School Report Cards

The school characteristics were taken from the report card files provided by the NYC Depart-
ment of Education. These data provide information on a school’s enrollment statistics, racial
composition of student body, attendance rates, suspensions, teacher numbers and experience,
and graduating class Regents Math and English performance. A unique identifier for each school
allows these data to be merged with data from our other sources.
    There were significant differences in the file formats and field names across the years. To
keep the school characteristics constant across years, we use the data from the 2003-04 report
cards as the primary source. This corresponds to information from school years prior to the
new assignment mechanism. Except for data on the math and reading achievement, variable

                                               11
descriptions were comparable across years. For these comparable variables, we used the 2002-03
data only when the 2003-04 data were not available. The coverage of the characteristics for the
school sample is enumerated in Table B2.

Assignment System and DOE files

Assignment data contain a list of all school programs in the public school system along with
an identifier for the associated high school. The DOE provided a separate file with data on the
school addresses and identifiers that allows us to merge that information with the assignment
system database. A second identifier can be used to merge these data with other fields in the
department of education records described above.
    Across the two years, the high school identifiers in the files were inconsistent for a small
number of schools in our sample. These were matched by school name and address. One
school moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan and was investigated to ensure the records were
appropriately matched.

Program Characteristics

Program characteristics are taken from the DOE’s High School Directory, which is made available
to students before the application process. Reliable data on program types were not available
in 2002-03. The 2002-03 program types were imputed from the 2003-04 program types if the
program was present in both years. Otherwise, the program was categorized as a general program.
     The numerous program types were aggregated into fewer broad categories. The items in the
list below are the aggregated categories that include all the subcategories described by the data.

  1. Arts: Dance, Instrument Performance, Musical Theater, Performing and Visual, Perform-
     ing Arts, Theater, Theater Tech, Visual Arts, Vocal Performance.

  2. Humanities/Interdisciplinary: Education, Humanities/Interdisciplinary.

  3. Business/Accounting: Accounting, Business, Business Law, Computer Business, Finance,
     International Business, Marketing, Travel Business.

  4. Math/Science: Engineering, Engineering – Aerospace, Engineering – Electrical, Environ-
     mental, Math and Science, Science and Math.

  5. Career : Architecture, Computer Tech, Computerized Mech, Cosmetology, Journalism, Vet-
     erinary, Vision Care Technology.

  6. Vocational : Auto, Aviation, Clerical, Construction, Electrical Construction, Health, Heat-
     ing, Hospitality, Plumbing, Transportation.

  7. Government/law : Law, Law Enforcement, Law and Social Justice, Public Service.

  8. Other: Communication, Expeditionary, Preservation, Sports.

  9. Zoned

                                               12
 10. General : General, Unknown.

    Finally, some programs adopt a language of instruction other than English. We categorized
the languages as Spanish, English, Asian Languages, and Other.

C.4    School Sample Construction
We consider NYC public middle school 8th grade students assigned to public high schools that
are not charters, specialized or parochial. Our analysis uses two school samples, one for each
year in our analysis.
    To construct these samples, we started with the set of schools and programs in the assignment
records. To analyze rank data, we added the set of school programs that were ranked by any
student in our demand sample. This initial set consists of 743 (301) programs (schools) in 2002-03
and 677 (293) programs (schools) in 2003-04.
    In 2003-04, this list contained 62 parochial school programs. We verified that each of the 130
students matriculating to these school programs were private middle-schoolers. These schools
were dropped from the analysis because private middle-schoolers are not in the population of
interest. Subsequently, we dropped all charter and specialized high school programs and other
school programs that do not have assignments and were not ranked by any student in our sample.
    A total of 9 continuing student programs accepted students only from their associated mid-
dle school. Since these programs cannot be chosen by students who were not in those schools in
8th grade, we combine these programs with a generic program (e.g., unscreened, English, gen-
eral/humanities/math). Rank-order lists for students who ranked both the continuing students’
only program and the associated program were modified as described below.
    Finally, we dropped new and closed schools from the analysis. Closed schools were ones that
admitted students in 2002-03 but not in 2003-04. The set of new schools was collected from a
separate DOE directory of new schools. These schools were not well advertised and very few
students ranked them, making calculations with those schools unreliable.
    The number of schools and programs at each stage of our selection procedure is also summa-
rized in Table B2.

C.5    Program Capacities
Program capacities are not provided separately in the data files. We have estimated program
capacities from the actual match files and students’ final assignments. The capacity of each
program is initially set to zero. If a student in our demand sample is assigned a program at the
end of the assignment process, the capacity of the program is increased by one. Otherwise, if
the student is assigned a program in the Main round, the capacity of the program is increased
by one. Finally, if a student is not assigned in the Main round and is assigned a program in the
Supplementary round, the capacity of the program is increased by one.
    Education Option programs are divided into six buckets: High Select, High Random, Middle
Select, Middle Random, Low Select and Low Random. Bucket capacities are calculated as above
by taking into account the category of the assigned student. For example, if a student of High
category is assigned an Education Option program, then the capacity of a High Select bucket is

                                               13
increased by one. If the current capacity of the High Select bucket is less than or equal to that of
High Random, then the capacity of the High Select bucket is increased, otherwise the capacity
of the High Random bucket is increased.

C.6    Program Priorities
Program type determines how students are priority-ordered. The data contains a list of all
programs with program-specific information, including type, building number, street address,
etc. When students have the same priority, the tie is broken randomly. The random numbers
are generated by computer during our simulations.
     The assignment data contains several fields that determine a student’s priority order in pro-
grams. Priority group is a number assigned by the NYC DOE depending on students’ home
addresses, program location, etc. High school rank is a number assigned by each program. This
number may reflect a student’s ranking among all applicants to an Education Option program,
whether a student attended the information session of a limited unscreened program, etc. These
fields are provided for every program every student ranked. Students applying to Educational
Option programs are placed into one of three categories based on their score on the 7th grade
reading test: top 16 percent (high), middle 68 percent (middle), and bottom 16 percent (low).
Student categories are included in the assignment data.
     Unscreened programs order students based on their random numbers only. Limited un-
screened and formerly zoned programs order students first by priority group and then by ran-
dom number within the priority group. Screened programs order students by priority group
and then by high school rank. Each Education Option program orders all applicants for each
of six buckets, High Select, High Random, Middle Select, Middle Random, Low Select and Low
Random. A High Bucket orders high category students first, then middle category students,
then low category students. A Middle Bucket orders middle category students first, then high
category students, then low category students. A Low Bucket orders low category students first,
then high category students, then middle category students. A Select bucket orders students
within each category by priority order and then by high school rank. A Random bucket orders
students within each category by priority order.

C.7    Regents Test and Graduation Outcomes
Regents
    The NYC Regents test file contains the date and raw score for each tested student from 2004
to 2010. Regents exams are mandatory state examinations on which performance determines
whether a student is eligible for a Regents high school diploma in New York. There are Regents
examinations in English, Global History, US History, and multiple exams in Math and Science. A
Regents exam typically has a multiple choice section and a long answer or essay component, and
each exam usually lasts for three hours. The English exam, however, consists of two three-hour
pieces over two days. The exam has a locally-graded component and Dee, Jacob, McCrary, and
Rockoff (2016) illustrate how test scores bunch near performance thresholds.
    The New York State Board of Regents governs and designs the Regents exams. Starting in


                                                14
2005, they started to modify the math exams. At the beginning of our sample, the two math
exams were Elementary Algebra and Planar Geometry (Math A) and Intermediate Algebra and
Trigonometry (Math B). Two new math exams, Integrated Algebra I (Math E) and Geometry
(Math G), have since been phased in. Since students typically either take Math A or Math E,
we focus on the score on the test taken first, taking the Math A score when both are contem-
poraneous. There are Regents science exams in Earth Science, Living Environment, Chemistry,
and Physics. The science outcome we focus on is Living Environment because it is the most
commonly taken Regents science exam. English and US History Regents exams are typically
taken in 11th grade.
    The Regents file does not have the test date, and instead only has a variable indicating the
term (“termcd”). Based on discussions with the DOE, we convert term to fall if the termcd
is “1”, “5”, “a”, or “A” and to spring if the termcd is “2”, “3”, “4”, “6”, or “7.” The DOE in-
dicated exceptions at the following school DBNs where the termcd of “2” refers to the fall
semester: 79M573, 79M612, 32K564, 02M560, 10X319, 02M575, 22K585, 12X480, 03M505,
02M570, 21K525, 21K540, 19K409, 17K489, 15K698, 14K454, 14K640, 07X379, 11X265, 15K529,
08X377, 05M285, 21K728, 02M303, 25Q792, 18K578, 24Q520, and 19K431. If the student takes
a subject before 9th grade, that subject is dropped for that student. If a student takes the test
more than once after 9th grade, we used the test score from the earliest date. There are a small
number of cases where there is more than one score on the same date, and this date is the first
date after entering 9th grade. In some of these cases, there are two different test codes, where
one code ends with a “2”. We used the score corresponding to the test that does not end with a
“2”. Otherwise, we treated the score as missing.
    We focus on the results in the Mathematics and English tests. Given the existence of multiple
Math tests we take the earliest test between Math A and Math B, which are the two most common
tests. If a student takes both tests in the same school year and term we use the Math A result.
    For each subject, we standardized scores to have mean zero and standard deviation within
subject for each cohort of test-takers by year and test time.

Graduation
    The Graduation file contains the discharge status of all public school students from 2005 to
the Spring 2012. For application cohorts 2002-03 and 2003-04, students should start school in
Fall 2003 and Fall 2004 and graduate on-time in Spring 2007 and Spring 2008, respectively. To
code graduation type, we use the following discharge codes: a) 26, 30, and 61 (discharge codes
for a local diploma)?b) 27, 46, and 60 (discharge codes for a Regents diploma) c) 28, 47, and 62
(discharge codes for an Advanced Regents diploma).
    It is possible for students to graduated with several different discharge files. We classify
students as having received or not any diploma (local or Regents) and we distinguish among
students who received any Regents diploma or not.

C.8    Miscellaneous Issues
Modifications to the rank-order list



                                               15
1. In the Main round, some students ranked programs that were either charter schools or
   Specialized High Schools. These programs are not in the sample of schools we consider and
   were likely ranked by in error the students. In such cases, programs were removed from
   the rank-order lists and rank-order lists were made contiguous where all programs ranked
   below a program not in the sample were moved up in the rank-order lists. These programs
   were observed a total of 795 times in the data. Thirty students ranked only charter or
   specialized programs.

2. The rank-order lists of students who ranked continuing student programs were modified as
   follows: First, the lists of all students who ranked only the continuing student programs
   were modified so that the student ranked the associated generic program instead. When
   students ranked both the generic program and the associated continuing student program,
   the list was modified so that only the associated program was ranked, and it was ranked
   at the highest of the two ranked positions. All programs ranked at positions below the
   lower-ranked of the two programs were moved up by one. A total of 46 students ranked
   both the continuing program and the generic program, to which we mapped the continuing
   program to. In 17 cases, these ranks were not consecutive.




                                           16
                                                                      Table C1. Student Sample Selection
                                                                                                   Mechanism Comparison
                                                                                     Uncoordinated                Coordinated
                                                                                      2002-2003          2003-2004          2004-2005
                                                                                          (1)                (2)                (3)
Number of students in the NYC DOE student file                                          100,669            97,569             96,327
Number of students in the rank data
Excluding students in both 2002-03 and 2003-04 files from 2003-04                                                    96,275
Excluding 9th grade students                                                                 92,623                  89,062                 90,250
Excluding private middle school students                                                     80,833                  78,183                 80,093
Excluding students with addresses outside the five boroughs                                  80,725                  78,089                 79,977
Total number of students with known assignments to sample schools                            75,515                  73,989                 75,049
Excluding students attending specialized high schools                                        72,725                  70,992                 71,861
Excluding students attending charter schools                                                 72,681                  70,886                 71,749
Excluding students in closed and new schools                                                 70,358                  66,921                 69,013
Excluding top 2% students
Excluding students that did not rank any sample schools
Notes: Uncoordinated mechanism refers to the 2002-03 mechanism and coordinated mechanism refers to the 2003-04 mechanism based on deferred acceptance. A student has invalid census information if the addr
is missing, cannot be geocoded, or places the student outside of New York City. A distance observation is invalid if it is missing or is greater than 65 miles.
                                                                                                                           Table	  C2.	  Construction	  of	  School	  Sample
                                                                                                                                     Uncoordinated                                                        Coordinated
                                                                                                                                        2002-­‐2003                                      2003-­‐2004                      2004-­‐2005
                                                                                                                            Programs                Schools                       Programs          Schools        Programs          Schools
                                                                                                                               (1)                    (2)                            (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
Programs	  where	  NYC	  public	  school	  students	  assigned                                                           743                    301                            669              293             658              322
Adding	  additional	  programs	  ranked	  by	  students                                                                                                                         677              294             764              338
Excluding	  parochial	  schools                                                                                              681                    239                            677              294             752              331
Excluding	  specialized	  schools                                                                                            669                    232                            665              287             750              329
Excluding	  charter	  schools                                                                                                667                    230                            663              285             702              315
Excluding	  programs	  with	  no	  assignments	  or	  ranking                                                            637                    225                            648              284             691              313
Combining	  continuing	  education	  programs                                                                               637                    225                            639              284             691              313
Excluding	  closed	  schools                                                                                                 612                    215                            639              284             691              313
Excluding	  schools	  opened	  after	  HS	  directory	  printed*                                                         612                    215                            558              235             661              283
Programs/schools	  ranked	  by	  students	  in	  sample                                                                                                                         497              234             660              283
Notes:	  13	  continuining	  student	  programs	  were	  merged	  with	  a	  generic	  program	  at	  host	  school.	  	  Parochial	  schools	  in	  2002-­‐03	  only	  have	  private	  middle	  school	  students	  assigned	  to	  them	  and	  are	  not	  ranked	  by	  students	  in	  
the	  demand	  sample.	  	  *A	  total	  20	  schools	  and	  23	  programs	  opened	  before	  HS	  directory	  printed	  are	  included	  in	  2003-­‐04.
                                             Table	  C3.	  Coverage	  of	  School	  Characteristics
                                                                               Uncoordinated        Coordinated                                      Both	  
                                                                                  2002-­‐03            2003-­‐04                                     Years
                                                                                    (1)                  (2)                                          (3)
Total	  number	  of	  schools	  in	  the	  sample                             215                  234                                          215
9th	  grade	  enrollment                                                          196                  199                                          189
Race                                                                                196                  199                                          189
Attendance	  Rate                                                                  196                  199                                          189
Percent	  Free	  Lunch                                                            196                  198                                          189
Percent	  of	  teachers	  less	  than	  2	  years	  experience               219                  223                                          212
High	  Math	  Achievement                                                         198                  200                                          191
High	  English	  Achievement                                                      180                  177                                          173
Percent	  Attending	  College                                                     171                  167                                          165
Notes:	  Table	  reports	  the	  number	  of	  schools	  with	  the	  characteristics	  from	  New	  York	  State	  Report	  cards.
