                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WEALTH INEQUALITY, FAMILY BACKGROUND, AND ESTATE TAXATION

                                      Mariacristina De Nardi
                                           Fang Yang

                                       Working Paper 21047
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21047


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2015




De Nardi acknowledges support from the ERC, grant 614328 “Savings and Risks,” and from the ESRC
through the Centre for Macroeconomics. We thank Francesco Caselli, Helen Koshy, Ananth Seshadri,
Gianluca Violante, Sevin Yeltekin, and several participants at many conferences and seminars for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the Federal Government, nor the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago. This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Wealth Inequality, Family Background, and Estate Taxation
Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 21047
March 2015, Revised October 2015
JEL No. D1,D14,D31,E21,E6,H2

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper generates two main contributions. First, it provides a new theory of wealth inequality that
merges two empirically relevant forces generating inequality: bequest motives and inheritance of ability
across generations; and an earnings process that allows for more earnings risk for the richest. Second,
it uses the resulting calibrated framework to study the effects of changing estate taxation. Increasing
the estate tax reduces the wealth concentration in the hands of the richest few and the economic advantage
of being born to a rich and super-rich family, at the cost of reduced aggregate capital and output. However,
all of these effects are quite small. In contrast, increasing estate taxation can generate a significant
welfare gain to a newborn under the veil of ignorance, but this comes at a large welfare cost for the
super-rich.


Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org

Fang Yang
Louisiana State University
Department of Economics, 2322
Business Education Complex,
Nicholson Extension
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
fyang@lsu.edu
1    Introduction

Since its introduction in 1916 the estate tax has been one of the most controversial taxes in

the United States tax code. The estate tax opponents call it the “death tax”. Among the
legislators supporting the abolition of the estate tax, former representative Ron Paul (14th
district of Texas) states: “The estate tax is immoral and counter-productive. ... My oﬃce
has received hundreds of letters and emails from individuals... Theses people are not rich,

but they have worked hard and saved to create an inheritance for their children...”
    The estate tax supporters see the estate tax as an extremely progressive tax and a very
eﬀective eﬀective way to tax the richest (and dead) few. Former representative Bart Stupak
(1st district of Michigan) states “I have continuously supported reforming the estate tax, but

a complete repeal is ﬁscally irresponsible, and serves to beneﬁt only mega multi-millionaires

while harming our economy...”.

    There is also much debate about wealth inequality and the importance of parental back-

ground in determining one’s lot in life. Many papers measure and document the importance
of parental background and initial conditions at the individual level. At the aggregate level,

the large amount of wealth that is transmitted across generations includes physical wealth

and human capital and has been extensively measured and debated. There is also a lot of

discussion about the role of taxation and estate taxation in particular.
    This paper provides two main contributions. First, it provides a new theory of wealth
inequality that merges two sources of inequality previously proposed: bequest motives and
inheritance of ability across generations; and an earnings process that allows for more earn-

ings risk for the richest. Second, it uses our calibrated framework to study the importance of
parental background in our benchmark economy and the eﬀects of changing estate taxation
on aggregate capital accumulation, inequality, parental background as a source of inequality,
and welfare.
    We calibrate our framework to the 1990s, a period during which the estate tax was
                                          2
relatively stable over time, and we match key moments of earnings mobility and earnings
inequality, aggregate savings, the fraction of wealth transmitted across generations, one
moment of the observed bequest distribution, the fraction of estates that pay the estate tax,

and the total estate tax revenue as a fraction of output. Our implied eﬀective exemption
level is $756,000 (compared to the statutory level of $675,000) and our implied eﬀective
marginal tax rate is 21% (compared to a highest statutory rate of 55%). These numbers
are consistent with other estimates of the eﬀective estate tax rate, including across the

estate size distribution (see for instance Gale and Slemrod [27]). Our calibrated model also
generates realistically skewed distributions for wealth, earnings, and bequests, and is thus a
good laboratory to use to study the eﬀects of estate taxation, and yields several interesting
ﬁndings.

   First, our benchmark model allows for four types of parental backgrounds: lower-earnings,

middle-earnings, high-earnings (rich), and super-high earnings (super-rich), and implies that

one’s parental background is an important determinant of one’s expected lifetime utility,
especially for the rich and super-rich.

   Second, we consider revenue-neutral reforms and study the eﬀects of balancing the govern-

ment budget constraint using either a labor income or a capital income tax adjustment. We

ﬁnd that both taxes have very similar eﬀects in terms of inequality, importance of parental

background, and aggregate capital and inequality, but that adjusting the labor income tax
when the estate tax is raised yields larger welfare gains for most of the population.
   Third, changing estate taxation from their eﬀective levels to levels of the order of the
statutory ones that were common around the year 2000 (an exemption level of $675,000

and a marginal tax rate of 55%) would lower aggregate capital and output, but would also
reduce wealth inequality (and especially the concentration of wealth in the hands of the
wealthiest 1%), and would reduce the the advantage to being born to a rich and super-rich
family. However, these eﬀects are quite small. In terms of welfare, this reform generates a


                                              3
signiﬁcant welfare gain from the standpoint of a newborn under the veil of ignorance, which
comes at a huge welfare cost for the super-rich.
    Fourth, our results about the eﬀects of higher estate taxation on the aggregates, on in-

equality, and on the importance of parental background are surprisingly consistent regardless
of whether bequests net or gross of estate taxes enter the utility function (more of a “wealth
in the utility function formulation”), or even in the case of bequests due to completely altru-
istic parents, once these models are calibrated to match the same facts as closely as possible.

In addition, even the ex-ante welfare measures are surprisingly similar.
    To be consistent with the observed distribution of bequests, our calibrated bequest mo-
tives are of the luxury good kind; that is, people desire to leave bequests only when they
are rich enough. Hence, households that get rich because they received positive earnings

shocks and/or large bequests want to share their luck with their descendants. The bequest

motive thus raises the saving rate of the already rich and endogenously generates a positive

correlation of the saving rates across generations. In addition, more successful parents tend
to have higher-earning oﬀspring, which makes for an even more concentrated distribution of

wealth and a higher correlation of savings across generations.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames our contribution in the context of the

previous literature. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 discusses the model’s calibration

choices. Section 5 highlights the calibrated model’s implications. Section 6 investigates the
eﬀects of various estate tax reforms. Section 7 compares our results with those in the previous
literature. Section 8 concludes and discusses directions for future research.


2    Related Literature

Our analysis builds on the model developed by De Nardi [18] (and further reﬁned by Yang [52]
and De Nardi and Yang [23]) by introducing an earnings process calibration based on the one
proposed by Castañeda et al. [10], which helps in matching the observed wealth concentration

                                              4
(see Cagetti and De Nardi [7] for a survey on wealth inequality), and by considering two
diﬀerent bequest motives. We use this improved framework to study the eﬀects of parental
background and estate taxation.

   An extensive literature, both empirical and theoretical, shows that the transmission of
physical and human capital from parents to children is a very important determinant of
household wealth in the aggregate economy (see Kotlikoﬀ and Summers [41], Modigliani [47],
and Gale and Scholz [30]) and of wealth and earnings ability over the household’s life cycle

(see Hurd and Smith [37] and Becker and Tomes [3]). As a result, they are also prime forces
to include to study the eﬀects of parental background on inequality and the eﬀects of estate
taxation.
   Another set of papers has pointed out the importance of initial conditions at labor market

entry in determining lifetime inequality (and one’s success in the labor market and expected

lifetime utility); see Keane and Wolpin [38] for an earlier contribution and Huggett et al. [36]

for a more recent one. We also study this dimension, as well as the eﬀect of parental
background on lifetime utility and inequality.

   The literature studying the eﬀects of estate taxation in quantitatively calibrated models

that match the observed wealth inequality includes Cagetti and De Nardi [8] and Castañeda

et al. [10]. While Cagetti and De Nardi (and their previous paper Cagetti and De Nardi [6])

do so in a model with entrepreneurial choice and Castañeda et al. do not, both use a sim-
pliﬁed life cycle with stochastic aging and assume completely altruistic parents. In contrast,
we model the life cycle structure and two types of intergenerational links carefully, in a
framework that also matches the observed distribution of bequests and generates a realistic

increase of wealth inequality over the life cycle. We compare our results with those reported
in these previous papers in Section 7.
   Our analysis is also connected to the qualitative literature on the eﬀects of estate taxation
in presence of diﬀerent bequest motives (see, for example, Gale and Perozek [29], Cremer


                                               5
and Pestieau [16], Pestieau and Sato [48], and Hines [34]). Our contribution is quantitative
in nature, and we address the issue of the sensitivity of the results to the assumed bequest
motives in two ways. First, we consider two diﬀerent formulations of bequest motives; one

formulation (our main one) in which parents care about bequests net of estate taxes, which is
closer to an altruistic formulation; and another formulation in which parents care about the
bequest left gross of taxes, a less “altruistic” formulation, which is closer to the “wealth in the
utility function” formulation advocated by Carroll [9]. Second, we compare our ﬁndings with

those of Cagetti and De Nardi [6] and Castañeda et al. [10], papers that assume perfectly
altruistic dynasties.
   There is also a literature testing the empirical implications of parental altruism or trying
to infer bequest motives using rich micro-level data sets. This branch of the literature has

some bearing on the choices we might want to make when modeling bequest motives. For in-

stance, the completely altruistic model, in which children’s utility enters parent’s utility, has

implications for intergenerational risk sharing that have been rejected by Altonji et al. [2],
among others. An interesting paper by Laitner and Juster [43] ﬁnds heterogeneity in bequest

motives for the relatively aﬄuent retirees in his sample. A contribution by Kopczuk [39] esti-

mates a bequest motive that might or might not be present, depending on some households’

characteristics, both observable and unobservable. Our view based on these ﬁndings is that,

while the jury is still out on how to best model bequests, a minimum requirement that a
reasonable bequest motive should satisfy is that it should generate a realistic distribution of
bequests, including the observation that many households die leaving bequests of negligible
value. In addition, given that the intergenerational risk-sharing implications of complete

altruism have been rejected, the bequest motive should not be of the perfectly altruistic
type. Given these considerations and the empirical success of our paper (and its variations
in bequest motives) in matching wealth and bequest inequality, we see our exercise as a valid
contribution in evaluating the eﬀects of parental background and estate taxation.


                                                6
      Finally, our paper proposes a positive analysis of estate taxation, as opposed to a nor-
mative one (for a relatively recent contribution of this kind, see Farhi and Werning [25]).


3      The Model

The model is a discrete-time, incomplete-markets, overlapping-generations economy with an
inﬁnitely lived government.


3.1     The Government

The government taxes capital at rate τa , labor income and Social Security pay-outs at rate
τl , and estates at rate τb above the exemption level xb to ﬁnance government spending G.
                            y ), are linked to one’s realized average annual earnings ye, up to a
Social Security beneﬁts, P (e

Social Security cap yec , and are ﬁnanced through a labor income tax τs . The two government

budget constraints, one for Social Security and the other one for government spending, are

balanced during each period.


3.2     Firm and Technology

There is one representative ﬁrm producing goods according to the aggregate production

function F (K; L) = K α L1−α , where K is the aggregate capital stock and L is the aggregate

labor input. The ﬁnal goods can either be consumed or invested into physical capital, which
depreciates at rate δ.


3.3     Demographics and Labor Earnings

Each model period lasts ﬁve years. Agents start their economic life at the age of 20 (t = 1).
By age 35, (t = 4), the agents’ children are born. The agents retire at age 65 (t = 10).
From that period on, each household faces a positive probability of dying, given by (1 − pt ),



                                               7
which only depends on age.1 The maximum life span is age 90 (T = 14), and the population
grows at a constant rate n. The online appendix (on Science Direct) graphically illustrates
the demographic structure of our overlapping generations model.
                                                                                    i
       Total labor productivity of worker i at age t is given by yti = ezt +ϵt , in which ϵt is
the deterministic age-eﬃciency proﬁle. The process for the stochastic earnings shock zti is:
zti = ρz zt−1
          i
              + µit , µit ∼ N (0, σµ2 ).
       To capture the intergenerational correlation of earnings, we assume that the productivity

of worker i at age 55 is transmitted to children j at age 20 as follows: z1j = ρh z8i + ν j , ν j ∼
N (0, σh2 ), as parents are 35 years (seven model periods) older than their children.


3.4      Preferences

Preferences are time separable, with a constant discount factor β. The period utility function

from consumption is given by U (c) = (c1−γ − 1)/(1 − γ).

       People derive utility from holding onto assets because they turn into bequests upon death.

This form of ‘impure’ bequest motive implies that an individual cares about total bequests
left to his/her children, but not about the consumption of his/her children.

       The utility from bequests b is denoted by
                                             [                      ]
                                           ϕ(b) = ϕ1 (b + ϕ2 )1−γ − 1 .

The term ϕ1 measures the strength of bequest motives, while ϕ2 reﬂects the extent to which
bequests are luxury goods. If ϕ2 > 0, the marginal utility of small bequests is bounded,

while the marginal utility of large bequests declines more slowly than the marginal utility of
consumption. In the benchmark model, we set b as bequest net of estate tax, bn . We also
consider the case in which gross bequests, bg , enter the utility function. In that case, we set
b = bg . Our formulation is thus more ﬂexible than in De Nardi [18], Yang [52], and De Nardi
   1
    We make the assumption that people do not die before age 65 to reduce computational time. This
assumption does not aﬀect the results since in the U.S., the number of adults dying before age 65 is small.

                                                        8
and Yang [23] because we allow for two kinds of bequest motives. In the ﬁrst one, parents
care about bequests net of taxes. In the second one, parents care about bequests gross of
taxes. A more altruistic parent would take into account that some of the estate is taxed

away, but parents might just care about what assets they leave, rather than how much their
oﬀspring receive.


3.5     The Household’s Recursive Problem

We assume that children have full information about their parents’ state variables and infer
the size of the bequests that they are likely to receive based on this information. The potential

set of a household’s state variables is given by x = (t, a, z, ye, Sp ), where t is household age

(notice that in the presence of a ﬁxed age gap, one’s age is also informative about one’s
parents’ age), a denotes the agent’s ﬁnancial assets carried from the previous period, z is

the current earnings shock, and ye stands for annual accumulated earnings, up to a social

security cap yec , which are used to compute Social Security payments. The term Sp stands

for parental state variables other than age and, more precisely, is given by Sp = (ap , zp , yep ).
It thus includes parental assets, current earnings, and accumulated earnings. When one’s

parent retires, zp , or current parental earnings, becomes irrelevant and we set it to zero with

no loss of generality.

      From 20 to 60 years of age (t = 1 to t = 9), the agent works and survives for sure to
next period. Let Vw (t, a, z, ye, Sp ) and VwI (t, a, z, ye) denote the value functions of a working
age person whose parent is alive and dead, respectively, where I stands for “inherited.” In

the former case, the household’s parent is still alive and might die with probability pt+7 , in
which case the value function for the orphan household applies, and assets are augmented
by inheritances in per-capita terms. That is,




                                                 9
                                               {
                                                           [
(1)            Vw (t, a, z, ye, Sp ) = max
                                         ′
                                           U (c) + βpt+7 E  Vw (t + 1, a′ , z ′ , ye′ , Sp′ )
                                         c,a
                                                                                          }
                                                      [ I                                ]
                                        +β(1 − pt+7 )E Vw (t + 1, a′ + bn /N, z ′ , ye′ ) ,

subject to

(2)           c + a′ = (1 − τl )wy − τs min(wy, 5yec ) + [1 + r(1 − τa )]a,

(3)                a′ ≥ 0,
                         [                         ]
(4)                ye′ = (t − 1)e
                                y + min(wy/5, yec ) /t,
                                                                                               
                           [                             ]                                     
                          (t + 6)yep + min((wyp /5, yec ) /(t + 7)              if t < 3       
(5)               yep′ =
                         
                                                                                        
                            yep                                                otherwise 
(6)               bn = bn (Sp ),

where N is the average number of children determined by the growth rate of the population.

The expected values of the value functions are taken with respect to (z ′ , zp′ ), conditional on

(z, zp ). The agent’s resources depend on labor endowment y and asset holdings a.
      Average yearly earnings for children and parents evolve according to equations (4) and

(5), respectively. Since current income y refers to a ﬁve-year period, current income is divided

by ﬁve when the yearly lifetime average labor income (e
                                                      y ) is updated. Equation (6) is the

law of motion of bequest for the parents, which uses their optimal decision rule.

    The value function of an agent who is still working but whose parent is dead is
                                           {                                        }
                                                      [                            ]
(7)                VwI (t, a, z, ye) = max
                                         ′
                                            U (c) + βE VwI (t + 1, a′ , z ′ , ye′ ) ,
                                         c,a


subject to (2), (3), and (4 ).
      From 65 to 85 years of age (t = 10 to t = 14), the agent is retired and receives Social
Security beneﬁts and his parent is already deceased. He faces a positive probability of dying,
in which case he derives utility from bequeathing the remaining assets.
                                                     10
                                       {                                            }
(8)               Vr (t, a, ye) = max
                                    ′
                                      U (c) + βpt Vr (t + 1, a′ , ye) + (1 − pt )ϕ(b) ,
                                 c,a


subject to (3),

(9)                         c + a′ = [1 + r(1 − τa )]a + (1 − τl )P (e
                                                                     y ),

                                                                             
                                  
                                   a′                                        
                                                                 if a′ < xb , 
(10)                     bn =
                                  
                                   (1 − τb )(a′ − xb ) + xb otherwise, 
                                                                        

and, in the case of net bequest motives,

(11)                                          b = bn

while in the case of gross bequest motives,

(12)                                         b = bg = a′ ,

regardless of the structure of the estate tax.

      We focus on a stationary equilibrium concept in which factor prices and age-wealth

distribution are constant over time. Due to space constraints, the deﬁnition of a stationary

equilibrium for our economy is in the online appendix.


4      Calibration

Unless stated otherwise, we report parameters at an annual frequency. The calibration table
in the online appendix summarizes the parameters that are either taken from other studies or
can be solved independently of the endogenous outcomes of the model. Regarding the latter,
due to the assumption of exogenous labor supply and retirement decisions, the tax rate on
Social Security only depends on the earnings shocks and the population demographics, which


                                                   11
are exogenous to the model.
   We set the population growth rate, n, to be 1.2%, the average value of population growth
from 1950 to 1997 from the Council of Economic Advisors [15]. The pt ’s are the vectors

of conditional survival probabilities for people older than 65 and are set to the survival
probabilities for people born in 1965 (Bell et al. (1992)). We take the risk aversion coeﬃcient,
γ, to be 1.5.
   The deterministic age-proﬁle of labor earnings ϵt has been estimated by Hansen [32].

Since we impose mandatory retirement at the age of 65, we set ϵt = 0 after that age (t > 9).
Our calibration of labor earnings process is based on the observation that the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID) provides excellent data on the earnings dynamics for much of
the population, but not for those of the richest households (see, for instance, Bosworth and

Anders [4]). To match the earnings dynamics of all the population, we thus proceed as

follows.

   1. We assume four possible earnings states: low, middle, high, and super-high. We take

      the support of the earnings shocks from Castañeda et al. [10]. The resulting grid points

      for ψ are [1, 3.15, 9.78, 1,061].

   2. We take the persistence ρh of the earnings inheritance process from Zimmerman (1992)
      and Solon (1992) and the variance σh2 from De Nardi (2004). We then discretize the

      earnings inheritance process as proposed by Tauchen [51].

   3. We take PSID estimates on the persistence (0.92) and variance (0.38) over ﬁve-year

      periods from Table A.1 in appendix A in De Nardi [18]; and we discretize this process
      for the lowest three grid points using Tauchen [51] to make sure that our process
      accurately represents the estimated earnings dynamics for much of the population.
      This gives us a three by three transition matrix.

   4. We pick the remaining six elements of our four by four transition matrix to match
                                              12
     the following aspects of the earnings distribution: The Gini coeﬃcient and the share
     of total earnings earned, respectively, by the top 1%, 5%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and an
     earnings persistence at the top of 80%. The latter is consistent with work by DeBacker

     et al. [17], which reports that the persistence of both labor and business income at
     the top of labor and business income distributions is high and that, in particular, the
     probability of staying there, both after one year and ﬁve years (the latter results are
     available from the authors on request), is around 80%. We also impose adding-up

     restrictions.

The online appendix on Science Direct shows that our calibration generates a cross-sectional

earnings distribution that is very close to that computed from the SCF data. It also reports
the transition matrices for the earnings process over time and across generations and the
invariant distribution over earnings states upon entering the economy. The share of income

that goes to capital, α, is set at 0.36 (Cooley and Prescott [14]) and depreciation is 6%

(Stokey and Rebelo [50]).

   The capital income tax rate τa is set at 20% as in Kotlikoﬀ et al. [40]. The Social Security

beneﬁt P (e
          y ) mimics the Old Age and Survivor Insurance component (See online appendix
on for details). The tax rate on labor income τs is set at 12.0% to balance the Social Security

budget.

   Table 1 lists the parameters we use to calibrate the model. We choose β, to match the

capital output ratio, and in the cases in which a bequest motive is present, we choose ϕ1 , and
ϕ2 to match the bequest-wealth ratio (Gale and Scholz [30]) and the 90th percentile of the

bequest distribution normalized by income (Hurd and Smith [37]). In the data, the bequest-
wealth ratio is 0.88% when only bequests are included, but rises to 1.18% if inter-vivos
transfers and college expenses are included in the measure of bequests. Although one might
argue that we should calibrate to the total of such transfers because we do not model the last
two components explicitly, we calibrate to the lower bound of the range to be conservative.

                                              13
Regarding the bequest distribution, we use the one for single descendants instead of the
one for all descendants. As argued in De Nardi [18], typically a surviving spouse inherits a
large share of the estate, consumes part of it, and only leaves the remainder to the couple’s

children.
   The discount factor aﬀects savings and average wealth in the economy. The term ϕ1
measures the strength of bequest motives, thus we choose the aggregate bequest as a moment.
The term ϕ2 reﬂects the extent to which bequests are luxury goods, thus aﬀecting the upper

tail of the bequest distribution. Our calibration for the model with net bequest in the utility
function implies that, during the last period of life, when the individual knows that he/she
will die for sure next period, the marginal propensity to bequeath out of an additional dollar
above the estate tax threshold is 56%, while the threshold above which the person wants to

start bequeathing is $1.095 million (normalized using $57,135 as average income in 2000).

The corresponding numbers for the gross bequests model are, respectively, 53% and $1.376

million. We discuss the interpretation of the bequest parameters in the online appendix.
   Although many experts agree that eﬀective estate taxation can be reduced substantially

by appropriate estate management and valuation, there is considerable uncertainty about

how much people can and do reduce the estate tax burden by using both legal and illegal

ways. There is, in contrast, no dispute about the observed revenues from the estate and gift

tax and the fraction of estates that do pay estate taxes. We choose the tax parameters τb and
xb to match the fraction of estate tax revenue to output (0.33% Gale, Hines, and Slemrod [28]

and Gale and Slemrod [27]) and the fraction of estates that pay estate taxes (2.0%, Gale,
Hines, and Slemrod [28] and Gale and Slemrod [27]). The implied exemption level expressed
in terms of year 2000 dollars turns out to be $756,000, which is only modestly higher than
the $675,000 exemption that was in place at that time. Our calibrated numbers fall well
within the bounds proposed by the previous literature. Given that our model matches asset
holdings so well, and given the considerable uncertainty about eﬀective estate tax avoidance


                                              14
and evasion, we see this as a useful way to proceed.
   We choose τl to balance the government budget constraint, given a ratio of government
spending to output of 18% (Council of Economic Advisors [15]).

   In the model without bequest motives, we choose the parameters β, τb , xb , and τl to
match the capital output ratio, the fraction of estate tax revenue to output, the fraction of
estates that pay estate taxes, and the ratio of government spending to output.
   An inspection of Table 1 reveals that, unlike our calibrated model with voluntary bequest

motives, the model without bequest motives cannot match the ﬂow of aggregate bequests
to aggregate wealth. In fact, it only captures 66% of it, and thus overstates the estate tax
rate (63%), setting it even higher than the statutory tax rate (55%), which applies only to
the largest bequests. The higher tax rate mechanically comes from the fact that the ﬂow of

bequests is too small and yet the estate tax revenue has to match the observed revenue in

the data.

   We present our numerical results as follows. In Section 5 we discuss three versions of the
model and their implications, how they compare with the actual data, and how they diﬀer

across models. We also discuss the importance of parental background in aﬀecting lifetime

expected utility and we evaluate the intergenerational persistence of earnings and wealth

in our benchmark economy. The online appendix also discusses the distribution of the tax

burden and how it changes with estate taxation reform. In Section 6, we study the long-run
eﬀects of various estate taxation reforms, in which we use either the tax on capital or the
tax on labor income to re-establish budget balance. In each run, unless otherwise indicated,
we solve for the dynamic programming problem, impose budget balance for the government,

and adjust prices to re-establish market clearing.




                                             15
5        Numerical Results

5.1       The Wealth Distribution in the Cross Section and Over the Life Cycle

Table 2 reports values of the wealth distribution. The ﬁrst line refers to data from the 1998

SCF taken from Budria et al. [5] and shows that, in the data, wealth is highly unevenly
distributed. The wealthiest 1% of people hold 35% of net worth, while the wealthiest 5%
hold 58% of total net worth. The second line of data reports the corresponding numbers for
the benchmark model with intergenerational links and bequest motives, and bequests net of
taxes entering the utility function. The third line of data reports the corresponding numbers
for the model with intergenerational links and bequest motives, and bequests gross of taxes
entering the utility function2 . Both versions of the model with voluntary bequests, whether

the utility from bequests is net or gross of taxes, when appropriately calibrated to match

our target moments, succeed in generating the observed wealth concentration.

        The fourth line of data reports values for the wealth distribution generated by a model
without voluntary bequests that is calibrated as discussed previously. This version of the

model succeeds in generating wealth holdings in the hands of the richest 1% that are larger

than the share of earnings of the richest 1%. The key mechanism generating this is that

the earnings super-rich have a 20% probability of sliding into a much lower earnings state
each period and thus save at very high rates to smooth consumption over time. Despite this
additional saving motive for the high earners, however, the model falls short of matching the
observed fractions of wealth held by the richest. The comparison between the model with
and without voluntary bequest motives highlights the role of the voluntary bequest motive,
calibrated as a luxury good, in generating a higher concentration of wealth in the hands
of the richest few and raising overall wealth inequality as measured by the Gini coeﬃcient.
The intuition is that this kind of bequest motive raises the saving rate of the rich, who thus
    2
    Since all of our 20 years old are born with zero net worth, we exclude them from our calculations of
wealth inequality.

                                                  16
leave larger estates to their children; they in turn also save more, thus increasing wealth
concentration.
      Figure 1 displays the evolution of a summary measure of wealth concentration, the Gini

coeﬃcient, by age. The ﬁgure reports two diﬀerent series for the data. The ﬁrst one, from
Huggett [35], displays a U-Shaped form by age (dash-dot line); while the second one, from
Kuhn [42], is ﬂatter (solid line). Both lines imply a high concentration of wealth at all ages.
The Gini coeﬃcient of wealth by age produced by our benchmark model with net bequests in

the utility function (line with circles) coincides with the one in the model with gross bequests
in the utility function (line with triangles), as the two model, appropriately re-calibrated, ﬁt
the data very similarly. All of our models produce Gini coeﬃcients by age in the ballpark of
the data, but the models with voluntary bequests better match the observed Gini coeﬃcient

for wealth at all ages when compared to the implications of the model without voluntary

bequests (line with squares). This indicates that the model with voluntary bequests not only

better matches the cross-sectional wealth inequality at all ages, but also better reproduces
some of its evolution over the life cycle. The evolution of the Gini coeﬃcient, and more

generally wealth inequality, as people age is a promising avenue to help identify bequest

motives.


5.2     The Importance of Parental Background

Parental background aﬀects one’s prospects in life through two channels. First, since richer
parents leave larger bequests, it inﬂuences the amount of expected bequests that one will

receive. Second, since one’s initial earnings draw is correlated to one’s parental earnings and
is then persistent over time, it also inﬂuences one’s lifetime earnings.
      In this subsection, we discuss the value of being born to a family with diﬀerent parental
backgrounds (or earnings). Later, when evaluating various policy reforms, we assess to what
extent estate, capital income, and labor income taxes can aﬀect the luck (or lack thereof) of


                                               17
being born in a certain parental background rather than another one in our framework.
   In our calibration, the earnings of both parents and children can assume four values:
low-earnings, middle-earnings, high-earnings, and super-high earnings. We perform our cal-

culations of the value of being born in a certain parental socio-economic class as follows. Take
a new worker with parental background i. Find the median of the other parental state vari-
ables (assets and associated lifetime earnings) with current parental earnings or background
at the time when the child enters the labor market. Also ﬁnd the median of the new workers’

state variables (initial earnings) conditional on their parental earnings or background. Take
the corresponding value function for all of these state variables. Repeat this process for a
new worker with parental background j. Compare the two value functions, and compute the
one-time asset compensation requested to make the newborn worker born to a given family

background indiﬀerent to being born to a family with another level of parental earnings

or background, and divide by average income to normalize. One way of interpreting this

comparison is that it calculates the value of being born to a typical background, conditional
on parental socio-economic status, and all of the median associated state variables that go

along with it, with a diﬀerent parental socio-economic status and all associated other median

state variables.

   Table 3 includes two panels. In the top panel, we switch both initial human capital and

expected bequests among the oﬀspring of families from diﬀerent parental backgrounds, thus
evaluating the importance of bequests and initial productivity, or human capital, together. In
the bottom panel, we only switch expected bequests, thus evaluating only the importance of
wealth transmission across generations, for given initial productivity or human capital. The

top panel of Table 3 shows that newborn workers whose parents are at the highest earnings
at age 55 need to be compensated, respectively, by 35.7, 35.5, and 28.4 times average income
to be moved to the state of being born to a family with the low (1st), middle (2nd), or high
level (3rd) of parental earnings. A newborn worker with parents in the 3rd (high) earnings


                                              18
background has to be compensated by over ﬁve times average income to be born to a family
with middle- or low-earning parents. Finally, low (1st) and middle (2nd) earning families
are quite similar in terms of the lifetime utility that they provide to their children, compared

with the high or super-high earners. The bottom panel shows that, for those born to a
super-rich family, 40% of the compensation is related to expected bequests, while 60% to a
higher initial level of productivity, or human capital inheritance. Comparing the second line
of both panels shows that the importance of bequests shrinks very quickly as we move from

being born to a super-rich family to a merely rich family.
      These calculations thus suggest that the value of being born into a family with a high
or super-high socio-economic background is very large, and that parental background (and
especially expected bequests) is an important determinant of the lifetime utility of the richer

households in our calibrated model. In contrast, the eﬀects of parental background are

much smaller for the households born to the low- and middle-income parental level, with the

importance of bequests becoming much smaller as the level of parental background decreases.
Since in our economy the fraction of people born with a high- and super-high parental earning

background is very small (about 2%), for the majority of people in our economy the eﬀect

of parental background on lifetime expected utility is small.


5.3     Intergenerational Wealth and Earnings Mobility

Next we assess the model’s implication regarding intergenerational mobility of earnings and
wealth. Chetty et. al. [12] use data from federal income tax records for children born in the

1980-82 birth cohorts and regress the log of child income (mean family income in 2011-12)
on the log of parent income (average parents family income over the ﬁve years from 1996 to
2000) and ﬁnd an estimated coeﬃcient of 0.344. We generate a simulated panel of parents
and children from the model and run the following regression: yk,i = β0 + β1 yp,i + ϵyi , where
yk,i is the earnings of the child in family i at age 20 to 24, yp,i is earnings of the parent at


                                              19
age 55 to 59. The resulting coeﬃcient β1 is 0.306, which is lightly lower than the value of
0.344 reported in Chetty et al. [12]. For other work discussing important issues with the
estimation of intergenerational mobility, see Mazumder [46].

    Charles and Hurst [11] compute an intergenerational mobility of wealth of 0.263 from
the PSID after controlling for education. In their sample, children’s wealth is measured
in 1999 and parental wealth is average wealth between 1984 and 1989. We select parents
who are age 45 to 65 in the ﬁrst period and are alive four periods later. We then run the

following regression: ak,j = β0 + β1 ap,i + agek,i + age2k,i + ϵai , where ap,i is average wealth
of the parent in the ﬁrst and second period, ak,j is wealth of the children four periods

later, and age is children’s age four periods later. The resulting coeﬃcient β1 is 0.174.
There are two reasons why our model slightly underestimates intergenerational persistence

of wealth over those age groups. First, for tractability, every household starts at age 20

with zero wealth in our model, hence there is no correlation of wealth between parents

and children at the beginning of the life cycle, and it takes time for the households to
accumulate wealth. Given this, we see our results on the importance of parental background

as lower bounds. Second, our model generates a slightly lower intergenerational persistence

of earnings than in the data. As a robustness check, we increase the correlation of the childs

initial productivity draw to match an intergenerational persistence of earnings to 0.4. In

that case, the resulting intergenerational persistence of wealth goes up to 0.207. We also
re-run some of our experiments for that case and obtain very similar results (results available
upon request).


6    Reforming Estate Taxation

We study two key margins of estate taxation: the threshold above which estates start be-
ing taxed, and the marginal tax rate above which estates are taxed above the exemption
threshold. Modifying the estate taxation exemption levels aﬀects both the size of the estates

                                               20
that are hit by estate taxes and the burden of estate taxation. For example, reducing the
exemption level implies that smaller estates start being taxed, but also that the previously
taxed estates pay more taxes, because their exemption level is smaller. In contrast, changing

the estate tax rate for a given exemption level just increases or decreases the burden of estate
taxes on estates of the same size.
      Changing estate taxation also has an eﬀect on the estate distribution. This can happen
for two reasons. First, if the people leaving estates care about the estate net of bequest

taxes (a more altruistic form of bequest motive), they will change their saving behavior and
desired bequest when estate taxation changes. This eﬀect will be missing in the case of gross
bequests in the utility function. Second, people might receive diﬀerent amounts of bequests
net of taxes, which will aﬀect their saving behavior and desired bequests in turn, because the

model with realistically calibrated bequest motives generates a non-homotheticity of savings

in income and wealth.

      We now turn to presenting the eﬀects of various estate taxation policy reforms on the
aggregates, on inequality, on the importance of parental background, and welfare, in the

cases of adjusting either the capital income (Table 4) or the labor income tax (some of the

results for this case are in the online appendix) to re-establish government budget balance.

In some instances, to better discuss the various eﬀects, we also report results for ﬁxed prices

and thus partial equilibrium.


6.1     Aggregate Eﬀects

Tables 4 reports the results for the estate tax reforms in which the capital income tax is

used to re-establish budget balance. Due to space constraints, we report the aggregate and
distributional results for the estate tax reforms in the case in which the labor income tax
is used to re-establish government budget balance in the online appendix. Changing the
tax on capital income changes the incentives to save by aﬀecting the net rate of return on


                                              21
capital. Changing labor income taxation does not distort labor supply decisions because, for
tractability, we assume exogenous labor supply, but aﬀects net lifetime income, and hence
the importance of human capital inheritance across generations. In fact, raising the tax on

labor earnings reduces the advantage of being born to more able parents and having a higher
expected lifetime income.
   The top panels of the tables show the aggregate eﬀects of changing the estate tax rate,
while the second panel reports the results for changes in the estate tax exemption level. The

third panel changes both the estate tax rate and its exemption level at the same time. The
line in bold refers to our benchmark economy. The bottom two panels reproduce some of
the analysis for the case of utility from bequests gross of taxes.
   Lowering the estate tax rate (τb ) below our calibrated level of 21% increases the

return to leaving a bequest for people who are rich enough to have an active bequest motive

but requires an increase in another tax instrument to re-establish budget balance. Increasing

the tax rate on capital income decreases the incentive to save for everyone, and especially
for those who are not actively saving to leave a bequest. The net eﬀect for the richest in our

framework is that the increased return from leaving a bequest is larger than the disincentive

coming from the lower interest rate. In addition, in the aggregate, the increased savings of

the richest are large enough to counterbalance the decreased savings of everyone else and, on

net, aggregate capital and income go up as the estate tax is lowered. When the labor income
tax is used to balance the government budget constraints, for given prices, reducing estate
taxation does not reduce the rate of return to savings for anyone in the population and still
increases the return to leaving a bequest for the rich. As a result, aggregate capital goes up

a bit more (which tends to reduce the interest rate by more in general equilibrium) and so
does aggregate output. This is not very surprising because not only does taxing labor not
discourage savings as taxing capital income does, but in our economy labor supply is ﬁxed,
and therefore there is no disincentive of labor supply coming from increasing the labor tax.


                                              22
   Increasing the tax rate on estates. Up to a tax rate on estates of about 50%, raising
the estate tax rate and lowering the capital income tax reduce both aggregate capital and
output due to the fact that the return to leaving a bequest goes down when the estate

tax goes up, and the saving rate of the rich goes down by more than the increased savings
of everyone else (now facing higher returns due to a lower tax rate on capital and higher
equilibrium interest rates and thus saving more). However, around a tax rate on estates of
about 60%, bequests net of the estate tax become smaller and smaller and the richest keep

up their saving to avoid a large reduction in net bequests. The rest of the population faces
a lower capital income tax and desire to save more, and aggregate capital and income go up.
In the model with gross bequest motives, the rich do not adjust savings up to avoid a large
reduction in net estates, as the tax rate on estates keeps going up and this nonlinearity is

absent. This nonlinearity is also absent when we increase the estate tax while lowering the

tax rate on labor. In this case, the rich keep getting less rich due to smaller net bequests as

we increase the estate tax, but the eﬀect of increasing the returns to savings due to lower
capital income taxes is no longer present across the whole population. However, most of the

population experiences a positive wealth eﬀect due to lower labor income taxes, and thus

saves a little more as a result.

   Lowering the exemption level has two eﬀects. First, it introduces estate taxes for

smaller estates that were not taxed previously; and second, it taxes more heavily the estates
that were already taxed previously. When the exemption level is lowered, aggregate capital
and income decrease. When it is increased, the eﬀects go in the opposite direction but are
very small. This holds regardless of whether the capital income or the labor income tax is

adjusted.
   Finally, we change the structure of estate taxation to the statutory one in
place in the year 2000, when the exemption level was $675, 000 and the marginal tax
rate was 55%. This change in the exemption levels implies that 2.44% of estates are now


                                              23
taxed, compared with 1.92% in our benchmark. This tax policy minimizes aggregate capital
and income among all of the tax conﬁgurations that we consider and thus does not seem
particularly desirable under this respect. Under this taxation scheme, gross bequests go up

because people care about the utility of leaving bequests net of taxes and thus keep more
assets to transfer to their descendants, but this increase is not enough to compensate for the
increased estate tax burden.
   In the model in which people derive utility from bequests gross of taxes, rather

than net of taxes, when the estate tax rate goes down, people do not decrease their desired
gross bequests and capital and, as a result, output goes up by a little more than the case
of net bequests in the utility function (more results than those reported are available on
request). In contrast, when the estate tax rate goes up, people do not save more to leave

larger bequests net of taxes to their children. As a result, aggregate capital and income

drop slightly more than in the model with utility from bequests net of taxes. Interestingly

however, both the calibrated models with net and gross bequests in the utility function imply
a drop in aggregate capital and income when estate taxation is raised; and the diﬀerences in

the eﬀects generated by these two models are quite small, once the two models are calibrated

to match the same facts in their respective benchmark calibrations.

   We also computed the elasticity of the estate tax base to changes in the estate tax in

both the net bequest model and gross bequest model, adjusting either the capital income or
the labor income tax, in either a general equilibrium or a partial equilibrium setting. For
changes of the estate tax rate between 10% and 60%, the elasticity of the tax base ranges
between -0.158 and 0.082 and it is thus very small.

   Overall, the results of changing the estate tax are thus remarkably similar whether the
tax on capital of labor income is adjusted, and whether households derive utility from leaving
bequests gross or net of estate taxes.




                                             24
6.2     Distributional Eﬀects

Tables 5 report the eﬀects of various reforms on measures of wealth inequality when the
capital income tax is adjusted. The corresponding table for when the labor income tax is

adjusted is in the online appendix. The main conclusions to be drawn from these experiments
are the following. First, the share of wealth held by the richest is monotonically decreasing
in the estate tax rate. For instance, eliminating estate taxation would increase the share of
total net worth held by the richest 1% of people from 35% to 37%, while increasing it to

50% would reduce their share of net worth to 33%. Second, the eﬀects of changing estate
taxation on inequality are similar when we use the labor or the capital income tax to balance
the budget. Third, the decrease in wealth inequality as the tax rate on estates is increased
is slightly larger when the capital income tax is used to balance the budget than when the

labor income tax is used. Fourth, changing the exemption level of estate taxation in the

range of $200, 000 to $1, 000, 000 has little eﬀect on wealth inequality for an estate tax rate

of 21%, while the eﬀects are a bit larger with a higher estate tax rate of the order of 55%

(results available from the authors).
      Hence, putting together the aggregate and distributional eﬀects of these reforms, we ﬁnd

that reducing estate taxation increases aggregate output and capital but increases wealth

inequality, while increasing the estate tax rate has the opposite eﬀect and that the results

are remarkably similar when the capital or labor income tax is adjusted and for gross and
net bequests in the utility function.


6.3     Importance of Parental Background Eﬀects

In order to assess to what extent estate tax reforms can aﬀect the lifetime value of being
born to a family with a diﬀerent parental earnings level, or parental background, we show
in Table 6 the one-time asset compensation corresponding to moving a child being born to a
family with a given parent’s earnings to another one, expressed as a fraction of average yearly

                                               25
income. We report these compensations for our benchmark economy and for an economy with
a 55% tax rate on estates, an estate exemption level of $675, 000, and either a lower capital
income or labor income tax. We also report results for the model with gross bequests in

the utility function. Table 7 keeps child productivity unchanged and only switches expected
bequests due to family background.
      These tables yield several ﬁndings. First, the value of being born to a family with the
highest parental background is signiﬁcantly reduced when estate taxes are increased. For

instance, the compensation requested for moving from the top to the bottom of parental
background is 35.7 times average income in the benchmark economy, while it goes down
to 33.7 times when estate taxation is increased. Second, these compensations are very
similar regardless of which tax is used to balance the government budget (the results for

the labor income tax are in the online appendix), and this indicates that it is the reduction

in the net bequests received that dominates the eﬀects of this reform, rather than the tax

used to balance the government budget constraint. Third, the eﬀects of the importance of
parental background and its changes are very similar both for net and gross bequests in the

utility function, with only a slightly bigger reduction for the case of gross bequests in the

utility function. Fourth, the importance of parental background to determine one’s lot in

life is basically unchanged for all other people who are not born in a super-rich family, ﬁrst

reﬂecting the very high progressivity of estate taxation both before and after the reform,
second, reﬂecting the fact that this tax raises little revenue that can be used to rebate other
taxes, and third reﬂecting the fact that only a small fraction of the population receives a
very large bequest.


6.4     Welfare Eﬀects

Our incomplete market framework generates, absent any policy or exogenous changes, a sta-
tionary distribution of wealth. As done by Conesa et al. [13] we employ an ex-ante welfare


                                              26
criterion (before ability is realized) that measures expected (with respect to idiosyncratic
shocks and parental background) lifetime utility of a newborn worker in a stationary equilib-
rium. To better understand the welfare costs and beneﬁts of this reform, we also report the

ex-ante expected lifetime utility newborn worker, conditional on their initial productivity.
   Table 8 reports one-time welfare compensations and the fraction of people gaining from
a reform. The welfare compensation computes the amount of assets that we need to give
agents in the economy before a reform, as a fraction of average income, so that each agent

is indiﬀerent between living in the economy before and after a reform. For simplicity, we
then switch the signs so that a positive number means a welfare gain of switching from the
benchmark economy to the economy with higher estate taxation. To isolate the general
equilibrium eﬀects, we present, in the top panel, the partial equilibrium results in which we

ﬁx the prices at their level in the initial steady state.

   The column “All” refers to the ex-ante welfare measure computed under the veil of

ignorance. The columns labeled “Initial Earnings” condition on the newborn workers’ initial
earnings draw, while the last three columns report, respectively, the fraction of households

beneﬁting from the reform, the average gains of those who gain, and losses of those who lose.

   A few things are worth noticing. For ﬁxed prices, ﬁrst the vast majority of the pop-

ulation gains from switching to the year 2000 statutory estate taxation. The fraction is

highest when the labor income tax is lowered to balance the government budget, because
many people save little and thus do not beneﬁt from a tax break on capital income. Second,
the fraction of people gaining from increasing estate taxation is very similar regardless of
whether net or gross bequests enter one’s utility function. Third, the ﬁrst three columns of

the table report the average gain or loss conditional on one’s initial earnings upon entering
the labor market. Conditioning on this reveals that the average gains conditional of being
born in a given productivity level are positive with the exception of the largest earnings re-
alization. Conditional on being in that state, the utility loss from increased estate taxation


                                               27
large as a fraction of average income is large, especially in the case in which net bequests
enter the utility function because households in that case lose utility, both because they
get lower net estates (which happens with both utility functions) and because they receive

smaller utility from gross bequests due to increased estate taxation (an eﬀect present only
with net bequests in the utility function). Interestingly, however, the results are surprisingly
close with gross and net bequests in the utility function.
   For endogenous prices, things change. First, the interest rate goes up, but the

wage rate goes down, regardless of whether capital or labor income tax is lowered. A higher
interest rate increases the rate of return to savings and thus tends to improve the welfare of
the savers. A reduction in the wage rate, in contrast, decreases the earnings of all workers,
thus generating a welfare loss. The negative wage eﬀect dominates, thus resulting in a

much smaller fraction of people beneﬁting from an increase in estate taxes than for ﬁxed

prices. Second, in the case the labor income tax is lowered due to the increased revenue from

estate taxation, the welfare loss from lower wages is partly oﬀset in wages net of taxes, thus
generating a larger fraction of people gaining from the reform. Third, the welfare gains can

be nonlinear as a function of one’s initial earnings because wages go down but the interest

rate goes up. As a result, low earners who do not save much lose due to lower wages. As

we move up the earnings distribution, savings increase and people start to gain due to the

higher return to saving. This holds true until we get to the highest earnings level, at which
leaving and receiving bequests becomes very important, hence the welfare of people in this
state is hurt by higher estate taxes.
   Lastly, for almost all reforms, with the exception of the one with gross bequests in the

utility function, in which the capital income tax is adjusted and prices adjust (which implies
an even larger drop in wages), increasing estate taxation results in an ex-ante welfare gain
from the standpoint of the unborn person who is under the veil of ignorance.




                                              28
7    Comparing Our Results With those in the Previous Literature

The literature studying the eﬀects of estate taxation in quantitatively calibrated models that

match the observed wealth inequality includes Cagetti and De Nardi [8] and Castañeda et
al. [10].
    Both papers use a simpliﬁed life cycle structure and altruistic households, but Cagetti
and De Nardi do so in a model with entrepreneurial choice in which entrepreneurs are

potentially very productive and credit constrained, while in Castañeda et al. the households
face high earnings risk once they become super-rich (a mechanism that we also include in
our analysis). Compared with these two papers, we model the life cycle structure and two
types of intergenerational links carefully.

    Both Cagetti and De Nardi and Castañeda et al. only study the case of abolishing estate

taxation. Interestingly, both papers ﬁnd, as we do, that abolishing estate taxation would

generate small increases in aggregate capital and output. More speciﬁcally, for instance,

all three papers, including ours, generate increases in the range of 0.7 − 1.5% for aggregate
capital, 0.1 − 0.6% of aggregate output, and 1.0-1.7 percentage point increases in the share

of wealth held by the richest 1%. Cagetti and De Nardi also compute welfare gains and

losses and ﬁnd that abolishing estate taxation would generate large welfare losses for a large

fraction of the population, a ﬁnding that is also broadly consistent with ours.
    While it is reassuring that the results are quite similar for the speciﬁc case of abolishing
estate taxation, we study a much broader range of estate tax reforms and we ﬂesh out the
eﬀects of these reforms on many important outcomes, including the importance of parental

background. In addition, we also study the robustness of our results to two diﬀerent types of
voluntary bequest motives that match important aspects of the observed estate distribution.




                                               29
8    Conclusions and Directions for Future Research

We study wealth inequality, the importance of parental background, and the eﬀects of re-

forming estate taxation in a framework with both voluntary and accidental bequests and
transmission of ability (or human capital) across generations and earnings risks. Our model
ﬁts key aspects of the data very well and is quite rich, but makes some important assump-
tions.

    First, we limit ourselves to steady state analysis. This is due to both computational costs
and to the fact that we see understanding steady state inequality as a necessary step that
comes before studying the transitions and evolution of inequality over time.
    Second, for tractability, we assume exogenous labor supply, and we thus abstract from

labor supply distortions coming from taxation. It would be interesting to study this chan-

nel, both in stationary environments with diﬀerent taxation structures (see, for example,

De Nardi et al [22] for a discussion of the eﬀects of government policies on income across

countries) and in the context of the observed rise in wage inequality in the United States
(see Heathcote et al. [33] for a discussion of the macroeconomic eﬀects of these changes).

    Third, we assume an exogenous transmission of human capital across generations, thus

not modelling this interesting channel, its formation, and its reaction to policy reforms. While

it would be interesting to endogenize human capital formation, this is a major undertaking in
this framework. In addition, because the richest 1% of households pay 99% of the estate tax,
and because they are more than rich enough to invest optimally in their children’s human
capital, it is unlikely that they would change their human capital investment in children

when faced with realistic changes in the estate tax rates and exemption levels, and because
the revenue generated by the estate tax is very small, so are the adjustments implied in the
labor or capital income tax. However, there are many other reforms that are likely to impact
human capital formation, including, for instance, reforms that drastically both lower the
estate tax exemption level and raise its tax rate, thus heavily taxing also the estates of the
                                             30
upper and middle-income families, and reforms that change the level and the progressivity
of the labor income tax. For examples of frameworks modeling parental investment and the
eﬀects of family structure on income, see Aiyagari et al. [1], Greenwood et al. [31], Scholz

and Seshadri [49], Lee et al. [44], and Lee and Seshadri [45].
   Fourth, we abstract from complementary important reasons to save, such as medical ex-
pense risks after retirement, heterogeneity in life expectancy, and health investments across
generations. De Nardi et al. [20], [19], and [21], and French et al. [26] point to the importance

of heterogeneity in longevity and out-of-pocket medical expenses risk that rise with age and
income, and show that these factors go a long way towards explaining the lack of assets de-
cumulation by the high-income elderly in old age. Eriksson et al. [24] ﬁnd that in the Danish
data there is strong correlation in health across generations and that accounting for health

reduces the intergenerational correlation of earnings by 25-28%, which points out the impor-

tance of health and health investments and their persistence across generations. However,

while explicitly modelling health and health investment, and medical risk and heterogeneity
in longevity, are important per se, the fact that substantial physical wealth is transmitted

across generations remains. More generally, the important related question concerning the

ability of estate taxation to reduce intergenerational transmission of wealth has to do with

the identiﬁcation of the strength of bequest motives as opposed to precautionary savings.

While more work along these lines is a promising avenue for future research, it is reassur-
ing that our results on the eﬀects of estate taxation in the context or realistic models of
wealth inequality are robust to a variety of bequest motives and reasons to save (from warm
glow bequests and high earnings risk for the richest, to completely altruistic households and

entrepreneurial savings).
   Lastly, our eﬀective estate taxation is lower than the statutory one and it would be
interesting to explicitly model the costs of estate tax avoidance and to properly account for
their endogenous changes in presence of estate tax reforms.


                                               31
References

 [1] Rao S. Aiyagari, Jeremy Greenwood, and Ananth Seshadri. Eﬃcient investment in
    children. Journal of Economic Theory, 102:290–321, 2002.

 [2] Joseph G. Altonji, Fumio Hayashi, and Larry Kotlikoﬀ. Parental altruism and intervivos
    transfers: Theory and evidence. Journal of Political Economy, 6(105):1121–1166, 1997.

 [3] Gary S. Becker and Nigel Tomes. Human capital and the rise and fall of families. Journal
    of Labor Economics, 4(3):1–39, 1986.

 [4] Barry P. Bosworth and Sarah Anders. Saving and wealth accumulation in the psid,
    1984-2005. NBER Working Paper 17689, 2011.

 [5] Santiago Budrı́a Rodrı́guez, Javier Dı́az-Giménez, Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Vı́ctor

    Rı́os-Rull. Updated facts on the U.S. distributions of earnings, income and wealth.

    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 26(3):2–35, 2002.

 [6] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Entrepreneurship, frictions and wealth.

    Journal of Political Economy, 114(5):835–870, 2006.

 [7] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Wealth inequality: data and models.

    Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12:285–313, 2008.

 [8] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Estate taxation, entrepreneurship, and
    wealth. The American Economic Review, 99(1):85–111, 2009.

 [9] Christopher D. Carroll. Why do the rich save so much? NBER Working Paper 6549,
    1998.

[10] Ana Castañeda, Javier Dı́az-Giménez, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. Accounting for u.s.
    earnings and wealth inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 111(4):818–857, 2003.
                                             32
[11] Kerwin Koﬁ Charles and Erik Hurst. The correlation of wealth across generations.
    Journal of Political Economy, 111(6), 2003.

[12] Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner. Is
    the united states still a land of opportunity? recent trends in intergenerational mobility.

    Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

[13] Juan Carlos Conesa, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger. Taxing capital? not a bad idea

    after all! American Economic Review, 99:25–48, 2009.

[14] Thomas F. Cooley and Edward C. Prescott. Economic growth and business cycles. In
    Thomas F. Cooley, editor, Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, pages 1–38. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1995.

[15] Council of Economic Advisors. Economic Report of the President. United States Gov-

    ernment Printing Oﬃce, Washington, 1998.

[16] Helmuth Cremer and Pierre Pestieau. Wealth transfer taxation: A survey. CESifo

    Working Paper Series No. 1061, 2003.

[17] Jason DeBacker, Vasia Panousi, and Shanthi Ramnath. The properties of income risk

    in privately held businesses. Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 2012-69, 2012.

[18] Mariacristina De Nardi. Wealth inequality and intergenerational links. Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, 71(3):743–768, 2004.

[19] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Life expectancy and old age
    savings. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):110–115, 2009.

[20] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Why do the elderly save? The
    role of medical expenses. Journal of Political Economy, 118(1):39–75, 2010.


                                             33
[21] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Medicaid insurance in old age.
    Working Paper 19151, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

[22] Mariacristina De Nardi, Liqian Ren, and Chao Wei. Income inequality and redistribu-
    tion in ﬁve countries. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, 24(2):2–

    20, 2000.

[23] Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang. Bequests and heterogeneity in retirement

    wealth. European Economic Review, 72:182–196, 2014.

[24] Tor Eriksson, Bernt Bratsberg, Oddbjorn Raaum, et al. Earnings persistence across
    generations: Transmission through health? Citeseer.

[25] Emanuel Farhi and Ivan Werning. Progressive estate taxation. The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 125:635–673, 2010.

[26] Eric French, Mariacristina De Nardi, John B. Jones, Olyesa Baker, and Phil Doctor.

    Right before the end: Asset decumulation at the end of life. Economic Perspectives,

    30(3):2–13, 2006.

[27] William G. Gale and Slemrod Joel. Rethinking the estate and gift tax: Overview.

    Working Paper 8205, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001.

[28] William G. Gale, James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod, editors. Rethinking Estate and
    Gift Taxation. Brookings Institution Press, 2011.

[29] William G. Gale and Maria G. Perozek. Do estate taxes reduce saving? In John Shoven,
    editor, Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation. Brookings Institution Press, 2001.

[30] William G. Gale and John Karl Scholz. Intergenerational transfers and the accumulation
    of wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4):145–160, 1994.


                                            34
[31] Jeremy Greenwood, Nezih Guner, and John A. Knowles. More on marriage, fertility,
    and the distribution of income. International Economic Review, 44(3):827–862, 2003.

[32] Gary D. Hansen. The cyclical and secular behaviour of labour input: Comparing eﬃ-
    ciency units and hours worked. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8(1):71–80, 1993.

[33] Jonathan Heathcote, Kjeil Storesletten, and Gianluca Violante. The macroeconomic
    implications of rising wage inequality in the United States. Journal of Political Economy,

    118:681–722, 2010.

[34] James R. Hines. Income and substitution eﬀects of estate taxation. The American
    Economic Review, 103:484–88, 2013.

[35] Mark Huggett. Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies. Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 38(3):469–494, 1996.

[36] Mark Huggett, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron. Sources of lifetime inequality. Amer-

    ican Economic Review, 101(7):2923–54, 2011.

[37] Michael D. Hurd and James P. Smith. Anticipated and actual bequests. Working Paper

    7380, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.

[38] Michael P. Keane and Kenneth I. Wolpin. The career decisions of young man. Journal

    of Political Economy, 105:473–522, 1997.

[39] Wojciech Kopczuk and Joseph Lupton. To leave or not to leave: The distribution of

    bequest motives. Review of Economic Studies, 74:207–235, 2007.

[40] Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ, Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser. Privatizing social security in
    the united states: Comparing the options. Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(3):532–574,
    1999.


                                             35
[41] Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ and Lawrence H. Summers. The role of intergenerational transfers
    in aggregate capital accumulation. Journal of Political Economy, 89(4):706–732, 1981.

[42] Moritz Kuhn. Trends in income and wealth inequality. Mimeo, 2014.

[43] John Laitner and Thomas F. Juster. New evidence on altruism, a study of tiaa-cref
    retirees. The American Economic Review, 86(4):893–908, 1996.

[44] Sang Yoon Lee, Nicholas Roy, and Ananth Seshadri. The causal eﬀect of parent’s

    education on children’s earnings. Mimeo, 2015.

[45] Sang Yoon Lee and Ananth Seshadri. Economic policy and equality of opportunity.

    Mimeo, 2014.

[46] Bhash Mazumder. Estimating the intergenerational elasticity and rank association in

    the u.s.: Overcoming the current limitations of tax data. Federal Reserve Bank of
    Chicago Working paper 2015-4, 2015.

[47] Franco Modigliani. Measuring the constribution of intergenerational transfers to total

    wealth: Conceptual issues and empirical ﬁndings. In Denis Kessler and Andre Mas-

    son, editors, Modeling the Accumulation and Distribution of Wealth. Clarendon Press,

    Oxford, 1988.

[48] Pierre Pestieau and Motohiro Sato. Estate taxation with both accidental and planned
    bequests. CESifo Working Paper Series 1799, 2006.

[49] John Karl Scholz and Ananth Seshadri. Health and wealth in a lifecycle model. Mimeo,
    2012.

[50] Nancy L. Stokey and Sergio Rebelo. Growth eﬀects of ﬂat-tax rates. Journal of Political
    Economy, 103:519–550, 1995.


                                            36
[51] George Tauchen. Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and vector
    autoregressions. Economic Letters, 20(2):177–181, 1986.

[52] Fang Yang. Social security reform with impure intergenerational altruism. Journal of
    Economic Dynamics and Control, 37:52–67, 2013.


                                1



                              0.9



                              0.8
                       Gini




                              0.7


                                                           benchmark
                              0.6                          gross bequest motives
                                                           no bequest motives
                                                           data SCF 1998
                                                           data from Huggett (1996)
                              0.5
                                    30      40        50         60            70
                                                   age


                              Figure 1: Gini coeﬃcient of wealth by age.



                                                                   Gross No           Bequest
 Moment                                        Data Benchmark Bequests                Motives
 Wealth-output ratio                            3.10       3.10     3.10                  3.11
 Bequest-wealth ratio                    0.88-1.18%      0.88%    0.88%                 0.58%
 90th perc. bequest distribution                4.34       4.51     4.29                  4.71
 Fraction of estates paying taxes              2.0%      1.92%    1.92%                 2.04%
 Revenue from estate tax/output               0.33%      0.33%    0.33%                 0.32%
 Government spending/output                     18%     18.00%   18.00%                18.00%
 Parameters
 β    discount factor                                    0.9454   0.9455                0.9525
 ϕ1 bequest utility                                     -5.4473  -6.1561                0.0000
 ϕ2 bequest utility shifter (in $ 2000)                  1095K    1376K                 0.0000
 τb tax on estates                                      21.43%   21.30%                62.94%
 xb estate exemption level (in $ 2000)                    756K     786K                  745K
 τl tax on labor income                                 19.20%   19.20%                19.20%
Table 1: Parameters calibration for the benchmark model and the model with no         voluntary be-
quests.


                                                 37
                                                      Percentile   (%)
                                       Gini      1      5   20        40     60     80
               1998 SCF                0.80   34.7   57.8 69.1      81.7   93.9   98.9
               Benchmark model         0.80   35.2   51.9 66.1      82.9   95.3   99.6
               Gross bequests model    0.80   35.3   52.1 66.3      83.0   95.3   99.6
               No bequest motives      0.76   25.8   44.1 59.7      78.5   93.5   99.1

Table 2: Percentage of total wealth held by households in the top percentiles. First line: 1998
SCF data. Second line: Benchmark model with voluntary bequests in which net bequests are in
the utility function. Third line: Model with voluntary bequests in which gross bequests are in the
utility function. Fourth line: Model without voluntary bequests.


                                           Moving to parent’s earnings
                         Parent’s earnings   1st          2nd      3rd
                         Bequests + human capital inheritance
                         2nd                0.06            -        -
                         3rd                5.59         5.43        -
                         4th               35.71        35.50    28.41
                         Bequests only
                         2nd                0.06            -        -
                         3rd                0.57         0.42        -
                         4th               14.87        14.71    13.98

Table 3: Asset compensation required for moving from a parental background level to another,
normalized as a fraction of average income. Top panel, background advantage due to both bequests
and inheritance of human capital. Bottom panel, background advantage due to bequests only.


           τb     exb     τa      K       Y         B K/Y B/Y              r   wage
         Net bequest model, changing the estate tax rate
         0.00       – 0.216 3.122 1.003 0.00876 3.114 0.873 5.580              0.490
         0.21   756K 0.200 3.100 1.000 0.00880 3.102 0.880 5.622               0.489
         0.40   756K 0.187 3.082 0.998 0.00896 3.088 0.898 5.658               0.488
         0.60   756K 0.170 3.084 0.998 0.00909 3.090 0.911 5.654               0.488
         Net bequest model, changing the estate tax exemption level
         0.21   219K 0.195 3.092 0.999 0.00891 3.095 0.892 5.638               0.489
         0.21   756K 0.200 3.100 1.000 0.00880 3.102 0.880 5.622               0.489
         0.21 1095K 0.201 3.101 1.000 0.00879 3.101 0.879 5.619                0.489
         Net bequest model, changing both the estate tax rate and the exemption level
         0.55   675K 0.174 3.077 0.997 0.00905 3.085 0.907 5.667               0.488
         Gross bequest model, changing the estate tax rate and exemption level
         0.55   675K 0.179 3.051 0.994 0.00872 3.069 0.877 5.717               0.486

Table 4: Aggregate eﬀects of changing the estate tax rate or exemption level, adjusting the capital
income tax.

                                                38
                                                           Percentile (%)
                   τb     exb     τa      Gini          1      5      20      40
                 Net bequest model, change the estate tax rate
                 0.00       – 0.216      0.811      36.91 53.34 67.28 83.61
                 0.21   756K 0.200       0.804      35.15 51.90 66.09 82.89
                 0.40   756K 0.187       0.798      33.78 50.71 65.10 82.27
                 0.60   756K 0.170       0.793      32.83 49.82 64.27 81.67
                 Net bequest model, change the estate tax exemption level
                 0.21   219K 0.195       0.805      35.52 52.23 66.37 82.90
                 0.21   756K 0.200       0.804      35.15 51.90 66.09 82.89
                 0.21 1095K 0.201        0.804      35.11 51.87 66.10 82.92
                 Net bequest model, change estate tax rate and exemption level
                 0.55   675K 0.174       0.794      32.99 49.98 64.43 81.74
                 Gross bequest model, change estate tax rate and exemption level
                 0.55   675K 0.179       0.792      32.39 49.57 64.15 81.59

Table 5: Distribution eﬀects of changing the estate tax rate or exemption level, adjusting the capital
income tax.



                                             Moving to parent’s earnings
                         Parent’s earnings    1st              2nd    3rd
                         Benchmark
                         2nd                 0.06                -       -
                         3rd                 5.59             5.43       -
                         4th               35.71             35.50 28.41
                         Net bequest model, changing capital tax
                         2nd                 0.07                -       -
                         3rd                 5.46             5.29       -
                         4th               33.70             33.52 26.73
                         Gross bequest model
                         2nd                 0.06                -       -
                         3rd                 5.58             5.43       -
                         4th               35.83             35.62 28.53
                         Gross bequest model, changing capital tax
                         2nd                 0.07                -       -
                         3rd                 5.43             5.27       -
                         4th               33.65             33.47 26.71

Table 6: Importance of parental background eﬀects (both bequests and human capital) of changing
the estate tax rate and exemption level to the year 2000 statutory levels (the estate tax rate is raised
to 55% and its exemption level is lowered to $675K). Asset compensation required for moving from
a parental background level to another, normalized as a fraction of average income.


                                                  39
                                            Moving to parent’s earnings
                        Parent’s earnings    1st               2nd     3rd
                        Benchmark
                        2nd                 0.06                  -       -
                        3rd                 0.57               0.42       -
                        4th                14.87             14.71 13.98
                        Net bequest model, changing capital tax
                        2nd                 0.07                  -       -
                        3rd                 0.55               0.39       -
                        4th                13.40             13.22 12.58
                        Gross bequest model
                        2nd                 0.06                  -       -
                        3rd                 0.56               0.42       -
                        4th                14.97             14.81 14.10
                        Gross bequest model, changing capital tax
                        2nd                 0.07                  -       -
                        3rd                 0.55               0.39       -
                        4th                13.44             13.26 12.62
Table 7: Importance of parental background eﬀects (bequests only) of changing the estate tax rate
and exemption level to the year 2000 statutory levels (the estate tax rate is raised to 55% and its
exemption level is lowered to $675K). Asset compensation required for moving from a parental
background level to another, normalized as a fraction of average income.

                              Initial Earnings      Fraction       Winner’s     Loser’s
               All      1st      2nd     3rd    4th Gaining        Ave gain    Avg Loss
            Partial equilibrium
            Net bequest motive, capital income tax
             0.015 0.004 0.027 0.134 -77.277           0.961           0.016      0.0261
            Net bequest motive, labor income tax
             0.045 0.027 0.073 0.162 -89.250           0.990           0.046      0.0637
            Gross bequest model, capital income tax
             0.012 0.003 0.022 0.109 -65.186           0.957           0.014      0.0235
            Gross bequest model, labor income tax
             0.037 0.022 0.060 0.131 -78.028           0.997           0.038      0.1733
            General equilibrium
            Net bequest motive, capital income tax
             0.005 -0.003 0.013 0.116 -75.102          0.386           0.022      0.0054
            Net bequest motive, labor income tax
             0.020 0.009 0.035 0.111 -83.343           0.981           0.021      0.0462
            Gross bequest model, capital income tax
            -0.008 -0.011 -0.007 0.070 -60.027         0.097           0.028      0.0121
            Gross bequest model, labor income tax
             0.005 -0.001 0.012 0.070 -67.214          0.457           0.016      0.0038
Table 8: Welfare eﬀects of changing the estate tax rate or exemption level to the year 2000 statutory
levels (the estate tax rate is raised to 55% and its exemption level is lowered to $675K) when using
the either the capital or labor income tax to balance the budget. In the ﬁrst ﬁve columns, a
positive number means a welfare gain of switching from the benchmark economy to the economy
with statutory levels. Welfare eﬀects are amount of assets as a fraction of average income.
                                                 40
