NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATES, INTEREST RATES, AND THE RISK PREMIUM
Charles Engel
Working Paper 21042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21042

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

I thank Bruce Hansen and Ken West for many useful conversations and Mian Zhu, Dohyeon Lee and
especially Cheng-Ying Yang for excellent research assistance. I thank David Backus, Gianluca Benigno,
Martin Evans, Cosmin Ilut, Keyu Jin, Richard Meese, Michael Melvin, Anna Pavlova, John Prins,
Alan Taylor, and Adrien Verdelhan for comments and helpful discussions. I also thank Martin Eichenbaum
and four referees at the American Economic Review for their suggestions. I have benefited from helpful
comments at seminars at Duke, North Carolina, European Central Bank, Enti Einaudi, International
Monetary Fund, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Federal
Reserve Board, and Wharton. I have benefited from support from the following organizations at which
I was a visiting scholar: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Federal Reserve Board, European Central Bank, Hong Kong Institute
for Monetary Research, Central Bank of Chile, and CREI. I acknowledge support from the National
Science Foundation grant no. 0451671 and grant no. 1226007. No interested party has provided financial
support or data, and I have no position as officer, director or board member of a relevant organization.
No other party had the right to review the paper before its circulation. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 21042
March 2015
JEL No. F31,F41
ABSTRACT
The well-known uncovered interest parity puzzle arises from the empirical regularity that, among developed
country pairs, the high interest rate country tends to have high expected returns on its short term assets.
At the same time, another strand of the literature has documented that high real interest rate countries
tend to have currencies that are strong in real terms - indeed, stronger than can be accounted for by
the path of expected real interest differentials under uncovered interest parity. These two strands one concerning short-run expected changes and the other concerning the level of the real exchange
rate - have apparently contradictory implications for the relationship of the foreign exchange risk premium
and interest-rate differentials. This paper documents the puzzle, and shows that existing models appear
unable to account for both empirical findings. The features of a model that might reconcile the findings
are discussed.

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

There are two well-known empirical relationships between interest rates and foreign exchange
rates, one concerning the rate of change of the exchange rate and the other concerning the level of the
exchange rate. Each of these empirical relationships presents challenges to traditional economic models in
international finance, and each has spurred advances in the modeling of investor behavior and
macroeconomic relationships. Both are important for understanding the role of openness in financial
markets and aggregate economic relationships. What has been heretofore unnoticed is that the two
relationships taken together constitute a paradox – the explanations advanced for one empirical finding
are completely inadequate for explaining the other.
The interest parity (or forward premium) puzzle in foreign exchange markets finds that over short
time horizons (from a week to a quarter) when the interest rate (one country relative to another) is higher
than average, the short-term deposits of the high-interest rate currency tend to earn an excess return. That
is, the high interest rate country tends to have the higher expected return in the short run. The empirical
literature on the forward premium anomaly is vast. Classic early references include Bilson (1981) and
Fama (1984). Engel (1996, 2014) surveys the empirical work that establishes this puzzle, and discusses
the problems faced by the literature that tries to account for the regularity. A risk-based explanation of
this anomaly requires that the short-term deposits in the high-interest rate country are relatively riskier
(the risk arising from exchange rate movements, since the deposit rates in their own currency are taken to
be riskless), and therefore incorporate an expected excess return as a reward for risk-bearing. The ex ante
risk premium must therefore be time-varying and covary with the interest differential.
Standard exchange rate models, such as the textbook Mundell-Fleming model or the well-known
Dornbusch (1976) model, assume that interest parity holds – that there are no ex ante excess returns from
holding deposits in one country relative to another. Those models have a prediction about the level of the
exchange rate. The level of the exchange rate is important in international macroeconomics because it will
help to determine demand for traded goods, especially when some nominal prices are sticky. These
models predict that when a country has a higher than average relative interest rate, the price of foreign
currency should be lower than average. This relationship is borne out in the data, but the strength of the
home currency tends to be greater than is warranted by rational expectations of future short-term interest
differentials as the models posit under interest parity – there is excess comovement or volatility. One way
to rationalize this finding is to appeal to the influence of expected future risk premiums on the level of the
exchange rate. That is, the country with the relatively high interest rate has the lower risk premium and
hence the stronger currency. When a country’s interest rate is high, its currency is appreciated not only

1

because its deposits pay a higher interest rate but also because they are less risky. 1
These two predictions about risk go in opposite directions: the high interest rate country has
higher expected returns in the short run, but a stronger currency in levels. The former implies the high
interest rate currency is riskier, the latter that it is less risky. That is the central puzzle of this paper. This
study confirms these empirical regularities in a unified framework for the exchange rates of the G7
countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the U.K.) relative to the U.S.
It is helpful to express this puzzle mathematically. Let ρt + j +1 be the difference between the return
between period t + j

and t + j + 1 on a foreign short-term deposit and the home short-term deposit,

inclusive of the return from currency appreciation. This study always takes the U.S. to be the home
country. Let rt* − rt be the difference in the ex ante real (inflation adjusted) interest rate in the foreign
country and the U.S. We use the * notation throughout to denote the foreign country.
The literature on interest parity has struggled to account for the robust empirical finding that
cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . Here, “cov” refers to the unconditional covariance, and Et ρt +1 to the conditional

expectation of ρt +1 . The ex ante excess return on the foreign deposit is positively correlated with the
foreign less U.S. interest differential. This is a correlation between two variables known at time t: the risk
premium and the interest rate differential. It is not a correlation between two unexpected returns, which
may be the source of a risk premium. Instead it is an unconditional correlation between two ex ante
returns, suggesting that the factor(s) that drive time variation in the foreign exchange risk premium and
the factor(s) that drive time variation in the interest rate differential have a common component. An
analogy would be a finding that the risk premium on stocks is positively correlated with the short-term
interest rate. Models with standard preferences in a setting of undistorted financial markets are unable to
account for this empirical finding by appealing to a risk premium arising from foreign exchange
fluctuations. The consumption variances and covariances that drives Et ρt +1 in such models do not also
lead to an interest differential that covaries positively with Et ρt +1 . 2
Recent advances have found that the interest parity puzzle can be explained with the same
formulations of non-standard preferences that have been used to account for other asset-pricing
anomalies. These studies model the ex ante excess return as a risk premium related to the variances of
consumption in the home and foreign country. Verdelhan (2010) builds on the model of external habits of
Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Colacito (2009), Colacito and Croce (2011, 2013) and Bansal and
1

Hodrick (1989) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) incorporate risk into macroeconomic models of the level of the
exchange rate. The latter includes a role for risk in a micro-founded model similar to a Dornbusch sticky-price
model.
2
On this point, see for example Bekaert et al. (1997) and Backus et al. (2001). Also see the surveys of Engel (1996,
2014).

2

Shaliastovich (2007, 2013) develop the model of preferences in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990)
to account for this anomaly. Those studies show how the foreign exchange risk premium can be related to
the difference in the conditional variance of consumption in the foreign country relative to the home
country, in a setting of undistorted, complete financial markets. Lustig et. al. (2011) uses Epstein-ZinWeil preferences to show how differential responses to a common component in the variances of home
and foreign consumption can generate the empirical relationship. These papers are important not only to
our understanding of the interest parity puzzle, but also to our understanding of asset pricing more
generally because they show the power of a single model of preferences to account for a number of asset
pricing regularities.
A different approach to explaining the interest parity puzzle advances an explanation akin to the
model of rational inattention of Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Sims (2003). This explanation builds on a
standard model of exchange rates such as Dornbusch (1976). A monetary contraction increases the
interest rate and leads to an appreciation of the currency. However, some investors are slow to adjust their
portfolios, perhaps because it is costly to monitor and gather information constantly. As more investors
learn of the monetary contraction, they purchase home assets, leading to a further home appreciation. So
when the home interest rate increases, the return on the home asset increases both from the higher interest
rate and the currency appreciation. This model of portfolio dynamics was proposed informally by Froot
and Thaler (1990) and called “delayed overshooting.” Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) provide empirical
evidence that is consistent with this hypothesis, and Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) develop a
rigorous model.
In the data for currencies of major economies relative to the U.S., when rt* − rt is high (relative to
its mean), the level of the foreign currency tends to be stronger (appreciated). Dornbusch (1976) and
Frankel (1979) are the original papers to draw the link between real interest rates and the level of the
exchange rate in the modern, asset-market approach to exchange rates. The connection has not gone
unchallenged, principally because the persistence of exchange rates and interest differentials makes it
difficult to establish their comovement with a high degree of uncertainty. For example, Meese and
Rogoff (1988) and Edison and Pauls (1993) treat both series as non-stationary and conclude that evidence
in favor of cointegration is weak. However, more recent work that examines the link between real
interest rates and the exchange rate, such as Engel and West (2006), Alquist and Chinn (2008), and Mark
(2009), has tended to reestablish evidence of the empirical link. Another approach connects surprise
changes in interest rates to unexpected changes in the exchange rate. There appears to be a strong link of
the exchange rate to news that alters the interest differential – see, for example, Faust et al. (2006),
Andersen et. al. (2007) and Clarida and Waldman (2008).
It is widely recognized that exchange rates are excessively volatile relative to the predictions of

3

monetary models that assume interest parity or no foreign exchange risk premium. Frankel and Meese
(1987) and Rogoff (1996) are prominent papers that make this point.

Evans (2011) refers to the

“exchange-rate volatility puzzle” as one of six major empirical challenges in the study of exchange rates.
Recent contributions that examine aspects of this excess volatility include Engel and West (2004),
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), and Evans (2012).
This excessive volatility in the level of the exchange rate arises (by definition) from the effect of
deviations from uncovered interest parity on the level of the exchange rate. This effect is forward looking,
∞

and can be summarized in the variable Et ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) . We use the overbar notation, as in x , to denote
j =0

the unconditional mean of a variable xt . When this sum of the ex ante risk premiums on foreign deposits
increases, the home currency appreciates. The second empirical finding we focus on can be summarized

(

)

as cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . That means that when rt* − rt is high (relative to its mean), the home
∞

currency is strong for two reasons: the influence of interest rates under uncovered interest parity (as in
Dornbusch and Frankel) and the influence of deviations from uncovered interest parity.
It is clear from examining the two covariances that are at the heart of the empirical puzzle of this
paper, it must be the case that while the interest parity puzzle has cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 , for some period
in the future (that is, for some j > 0 ), cov( Et ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt ) < 0 , the reverse sign.
Neither modern models of the foreign exchange risk premium nor of delayed overshooting can

(

)

account for the finding concerning the level of the exchange rate, that cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . We
∞

explain why these models are not capable of accounting for both puzzles. The very features that make
them able to account for the interest parity puzzle work against explaining the level puzzle. As we show,
both the models of the risk premium and of delayed overshooting imply a sort of muted adjustment in
financial markets, which can account for the interest parity puzzle, but the excess comovement puzzle
requires a sort of magnified adjustment.
We describe the features of a model that can reconcile the empirical findings. We suggest that
there may be multiple factors that drive the relationship between interest rates and exchange rates. We
embed a simple model of liquidity risk based on Nagel (2014) within a standard open-economy
macroeconomic model. In that framework, an asset may earn a liquidity premium that increases as
nominal interest rates rise, or as there are shocks to the financial system. Both the macroeconomic shocks
(for example, to monetary policy) that drive interest rates as well as financial shocks to liquidity play a
role in the exchange rate – interest rate nexus, and could potentially account for both empirical findings.
Section 1 develops the approach of this paper. Section 2 presents empirical results. Section 3

4

explains why the empirical findings constitute a puzzle. We discuss the difficulties encountered by asset
pricing approaches such as representative agent models of the risk premium, and models of “delayed
overshooting”. 3 Then this section proposes the model of the liquidity premium that can potentially
encompass both empirical findings.
The study of risk premiums in foreign exchange markets sheds light on important questions in
asset pricing that go beyond the narrow interest of specialists in international asset markets. The foreign
exchange rate is one of the few, if not the only, aggregate asset for an economy whose price is readily
measurable, so its pricing offers an opportunity to investigate some key predictions of asset pricing
theories. For example, in the absence of arbitrage, the rate of real depreciation of the home country’s
currency equals the log of the stochastic discount factor (s.d.f.) for foreign returns relative to the log of the
corresponding s.d.f. for home returns, while the risk premium (as conventionally measured) is
proportional to the conditional variance of the log of the s.d.f. for home relative to the variance of the
s.d.f. for foreign returns. 4 Thus, the behavior of the foreign exchange rate may give direct evidence on the
fundamental building blocks of equilibrium asset pricing models.

1.

Excess Returns and Real Exchange Rates
We develop here a framework for examining behavior of ex ante excess returns and the level of

the exchange rate. Our set-up will consider a home and a foreign country. In the empirical work of
section 2, we always take the U.S. as the home country (as does the majority of the literature), and
consider other major economies as the foreign country. Let it + j be the home one-period nominal interest
for deposits in period t + j that pay off in period t + j + 1 and it*+ j is the corresponding foreign interest
rate.

st denotes the log of the foreign exchange rate, expressed as the U.S. dollar price of foreign

currency. The excess return on the foreign deposit held from period t + j to period t + j + 1 , inclusive of
currency return is given by:
(1)

ρt + j +1 ≡ it*+ j + st + j +1 − st + j − it + j .
This definition of excess returns corresponds with the definition in the literature. We can

interpret this as a first-order log approximation of the excess return in home currency terms for a foreign
security. As Engel (1996) notes, the first-order log approximation may not really be adequate for
appreciating the implications of economic theories of the expected excess return. For example, if the
3

“Representative agent models” may be an inadequate label for models of the risk premium that are developed off
of the Euler equation of a representative agent under complete markets, generally taking the consumption stream as
exogenous.
4
The s.d.f.s for home and foreign returns are unique when asset markets are complete. See Backus et al. (2001),
Brandt et al. (2006), and section 3.1 below.

5

exchange rate is conditionally log normally distributed, then ln ( Et ( St +1 / St =
) ) Et st +1 − st + 12 vart ( st +1 ) ,
where vart ( st +1 ) refers to the conditional variance of the log of the exchange rate and St is the level (not
log) of the exchange rate. Engel (1996) points out that this second-order term is approximately the same
order of magnitude as the risk premiums implied by some economic models. However, we proceed with
analysis of excess returns defined according to equation (1) both because it is the object of almost all of
the empirical analysis of excess returns in foreign exchange markets, and because the theoretical literature
that we consider in section 3 seeks to explain expected excess returns defined precisely as Et ρt + j +1 .
The well-known uncovered interest parity puzzle comes from the empirical finding that the
change in the log of the exchange rate is negatively correlated with the home less foreign interest
differential, it − it* . That is, estimates of cov( st +1 − st , it −=
it* ) cov( Et st +1 − st , it − it* ) tend to be negative.
As Engel (1996, 2014) surveys, this finding is consistent over time among pairs of high-income, lowinflation countries. From equation (1), we note that the relationship cov( Et st +1 − st , it − it* ) < 0 is
equivalent to 0 < var(it − it* ) < cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) . That is, when the foreign interest rate is relatively high,
so it* − it is above average, the excess return on foreign assets also tends to be above average. This is
considered a puzzle because it has been very difficult to find plausible economic models that can account
for this relationship.
While almost all of the empirical literature on the interest parity puzzle has documented evidence
concerning cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) , we recast the puzzle in terms of cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) . rt is the home (i.e.,
U.S.) ex ante real interest rate, defined as rt= it − Et π t +1 , where π t +1 ≡ pt +1 − pt and pt denotes the log of
the consumer price index in the home country. rt* is defined analogously. This is an approximation of the
real interest rate. Analogous to the discussion above of the exchange rate, a different approximation
would include a term for the variance of inflation. In essence, that variance is treated as a constant here.
We conduct empirical work using real interest rates for three reasons. First, the theoretical
discussion of the interest parity puzzle usually builds models to explain cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) , essentially
assuming there is no inflation risk. Second, in high inflation countries, the evidence that
cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) > 0 is less robust – see Bansal and Dahlquist (2000) and Frankel and Poonawala

(2010). The puzzle arises mostly among country pairs where inflation is low and stable. Third, the
theoretical models of the level of the exchange rate, such as Dornbusch (1976) and Frankel (1979), relate
the stationary component of the exchange rate to real interest differentials.
To measure the relation between the interest differential and the level of the exchange rate, begin
by rearranging (1), subtracting off unconditional means, and iterating forward to get:

6

∞

(2)

stT =
stIP − Et ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) .
j =0

∞

(

)

where stT ≡ st − lim( Et st + k − k ( s+1 − s )) and stIP ≡ Et ∑ it*+ j − it + j − (i* − i ) . In deriving this expression, we
k →∞

j =0

have assumed that the interest differential and the ex ante excess return are stationary random variables.5
The lim( Et st + k − k ( s+1 − s )) term is the permanent component of the exchange rate according to
k →∞

the decomposition of Beveridge and Nelson (1981). That is, assuming that the nominal exchange rate is
stationary in first differences, the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition allows us to define a permanent
component that follows a pure mean zero random walk, and a stationary or transitory component.
Therefore, stT is the transitory component. When we talk about the effect of risk on the level of the
exchange rate, we refer to this component – the actual log of the exchange rate, normalized by its
permanent component. If interest parity held, so that Et ρt + j +1 = 0 for all j ≥ 0 , the transitory component
of the exchange rate is equal to the infinite sum of the expected nominal interest differentials, which we
have denoted by stIP (the IP superscript referring to interest parity.) The effect of ex ante excess returns
∞

on the level of the exchange rate is given in the term Et ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) .
j =0

The Dornbusch and Frankel models that assume interest parity imply cov ( stIP , rt* − rt ) > 0 . We

(

)

show empirically that cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . From (2), it follows that there is excess comovement
∞

in the level of the stationary component of the exchange rate: cov ( stT , rt* − rt ) > cov ( stIP , rt* − rt ) . That is,

(

)

cov ( stT , rt* − rt ) − cov ( stIP , rt* − rt ) =
− cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt > 0 .
∞

Some more insight into equation (2) can be gleaned by looking at the relationship of exchange
rates to consumer price levels. The real exchange rate is given by qt ≡ st + pt* − pt . Assume for simplicity
there is no drift in the real exchange rate. We can rewrite (2) by adding and subtracting prices
appropriately:
∞

(3)

∞

qt − lim( Et =
qt + k ) Et ∑ rt*+ j − rt + j − (r * − r ) − Et ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) ,

k →∞
=j 0=j 0

When purchasing power parity holds in the long run, so the real exchange rate is stationary as we will find
for our data, lim( Et qt + k ) is simply the unconditional mean of the real exchange rate. Then equation (3)
k →∞

says the real exchange rate is above its mean either when the sum of current and future expected real
5

Specifically, these variables are square summable, so that the sums on the right side of the equation exist.

7

interest differentials (foreign less home) are above average, or when the sum of expected current and
future excess returns are above average. In the Dornbusch model, an increase in the current real interest
rate influences the level of the real exchange rate through the term involving current and expected future
∞

real

interest

rate

Et ∑ rt*+ j − rt + j − (r * − r ) .

differentials:

Our

empirical

finding

that

j =0

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 implies that there is excessive volatility in the real exchange rate level.
∞

∞

It is important to note that Et ∑ it* − it − (i* − i ) is not the interest differential on long-term bonds,
j =0

even hypothetical infinite-horizon bonds. It is the difference between the expected return from holding an
infinite sequence of short-term foreign bonds and the expected return from the infinite sequence of shortterm home bonds.

An investment that involves rolling over short term assets has different risk

characteristics than holding a long-term asset, which might include a holding-period risk premium. 6
In

(

the

next

section,

we

present

evidence

that

cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0

and

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . The short-run ex ante excess return on the foreign security, Et ρt +1 , is
∞

negatively correlated with the real interest differential, consistent with the many empirical papers on the
uncovered interest parity puzzle.

But the sum of current and expected future returns is positively

correlated.
The empirical approach of this paper can be described simply.

We estimate vector error-

correction models (VECMs) in the variables st , it − it* , and pt − pt* . From the VECM estimates, we
construct measures of Et ( it* − it − (π t*+1 − π t +1 ) ) = rt* − rt . Using standard projection formulas, we can also
∞

construct estimates of stT and stIP . To measure Et ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) , we take the difference of stT and stIP .
j =0

From these ECM estimates, we calculate our estimates of the covariances just discussed. 7 Our approach
of estimating undiscounted expected present values of interest rates is presaged in Campbell and Clarida
(1987), Clarida and Gali (1994) and more recently in Froot and Ramadorai (2005), Mark (2009) and
Brunnermeier et. al. (2009).8 9

6

Chinn and Meredith (2004) find that uncovered interest parity holds relatively well for long-term bonds. Under
some further assumptions (e.g., that the expectations hypothesis of the term structure holds and the interest rate
differential is a first-order Markov process), this would imply the reversal in the sign of the covariance we highlight.
7
We also consider VECMs that are augmented with data on stock market returns, oil prices, gold prices and longterm interest rates, which are included solely for the purpose of improving the forecasts of future interest rates and
inflation rates.
8
This method does not require estimation of expected long-term real interest rates, about which there is some
controversy. See Bansal, et al. (2012).

8

2. Empirical Results
We investigate the behavior of exchange rates and interest rates for the U.S. relative to the other
six countries of the G7: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.K. We also consider the
behavior of U.S. variables relative to an aggregate weighted average of the variables from these six
countries, with weights measured as the value of each country’s exports and imports as a fraction of the
average value of trade over the six countries. This set of seven countries are particularly interesting for
examining these exchange rate puzzles because these countries have had floating exchange rates among
themselves since the early 1970s, little foreign exchange intervention in the market for each currency
relative to the dollar, very low capital controls, very little default risk, low inflation (especially for each
country relative to the U.S.), and very deep markets in foreign exchange. These facts narrow the possible
explanations for the puzzles.
Our study uses monthly data. Foreign exchange rates are noon buying rates in New York, on the
last trading day of each month, culled from the daily data reported in the Federal Reserve historical
database. The price levels are consumer price indexes from the Main Economic Indicators on the OECD
database. Nominal interest rates are taken from the last trading day of the month, and are the midpoint of
bid and offer rates for one-month Eurorates, as reported on Intercapital from Datastream. The interest
rate data begin in June 1979, and the empirical work uses the time period June 1979 to October 2009.
The choice of an end date of October 2009 represents a compromise. On the one hand, it is important for
our purposes to include these data well into 2009 because it has been noted in some recent papers that
there was a crash in the “carry trade” in 2008, so it would perhaps bias our findings if our sample ended
prior to this crash. 10 On the other hand, it seems plausible that there were some changes in the driving
processes for interest rates and exchange rates during the turbulent period from late 2008 until early 2013
because of the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis.

2.1 Fama regressions
The “Fama regression” (see Fama, 1984) is the basis for the forward premium puzzle. It is
usually reported as a regression of the change in the log of the exchange rate between time t+1 and t on
the time t interest differential:
st +1 − st = ζ s + βs (it − it* ) + us ,t +1

Under uncovered interest parity, ζ s = 0 and βs = 1 . We can rewrite this regression as:
9

See the appendix for a detailed discussion of the relation of the empirical work in this paper to Froot and
Ramadorai (2005).
10
See, for example, Brunnermeier, et al. (2009) and Jordà and Taylor (2012).

9

ρt +1 = ζ s + β s (it* − it ) + us ,t +1 ,

(4)

where β s ≡ 1 − βs . The left-hand side of the regression is the ex post excess return on the foreign
security. If β s > 0 , there is a positive correlation between the excess return on the foreign currency and
the foreign-home interest differential.
We estimate the Fama regression for our currencies as a preliminary exercise. Table 1 reports the
90% confidence interval for the regression coefficients from (4), based on Newey-West standard errors.
For all of the currencies, the point estimates of β s are positive. The 90% confidence interval for β s lies
above zero for four (Italy and France being the exceptions, where the confidence interval for the latter
barely includes zero.) For four of the six, zero is inside the 90% confidence interval for the intercept
term, ζ s . (In the case of the U.K., the confidence interval barely excludes zero, while for Japan we find
strong evidence that ζ s is greater than zero.)
The G6 exchange rate (the weighted average exchange rate, defined in the data section) appears
to be less noisy than the individual exchange rates. In all of our tests, the standard errors of the
coefficient estimates are smaller for the G6 exchange rate than for the individual country exchange rates,
suggesting that some idiosyncratic movements in country exchange rates get smoothed out when we look
at averages. The weights in the G6 exchange rate are constant. We can think of this exchange rate as the
dollar price of a fixed basket of currencies, and can interpret our tests as examining the properties of
expected returns on this asset. Our discussion focuses on the returns on this asset because its returns
appear to be more predictable than for the individual currencies. Examining the behavior of the returns
on the weighted portfolio is a more appealing way of aggregating the data and reducing the effects of the
idiosyncratic noise in the country data than estimating the Fama regression as a panel using all six
exchange rates. There is not a good theoretical reason to believe that the coefficients in the Fama
regression are the same across currencies, and the gains from panel methods are likely to be small from a
panel that would impose no restrictions across the equations on the coefficients. Table 1 reports that the
90% confidence interval for this exchange rate lies well above zero, with a point estimate of 2.467. The
intercept coefficient, on the other hand is very near zero, and the 90% confidence interval easily contains
zero.

2.2

Vector error correction model
A building block in our estimates of the central statistics of this study, cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) and

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt , is a vector error correction model from which we extract measures of expected
∞

inflation (in order to construct the short-term real interest rate differential, rt* − rt ), and the ex ante excess

10

returns for future periods ( Et ρt + j ).
Let

(5)

 st 
xt  pt − pt*  ,
=
 i − it* 

where st is the log of the dollar price of foreign currency, pt − pt* is the log of the US consumer price
level relative to the foreign price level, and it − it* is the US interest rate less the foreign interest rate
expressed as monthly returns.
We estimate:
(6)

xt − xt −1 =
C0 + Gxt −1 + C1 ( xt −1 − xt − 2 ) + C2 ( xt − 2 − xt −3 ) + C3 ( xt −3 − xt − 4 ) + ut

While the C matrices are unrestricted, the G matrix takes the form:
 g11
=
G  g 21
 g31

− g11
− g 21
− g31

g13 
g 23  .
g33 

This form implies that if there is cointegration, the nominal exchange rate and relative inflation rate adjust
to misalignments in the real exchange rate. The estimated coefficients of equation (6) are reported in
Appendix table A.1. This system can be estimated efficiently using equation-by-equation ordinary least
squares. We take as uncontroversial the presumption that the nominal interest rate differential is
stationary. For all the currency pairs, the point estimate of g33 is large (in absolute value) and negative,
consistent with stationarity.
A large literature has been devoted to the question of whether the nominal exchange rate and the
nominal price differential are cointegrated, or whether the real exchange rate is stationary. Three recent
studies of uncovered interest parity, Froot and Ramadorai (2005), Mark (2009) and Brunnermeier, et al.
(2009) estimate statistical models that assume the real exchange rate is stationary, but do not test for a
unit root. Jordà and Taylor (2012) demonstrate that there is a profitable carry-trade strategy that exploits
the uncovered interest parity puzzle when the trading rule is enhanced by including a forecast that the real
exchange rate will return to its long-run level when its deviations from the mean are large.
We find fairly strong evidence of mean reversion in the real exchange rate in this sample. The
strength of this evidence may arise from using the interest rate differential in the VECM as a covariate,
which previous studies have not included. We construct bootstrap distributions of the estimates of g11 ,
g12 , and g11 − g 21 . Table 2 reports these distributions and the estimated coefficients. Subtracting the

11

second equation from the first, the estimate of g11 − g 21 measures the monthly mean reversion in the real
exchange rate. We find the estimated difference is significant at the 5 percent level for three of the
currencies, and at the 10 percent level for two more currency pairs. A sixth case, Italy, is nearly
significant at the ten percent level. Only the Canadian dollar shows no clear signs of cointegration. The
estimates of g11 − g 21 range from approximately 0.02 (for the Canadian dollar) to 0.04 (for the U.K.
pound), implying a strong tendency for the real exchange rate to mean revert. The estimate of g11 − g 21
for the G6 average currency is approximately 0.03, and significant at the 5 percent level.
The general formulation of the VECM in (6) allows us to construct a measure of the permanent
component of the nominal exchange rate (as required in the calculation given in equation (2)) whether or
not the nominal exchange rate and relative nominal prices are cointegrated. Given the evidence presented
in Table 2, we proceed under the assumption of cointegration so that there is a permanent common
component to the nominal exchange rate and the price differential.
Below, we primarily report results from a VECM with three lags. We have calculated the Bayes
Information Criterion for the optimal lag length in the VECM, and found that for all currency pairs, the
optimal lag length is 1. However, we stick with the longer VECM because it seems possible that there are
important dynamic relationships that are not captured in a model with a single lag. In fact, below we also
report results of a VECM with 12 lags. We also report results from VECMs that include the dollar price
of oil and gold, relative (foreign to U.S.) long-term interest rates and relative stock returns. These
variables are included because they are forward looking and may improve forecasts of ρt + j . However, in
practice, there is a penalty for using larger VECMs (i.e., more lags and more variables) because many
more parameters are estimated. We find that while the pattern of our estimates of cov( Et ρt + j , rt* − rt ) are
the same across all of the VECMs, the standard errors of some of the estimates of that covariance increase
as the number of coefficients estimated increase.

2.3

Fama regressions in real terms
A counterpart to equation (4) in real terms can be written as:

(7)

qt +1 − qt + rˆt* − rˆt = ζ q + β q ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + uq ,t +1 .

We use a ^ over the real interest rate variables to emphasize that these variables are estimated from our
VECM. The dependent variable in this regression is equal to ρt +1 + u p ,t +1 , where u p ,t +1 is the relative
inflation forecast error, u p ,t +1 ≡ pt*+1 − pt* − ( pt +1 − pt ) − Eˆ t ( pt*+1 − pt* − ( pt +1 − pt ) ) , where we use the
notation Eˆ t to designate our estimate of the expected inflation differential. Much of the theoretical

12

literature on the foreign exchange risk premium builds models that interpret the Fama regression as one in
which the dependent and independent variables are defined in real terms as in (7), and assume no inflation
risk.
There are two senses in which our measures of rˆt* − rˆt are estimates. The first is that the
parameters of the VECM are estimated. But even if the parameters were known with certainty, we would
still only have estimates of rˆt* − rˆt because we are basing our measures of rˆt* − rˆt on linear projections.
Agents certainly have more sophisticated methods of calculating expectations, and use more information
than is contained in our VECM.
The findings for regression (7) in real terms are similar to those when the regression is estimated
on nominal variables. For all currencies, the estimates of β q , reported in Table 3, are positive, which
implies that the high real interest rate currency tends to have high real expected excess returns. The
estimated coefficient for the G6 aggregate is close to 2.
Table 3 and all of the subsequent tables report the Newey-West standard errors from regression
(7), and also report two sets of confidence intervals for each parameter estimate based on bootstraps.. The
Newey-West standard errors ignore the fact that rˆt d is a generated regressor. The first bootstrap uses
percentile intervals and the second percentile-t intervals. 11
The 95 percent confidence interval for β q lies above zero for Germany, Japan, and the U.K. The
90 percent confidence interval contains zero for Canada and Italy. The 95 percent confidence interval
contains zero for France, but the 90 percent confidence interval lies above zero for the first bootstrap.
These findings are similar to those from the Fama regressions in nominal returns (reported in Table 1),
with the exception of the Canadian dollar which was significantly positive in the nominal regression.
The fact that all six of the estimates of β q for the separate countries are positive conveys more
information than the individual tests of significance. A test of the joint null that all β q are less than or
equal to zero can be rejected at a confidence level greater than 99.9%, using a bootstrapped statistic based
on the joint distribution of the residuals from the regressions in Table 3.
The findings are clear using the G6 average exchange rate: the coefficient estimate is 1.98 and
both confidence intervals lie above zero. The estimate of ζ q is very close to zero, and the confidence
intervals contain zero.
In summary, the evidence on the interest parity puzzle is similar in real terms as in nominal terms.
The point estimates of the coefficient β q are positive and tend to be statistically significantly greater than

11

See Hansen (2010). The Appendix describes the bootstraps in more detail.

13

zero, cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . Even in real terms, the country with the higher interest rate tends to have
short-run excess returns (i.e., excess returns and the interest rate differential are positively correlated.)

2.4 The real exchange rate, real interest rates, and the level risk premium
Table 4 reports estimates from
qt = ζ Q + β Q ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + uQ ,t .

(8)

In all cases, the coefficient estimate is positive. In almost all cases, although the confidence intervals are
wide, the coefficient is significantly positive. This regression confirms the well-known relationship that
the U.S. dollar tends to be stronger when the U.S. real interest rate is relatively high. Our chief interest is
not this relationship, but whether the real exchange rate responds more or less to the real interest
differential than predicted by uncovered interest parity. That is, we are interested in the sign of
∞

cov( Et ∑ ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt ) .
j =0

Our central empirical finding is reported in Table 5. This table reports the regression:
∞

Eˆ t ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) = ζ ρ + β ρ ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + u ρ t .

(9)

j =0

∞

Eˆ t ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) is calculated as the difference between our measure of the transitory component of the
j =0

exchange rate, stT , and the estimated sum of current and expected future interest differentials, stIP ,
following equation (2).
For all of the currency pairs, the estimated slope coefficient is negative, implying

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 .
∞

The 90 percent confidence intervals are wide, but with only a few

exceptions, lie below zero. We can reject the joint null that this covariance is greater than or equal to zero
for all six currencies at a confidence level greater than 99.9 percent.
The confidence interval for the G6 average strongly excludes zero. To get an idea of magnitudes,
a one percentage point difference in annual rates between the foreign and home real interest rates equals a
1/12th percentage point difference in monthly rates. The coefficient of around -31 reported for the
regression when we take the U.S. relative to the average of the other G7 countries then translates into
∞

around a 2.6% effect on Eˆ t ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) of a one percentage point change in the interest rate
j =0

differential. From Table 4, we can see that if the U.S. real rate increases one annualized percentage
point above the real rate in the other countries, the dollar is predicted to be 3.6% (43.7/12) stronger. Of

14

that 3.6%, 1.0% is the amount attributable to the higher real interest differential under uncovered interest
parity (as in the Dornbusch (1976) model), and the remaining 2.6% represents the effect of the cumulated
expected excess return on dollar deposits on the exchange rate.

(

)

This finding that cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 is surprising in light of the well-known uncovered
∞

interest parity puzzle. We have documented that when rt* − rt is above average, foreign deposits tend to
have expected excess returns relative to U.S. deposits. That seems to imply that the high interest rate
currency is the riskier currency. But the estimates from equation (9) deliver the opposite message – the
high interest rate currency has the lower level risk premium. Since we have found cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0

(

)

and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 , we must have cov ( Et ρt + j , rt* − rt ) < 0 for at least some j > 0 . That is,
∞

we must have a reversal in the correlation of the expected one-period excess returns with rt* − rt as the
horizon extends.
This is illustrated in Figure 1, which plots estimates of the slope coefficient in a regression of
Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) on rˆt* − rˆt for j = 1, ,120 :
Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj

For the first few j, this coefficient is positive, but it eventually turns negative at longer horizons.
To summarize, when the U.S. real interest rate relative to the foreign real interest rate is higher
than average, the transitory component of the dollar is stronger than average. Crucially, it is even
stronger than would be predicted by a model of uncovered interest parity. Ex ante excess returns or the
foreign exchange risk premium contribute to this strength. This implies that the expected sum of future
excess returns on the foreign asset must increase when the U.S. real interest rate rises, which is a reversal
of the correlation between the interest differential and expected returns in the short run.
Figure 2 shows that a similar pattern occurs when we estimate
Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( it* − it ) + utj .

The usual empirical work on the interest parity puzzle, as in Table 1, reports on the correlation of the
excess return with the nominal interest differential. These findings imply cov ( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) > 0 . In Figure
2, we see nonetheless that cov ( Et ρt + j , it* − it ) < 0 as the horizon extends out to greater than 20 months.
The figure plots results for the G6 average exchange rate, but the pattern is similar for the individual

(

)

bilateral exchange rates. The evidence is less strong that cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , it* − it < 0 than it is for the
∞

analogous relationship involving real interest rate differentials.

15

In Figure 3, for the G6 currency, we plot the slope coefficient estimates from the regression

ρt + j = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj .
That is, the dependent variable in the regression is actual ex post excess returns on the foreign deposit,
rather than the measure of ex ante excess returns calculated on forecasts from the VECM. The same
pattern emerges as in the previous plots. For small values of j, we find cov ( ρt + j , rˆt* − rˆt ) > 0 , but as the
horizon increases, the sign of the covariance reverses. The pattern of coefficient estimates is not as
smooth because the regressions use ex post rather than ex ante returns, but the reversal of sign is
unmistakable. It is not possible, of course, to calculate cov

(∑

∞
0

)

ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt , because there are only a

finite number of realizations of ex post returns in our sample. Although we could calculate a truncated
sum, the disadvantages of this procedure are well known from the literature. This problem partly
motivated the development of the Campbell and Shiller (1987, 1988) technique, which is closely related
to our approach.
Figure 4 is analogous to Figure 3, except that the regressor is the nominal interest rate differential.
Figure 4 plots the slope coefficients from the regression

ρt + j = ζ j + β j ( it* − it ) + utj .
Again we can see the pattern of initially positive slope estimates, and then a reversal of sign. These
regressions are notable because they do not rely on our VECM analysis at all. The initial slope coefficient
estimated ( j = 1 ) is exactly the estimate reported for the G6 average exchange rate in Table 1. Valchev
(2014) finds very similar results for a panel regression of excess returns for 18 countries against the U.S.
dollar, using data spanning 1976-2013, imposing the same slope coefficient across currencies.
We consider two extensions of the empirical analysis to see if augmenting the simple VECM
estimated here can sharpen the forecasts of future short-term real interest rates. The results reported so far
are from a VECM with three lags, using monthly data. We estimated the model using 12 lags, which
might capture longer run dynamics in the monthly data.
The second extension added four variables to the VECM for each country. We include a stock
price index and a measure of long-term nominal government bond yields. The long-term bond yields are
from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, “interest rates, government securities and government
bonds.” The stock price indexes are monthly, from Datastream. 12 The yields and stock prices are taken
relative to the corresponding U.S. variable. We also include data on the dollar price of oil and the dollar

12

The Datastream codes are TOTMKCN(PI), TOTMKFR(PI), TOTMKIT(PI), TOTMKUK(PI), TOTMKBD(PI),
TOTMKJP(PI), and TOTMKUS(PI)

16

price of gold. 13 As we have noted above, our VECM estimates of expected inflation and expected future
interest rates are estimates both because the coefficients of the VECM must be estimated, but also
because the simple VECM does not include all of the information and news the market uses to forecast
future inflation and interest rates. The point of including these four variables is that they are asset prices
that respond quickly to news about the future state of the economy. For example, the gold price is
believed to be sensitive to news about U.S. monetary policy. Oil prices are thought to react to
expectations of global economic growth, which in turn may influence expectations of inflation and
interest rates. The stock prices and long-term bond rates from each economy may contain information
about local monetary policy and economic growth prospects.
We estimated the same parameters as reported in Tables 2, 3, and 4 for each of these models. The
point estimates for the augmented models were very similar to those reported for the baseline model. The
confidence intervals for the slope coefficients for the regressions reported in the tables based on
expectations generated from the VECM with 12 lags were wider than for the VECM with 3 lags. These
wider confidence intervals might reflect the greater imprecision in coefficient estimates in the VECM
with 12 lags. The more parsimonious specification has far fewer coefficients to estimate. On the other
hand, the findings when the additional informational variables are included in the VECM are not very
different than those reported in the tables. That is, not only the signs but the statistical significance of the
coefficient estimates (based on Newey-West statistics and on both bootstraps) are similar.
Simlarly to Figure 1, Figure 5 plots the slope coefficient estimates for the regression
Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj

for the 12-lag VECM. Figure 6 plots these slope coefficients for the VECM augmented with information
variables. The overall message is the same as in the previous specifications.
We turn now to the implications of these empirical findings for models of the foreign exchange
risk premium.

3.

The Puzzle
We have found that there is excess comovement of the level of the exchange rate and the interest

differential, in the sense that the covariance of the stationary component of the exchange rate with the
foreign less U.S. interest rate is more negative than would hold under interest parity:

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . This finding of excess comovement is not surprising in itself, and
∞

corresponds to previous findings of excess volatility in the literature. The difficulty resides in reconciling
13

These data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis database. The oil price is the spot price of West Texas
Intermediate crude oil, and the gold price is the Gold Fixing Price in the London Bullion Market.

17

this finding with the well-known interest parity “puzzle” that finds cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . A complete
theory of exchange rate and interest rate behavior needs to explain not only the interest parity puzzle, but
also why cov( Et ρt + j , rt* − rt ) < 0 for some j > 1 .
Recent work has made progress in developing economic models to account for the uncovered
interest parity puzzle. The models we review below – one set based on risk averse behavior of investors,
the other on rational inattention – rely on a curtailed adjustment by markets to a change in interest rates to
explain the interest parity puzzle. Suppose some shock raises rt* − rt . In one set of models, the shock also
increases the riskiness of foreign assets for home investors relative to the riskiness of home assets for
foreign investors. Investors’ desire to increase investment in the foreign deposits because of the increase
in rt* − rt is muted by the increase in foreign exchange risk, which implies an increase in the risk premium
on the foreign deposits. In the other set of models, there is initially partial adjustment by investors, not
based on risk aversion, but by slow reaction to news of the increase in rt* − rt . Some investors do not
adjust their portfolios immediately, which then generates higher expected returns on the foreign deposits
in the short run before all investors rebalance their portfolios.
These models do not allow for a channel of amplified adjustment, by which the high interest rate
currency is considered more desirable by investors, leading to a lower expected return on that currency.
That is, there is no channel by which cov( Et ρt + j , rt* − rt ) < 0 for any j.

3.1

Models of the foreign exchange risk premium under complete markets
Almost since the initial discovery of the interest-parity puzzle, there have been attempts to

account for the behavior of expected returns in foreign exchange markets without relying on any market
imperfections, such as market incompleteness or deviations from rational expectations.14 The literature
has built models of risk premiums based on risk aversion of a representative agent. Those models
formulate preferences in order to generate volatile risk premiums which are important not only for
understanding the uncovered interest parity puzzle, but also a number of other puzzles in asset pricing
regarding returns on equities and the term structure. See, for example, Bansal and Yaron (2004).
Here we briefly review the basic theory of foreign exchange risk premiums in complete-markets
models and relate the factors driving the risk premium to the state variables driving stochastic discount
factors. See, for example, Backus et al. (2001) or Brandt et al. (2006).
When markets are complete, there is a unique stochastic discount factor, M t +1 that prices returns
denominated in units of the home consumption basket. The returns on any asset j denominated in units of
14

See Engel (1996, 2014) for surveys of the theoretical literature.

18

home consumption satisfy 1 = E (t M t +1e j ,t +1 ) for all j. Likewise, there is a unique s.d.f., M t*+1 that prices
r

returns expressed in units of the foreign consumption basket. As Backus et. al. (2001) show, when the
s.d.f. and returns are log-normally distributed (or, as an approximation), we can write:
(10) =
Et ρt +1
(11)

1
2

(vart mt +1 − vart mt*+1 )

rt* =
− rt Et (mt +1 − mt*+1 ) + 12 (vart (mt +1 ) − vart (mt*+1 ))

The lower case variables, mt +1 and mt*+1 are the logs of M t +1 and M t*+1 , respectively.
We focus attention on the “long-run risks” model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), based on EpsteinZin (1989) preferences. Colacito and Croce (2011) have recently applied the model to understand several
properties of equity returns, real exchange rates and consumption. Bansal and Shaliastovich (2007,
2012), Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Colacito (2009), and Backus et al. (2010) demonstrate how the
“long-run risks” model can account for the interest-parity anomaly. Colacito and Croce (2013) build a
general equilibrium two-good, two-good endowment economy in which agents in both countries have
Epstein-Zin preferences, under both complete markets and portfolio autarky, and are able to account for
the interest-parity puzzle as well as other asset-pricing anomalies.
These papers directly extend equilibrium closed-economy models to a two-country openeconomy setting.

The closed economy models assume an exogenous stream of endowments, with

consumption equal to the endowment. The open-economy versions assume an exogenous stream of
consumption in each country. These could be interpreted either as partial equilibrium models, with
consumption given but the relation between consumption and world output unmodeled. Or they could be
interpreted as general equilibrium models in which each country consumes an exogenous stream of its
own endowment and there is no trade between countries. 15 Under the latter interpretation, the real
exchange rate is a shadow price, since in the absence of any trade in goods, there can be no trade in assets
that have any real payoff.
In each country, households are assumed to have Epstein-Zin preferences. The home agent’s
utility is defined by the recursive relationship:
(12)

{

Ut =
(1 − β )Ctρ + β  Et (U tα+1 )


ρ /α

}




1/ ρ

.

In this relationship, β measures the patience of the consumer, 1 − α > 0 is the degree of relative risk
aversion, and 1 / (1 − ρ ) > 0 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Assume, as in Bansal and
Yaron (2004) that α < ρ , which corresponds to the case in which agents prefer an early resolution of risk,
and 0 < ρ < 1 , so the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is greater than one.

15

Colacito and Croce’s (2013) two-good model does allow for trade in goods.

19

We will consider a somewhat more general version of the long-run risks model than is present in
the literature, but one that nests several models. We present only a version in which real interest rates are
determined, but discuss extensions to the nominal interest rate.
Assume an exogenous path for consumption in each country. In the home country (with
ct ≡ ln(Ct ) ):

(13)

ct +1 − ct = µ + lt + uth + utc ε tx+1 .

The conditional expectation of consumption growth is given by µ + lt . The component lt represents a
persistent consumption growth component modeled as a first-order autoregression:
(14)

lt +1 =ϕl lt + wth + wtc ε tl+1 .

The innovations, ε tx+1 and ε tl+1 are assumed to be uncorrelated within each country, distributed
i.i.d . N (0,1) , but each shock may be correlated with its foreign counterpart ( ε t*+x1 and ε t*+l1 , which are

mutually uncorrelated.)
In the foreign country, we have:
(15)

ct*+1 − ct* = µ * + lt* + utf + utc ε t*+x1

(16)

lt*+1 = ϕl*lt*+1 + wtf + wtc ε t*+l1

The conditional variances are written as the sum of two independent components.

The

component with the h superscript is idiosyncratic to the home country. An f superscript refers to the
foreign idiosyncratic component. The one with the c superscript is common to the home and foreign
country. Conditional variances are stochastic and follow first-order autoregressive processes:
(17)

uti+1 =−
(1 ϕu )θui + ϕu uti + σ u ε tiu+1 , i = h, f , c

(18)

wti+1 =
(1 − ϕ w )θ wi + ϕ w wti + σ wε tiw+1 .

i = h, f , c

The innovations, ε tiu+1 and ε tiw+1 , i = h, f , c are assumed to be uncorrelated, distributed i.i.d. with mean
zero and unit variance.
We can log linearize the first-order conditions as in Hansen et al. (2008). We will ignore terms
that are not time-varying or that do not affect both the conditional means and variances of the stochastic
discount factors, lumping those variables into the catchall terms Ξ t and Ξ*t .
The home discount factor is given by:
(19)

−=
mt +1 γ ur (uth + utc ) + γ wr ( wth + wtc ) + λur uth + utc ε tx+1 + λwr wth + wtc ε tl+1 + Ξ t .

The foreign discount factor is given by:
(20)

−=
mt*+1 γ u*r (utf + utc ) + γ w*r ( wtf + wtc ) + λu*r utf + utc ε t*+x1 + λw*r wtf + wtc ε t*+l1 + Ξ*t .

20

The parameters in these log-linearization are:
=
γ ur α (α − ρ ) / 2

=
γ wr α (α − ρ )ωw2 / 2

=
γ u*r α * (α * − ρ * ) / 2

λu*r = 1 − α *

λur = 1 − α

=
γ w*r α * (α * − ρ * )ωw*2 / 2

λw*r =
−(α * − ρ * )ωw*

λwr =
−(α − ρ )ωw

=
ωw β / (1 − βϕ w )

=
ωw* β * / (1 − β *ϕ w )

Bansal and Shaliastovich (2007, 2012), Colacito (2009), and Backus et al. (2010) assume
identical parameters in the two countries. Applying (10) and (11), we find:
( λ r ) 2 ( u h − u f ) + ( λ r ) 2 ( wh − w f ) 
t
t
w
t
t 
 u


(21)

Et ρt +1
=

(22)

2
2
rt* − rt =  −γ ur + 12 ( λur )  ( uth − utf ) +  −γ wr + 12 ( λwr )  ( wth − wtf





1
2

).

Under the parameter restrictions listed above ( 1 − α > 0 , 0 < ρ < 1 , α < ρ ), it is straightforward to verify
cov ( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 in this model, providing a resolution of the interest parity puzzle. Intuitively,

under these parameter restrictions, when the relative variance of the home consumption stream ( uth − utf
or wth − wtf ) is high, there are two effects. First, as Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012) put it, there is a
“flight to quality” – home investors shift their portfolios to less risky assets. The increase in volatility
“increases the uncertainty about future growth, so the demand for risk-free assets increases, and in
equilibrium, real yields fall”, that is rt* − rt rises. Second, foreign exchange risk for home investors rises
more than for foreign investors, leading to an increase in Et ρt +1 .
Lustig et al. (2011) consider a case where attitudes toward risk are different in the two countries.
That study emphasizes the importance of different responses to common shocks, rather than focusing on
idiosyncratic shocks to consumption volatility. Suppose these country-specific shocks are set to zero
h
f
h
f
( u=
u=
w=
w=
0 ), and there are differences in risk aversion ( α ≠ α * ) but other parameters of
t
t
t
t

preferences ( β and ρ ) are identical. Then:

) (

(

)

 λ r 2 − λ * r 2 u c + λ r 2 − λ * r 2 wc 
( ) ( u ) t ( w ) ( w ) t 
 u

(23)

Et ρt +1=

(24)

2
2
2
2
rt* − rt= γ u*r − γ ur + 12 ( λur ) − ( λu*r )  utc + γ w*r − γ wr + 12 ( λwr ) − ( λw*r )  wtc .





1
2

(

)

(

)

Under the same set of parameter assumptions as above ( 1 − α > 0 , 1 − α * > 0 , 0 < ρ < 1 , α < ρ ), one
finds again cov ( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . As Lustig et al. (2011) explain, “When precautionary saving demand
is strong enough, an increase in the volatility of consumption growth (and, consequently, of marginal
utility growth) lowers interest rates.” When α * > α (for example), the home country is more risk averse,

21

and the precautionary effect is larger in the home country, so rt* − rt commoves positively with utc and
wtc . Also, the foreign exchange risk for home residents exceeds that for foreign investors, so Et ρt +1

commoves positively with the common shocks utc and wtc .
Under either specification – idiosyncratic shocks and identical preferences, or different
preferences and common shocks – the interest rate differential and the foreign exchange risk premium are
responding to changes in the variance of consumption growth. A precautionary motive that drives down
the home interest rate also increases the foreign exchange risk premium. There is an under-adjustment of
investors to the lower home interest rate. They do not flock to foreign deposits to the same extent that risk
neutral investors would because of aversion to foreign exchange risk. But this muted adjustment implies
that there is no force to account for the negative correlation of Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 with rt* − rt . Under the first
∞

specification,
Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1
=
∞

1
2

h
f
2
 r 2 uth − utf
( λu ) 1 − ϕ + ( λwr ) w1t −−ϕwt
u
w



,


and under the second specification,
Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1=
∞

1
2

(

)

)

(

 r 2
utc
wtc 
*r 2
*r 2
r 2
−
+
−
λ
λ
λ
λ
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
 u
.
u
w
w
1 − ϕu
1 − ϕw 


(

)

It is clear that under either specification, cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt > 0 , contravening our empirical
∞

findings.
The interest parity puzzle is sometimes portrayed as a relation between currency depreciation
and the interest differential. Using real exchange rates and real interest rates, the puzzle is expressed as
cov ( qt +1 − qt , rt* − rt ) > 0 . This is a stronger relationship than cov ( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . It can be expressed

as cov ( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > var ( rt* − rt ) . Because the condition is stronger, the empirical relationship is not as
robust, but it is found to hold for many currencies and time periods nonetheless (see the surveys of Engel,
1996, 2014). The model with identical preferences and idiosyncratic shocks is able to account for this
relationship if risk aversion is strong enough. It is straightforward to see that if the coefficient of relative
risk aversion is greater than one ( α < 0 ), the model implies cov ( qt +1 − qt , rt* − rt ) > 0 . Similarly in the
model with common shocks, but in which α ≠ α * , if relative risk aversion is greater than one in both
countries, we find cov ( qt +1 − qt , rt* − rt ) > 0 .

22

It is notable that both formulations of the model that derive cov ( qt +1 − qt , rt* − rt ) > 0 imply (using

(

)

equation (3)) cov qt − lim( Et qt + k ), rt* − rt < 0 , in contradiction to the ample evidence reported in Table 4.
k →∞

That is, when the models are able to account for the stronger form of the interest parity puzzle, they imply
that the country with the higher interest rate tends to have the weaker currency: the transitory component
of the exchange rate is negatively correlated with the interest differential. This prediction of the models is
not noted in the literature, and is in striking contrast to the widely accepted empirical prediction of the
Dornbusch-style models that a higher real interest rate is associated with a stronger currency.
In the Dornbusch model, investors are risk neutral. A monetary contraction in the foreign country
raises the relative foreign real interest rate because nominal prices are sticky. Uncovered interest parity
holds, so the increase in rt* − rt is accompanied by an expected real depreciation of the foreign currency –
a fall in Et qt +1 − qt . In order to generate the expected fall in the real exchange rate, qt rises initially (and
then falls over time) so there is a real appreciation of the foreign currency. The intuition for the
predictions of the risk-premium models is similar, except that the exchange rate behavior is reversed.
Because of risk aversion, the shock that drives up rt* − rt is accompanied by an expected real appreciation
if investors are sufficiently risk averse – an increase in Et qt +1 − qt . To generate this expected appreciation
of the foreign currency, the real exchange rate initially falls relative to its permanent component. There is
a real depreciation of the foreign currency when rt* − rt is high.
In economic terms, in the Dornbusch model, when rt* − rt is positive, the foreign deposit is
attractive to investors, who buy the foreign currency which leads to a positive correlation between the real
exchange rate and rt* − rt . In these models of risk-averse behavior, rt* − rt is driven by shocks to the
variance of consumption growth. When investors are sufficiently risk averse, a shock that causes rt* − rt to
rise also makes the foreign deposit so risky that investors are attracted to home deposits, leading to a
stronger home currency and a negative correlation between the real exchange rate and rt* − rt . The models
explain the strong version of the interest parity puzzle with strong risk aversion – but the prediction of the
model for the level of the real exchange rate is the opposite of the data.
Some papers extend the above model to allow for changes in inflation, and are able to generate
predictions about the correlation of the nominal interest rate differential with Et ρt +1 . 16 In Bansal and
Shaliastovich (2012), for example, inflation processes are exogenous, but higher inflation is assumed to
lead to lower consumption growth. Hence, inflation volatility influences the risk premium and interest

16

Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012), Backus et al. (2010), Lustig et al. (2011).

23

rates through its influence on real consumption. The analysis is similar to that for changes in the variance
of real consumption shocks – an increase in home inflation variance lowers the real and nominal interest
rate through a precautionary effect and increases the risk premium on foreign deposits.
Verdelhan (2010) builds a two-country endowment model, with a representative agent in each
country whose preferences are of the form first proposed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). 17 In
Verdelhan’s approach, the real interest rate differential and the foreign exchange risk premium are driven
by a factor that is related to the consumption “habit” in each country. Each agent’s utility depends on the
“surplus” - his consumption relative to an aggregate habit level that is determined as a function of the
aggregate consumption level. Similar to the model with Epstein-Zin preferences, the real interest
differential and the foreign exchange risk premium are determined by the same driving factor, in this case
the surplus. When the surplus is small in the home country, a precautionary effect leads to a lower home
interest rate. But also, home investors find foreign deposits riskier relative to the riskiness of home
deposits for foreign investors, so the foreign exchange risk premium is high. They underreact to a
relatively high foreign interest rate because of foreign exchange risk. The Appendix shows in more detail
that this model cannot account for the main empirical findings of this paper because the single factor that
drives the risk premium and the interest differential does not allow for any source of excess adjustment by
investors.

3.2 Delayed overshooting/ delayed reaction
The behavior of exchange rates and interest rates described here seems related to the notion of
“delayed overshooting”. The term was coined by Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), but is used to describe a
hypothesis first put forward by Froot and Thaler (1990). Froot and Thaler’s explanation of the forward
premium anomaly was that when, for example, the home interest rate rises, the currency appreciates as it
would in a model of interest parity such as Dornbusch’s (1976) classic paper. They hypothesize that the
full reaction of the market is delayed, perhaps because some investors are slow to react to changes in
interest rates, so that the currency keeps on appreciating in the months immediately following the interest
rate increase. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) build a model based on this intuition. Much of the
empirical literature that has documented the phenomenon of delayed overshooting has focused on the
impulse response of exchange rates to identified monetary policy shocks, though in the original context,
the story was meant to apply to any shock that leads to an increase in relative interest rates.18
17
Moore and Roche (2010) also use Campbell-Cochrane preferences to provide a solution to the interest parity
puzzle. Stathopolous (2012) examines other international asset pricing puzzles in a two-good equilibrium model that
assumes these preferences.
18
See, for example, Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), Kim and Roubini (2000), Faust and Rogers (2003), Scholl and
Uhlig (2008), and Bjornland (2009).

24

Froot and Thaler (1990) present a descriptive model of delayed overshooting that, they say, can
explain the interest parity puzzle:
Consider as an example, the hypothesis that at least some investors are slow in responding to
changes in the interest differential. It may be that these investors need some time to think about trades
before executing them, or that they simply cannot respond quickly to recent information. These investors
might also be called "central banks," who seem to "lean against the wind" by trading in such a way as to
attenuate the appreciation of a currency as interest rates increase. Other investors in the model are fully
rational, albeit risk averse, and even may try to exploit the first group's slower movements. A simple
story along these lines has the potential for reconciling the above facts. First, it yields negative coefficient
estimates of -3 as long as some changes in nominal interest differentials also reflect changes in real
interest differentials. While changes in nominal interest rates have different instantaneous effects on the
exchange rate across different exchange-rate models, most of these models predict that an increase in the
dollar real interest rate (all else equal) should lead to instantaneous dollar appreciation. If only part of this
appreciation occurs immediately, and the rest takes some time, then we might expect the exchange rate to
appreciate in the period subsequent to an increase in the interest differential. (p. 188)
Some intuition can be gained in the case in which it* − it follows a first-order autoregression as
does the interest differential in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010),
(25)

it* −=
it θ ( it*−1 − it −1 ) + ε t , 0 ≤ θ < 1 .

Then using the definition of stIP from equation (2), we have:
(26)

stIP =θ stIP−1 + ε t / (1 − θ ) .

For simplicity, assume inflation is constant in both countries, so the distinction between real and nominal
rates is not important.
While the model of Bacchetta and van Wincoop is complex and requires numerical solution, the
essence of it can be described as a model in which the exchange rate only gradually approaches the level
that would hold under interest parity, as in the Froot and Thaler story. The gradual adjustment can be
modeled as
(27)

st − stIP= δ ( st −1 − stIP−1 ) + αε t ,

0 ≤ δ < 1.

Assume that there is initial underreaction so α < 0 . We find
 α (1 − δ )(1 − θ 2 ) 
cov( st +1 − st , it* − it ) =
− var ( it − it* ) 1 +
.
1 − θδ



The model will deliver the well-known result from the Fama regression, cov( st +1 − st , it* − it ) > 0
if α (1 − δ ) (1 − θ 2 ) < θδ − 1 . This condition can be satisfied if α is large enough in absolute value, so the
initial underreaction of the exchange rate is sufficiently large. In order for the home currency to
appreciate initially when the home interest rate rises, we must have −α (1 − θ ) < 1 . It is necessary that

θ > δ for both conditions to be satisfied. Under these conditions, we also find cov( st , it* − it ) > 0 , as we

25

find strongly in the data (in real terms.) This contrasts with the risk premium models in the previous

(

)

section, which could account for cov ( qt +1 − qt , rt* − rt ) > 0 but imply cov qt − lim( Et qt + k ), rt* − rt < 0
k →∞

It is easy to see that the impulse response function of the exchange rate to shocks to the interest
rate differential will take on the hump shape that is found in the empirical estimates of Eichenbaum and
Evans (1995) and replicated in the model of Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010). Nonetheless, in this
model, cov( Et ρt + j , it* − it ) is positive for all j.
The model is built to explain the uncovered interest parity puzzle, and delivers
*
=
δ j −1 cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) > 0 , so the
cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) =
−α (1 − δ ) / (1 − θδ ) > 0 . But cov( E
t ρ t + j , it − it )

covariance does not switch signs. This model has a single shock, the monetary shock, that drives both the
interest rate differential and the expected excess return. There is underreaction to the monetary shock, and
that underreaction dissipates over time, but there is no source of magnified adjustment.

3.3 Liquidity return
A model that can successfully account for the empirical findings of this paper may need to
incorporate both a source of under-adjustment and a source of over-adjustment to changes in interest
rates. One model with such properties includes short-term assets valued not only for their return but also
for some role they play as liquid assets. Here we sketch the implications of considering the role of
liquidity return. Our model is based on Nagel (2014).
Consider the home country investor. Following Nagel, we assume the investor has three assets to
choose among – demand deposits which are considered to be money, a near-money asset such as interest
bearing Eurocurrency deposits denominated in the home currency, and an asset that is not as liquid for the
home investor – in this case, the foreign Eurocurrency deposit. The near-money asset is not as liquid as
money, but the demand deposit pays a lower rate of interest, assumed to be zero. When the interest rate
rises (for example, because of a monetary policy shock), the opportunity cost of holding money rises, so
investors shift their portfolios toward more near-money. The near-money is now more valued for its
liquidity. The near-money is in greater demand for two reasons – it pays a higher interest rate, and it is
more prized for its non-pecuniary liquidity services.
This is the source of a sort of amplified adjustment by investors to a change in the interest rate.
The demand for the asset changes more than it would if investors were concerned only with the pecuniary
return.
Nagel also presents evidence that there are volatile shocks to the liquidity value of near-money.
We append the model of liquidity return to a simple standard New Keynesian open economy
macroeconomic model. These liquidity shocks are the source of the partial adjustment by investors. A

26

negative shock that reduces the liquidity of near-money in the home country weakens demand for home
assets, leading to a depreciation of the home currency. In our model, the monetary policymaker reacts to
the depreciation by raising the home interest rate – either because the policymaker wants to stabilize
exchange rates, or else because it is concerned about the inflationary impact of the depreciation. So when
there is a negative liquidity shock to home near-money, the home interest rate rises which increases
demand for that asset but at the same time the home asset is less liquid, so the increase in demand is
muted.
The foreign country investors are symmetric to the home investors. They consider the foreign
currency Eurocurrency deposit to be a liquid near-money. For simplicity, we assume parameters are the
same in the home and foreign countries, so we can express the key relationships in relative home to
foreign terms.
In a standard symmetric two-country New Keynesian model, the dynamics of exchange rates,
interest rates and prices are summarized by three equations: a price adjustment equation (or openeconomy Phillips curve); a monetary policy rule; and an equation that summarizes financial market
equilibrium, typically uncovered interest parity. It is the last equation that we will modify here. We
replace the interest parity equation with a relationship for excess returns:
(28)

Et ρt +1 =
−α ( it* − it ) + ηt ,

α > 0.

The first component relates the pecuniary excess return to the foreign less home interest differential. As
described above, if the home interest rate rises, the liquidity services of home Eurocurrency deposits rise.
As a result, the ex-ante excess return on the foreign deposit must increase. In other words, the home and
foreign deposits pay the same effective expected return, but the relative liquidity return on the home asset
rises, requiring an increase in the relative expected pecuniary return on the foreign asset. ηt represents an
independent component to the liquidity return of home relative to foreign assets that might arise from
financial market shocks (as in Nagel.) A positive realization of ηt raises the expected return on the
foreign short-term asset relative to the expected return on the home asset. This represents an increase in
the liquidity value of the home asset (relative to the foreign.) 19
Consumer price inflation can be summarized by the equation:
(29)

π t* − π t =
−δ ( qt − qt ) + β Et (π t*+1 − π t +1 ) ,

0 < β <1.

19
Valchev (2014) presents a model to account for the puzzle of this paper, also based on liquidity returns, but the
economic mechanisms in that paper are very different than those here. Gabaix and Maggiori (2014) is a recent study
in which a liquidity premium is introduced into a model of exchange rates. However, the notion of liquidity in that
paper refers to the cost of making international financial transactions, as opposed to the liquidity of assets as in this
model and Valchev’s. Also, the model of Gabaix and Maggiori is unable to explain the puzzle of this paper.

27

The household’s utility discount factor is β . The parameter governing the speed of adjustment of prices,

δ , depends on two underlying parameters in the model: β , and the probability that a firm will not
change its price in a given period (in a Calvo pricing framework), θ . Specifically, δ ≡ (1 − θ )(1 − θβ ) / θ ,
so that δ is decreasing in θ . qt is the equilibrium real exchange rate – the value the real exchange rate
would take on if nominal prices were flexible. It is driven by exogenous productivity shocks in the two
countries, so that an increase in relative home productivity leads to a real home appreciation. Engel
(2012) shows how such an equation can be derived in a model with producer-currency price stickiness
and home bias in preferences. When qt − qt is positive, prices of goods favored by foreign consumers are
relatively high, so foreign inflation will fall relative to home inflation over time. Because productivity
shocks are persistent, we assume qt follows a first-order autoregressive process with a high degree of
serial correlation.
Monetary policy is specified as a simple Taylor rule:
(30)

it* −=
it σ (π t* − π t ) + φ ( it*−1 − it −1 ) .

σ > 0, 0 <φ <1.

Equation (30) assumes in each country the policymaker targets its own consumer price inflation, and that
the instrument rules are identical. The policy rule includes interest-rate smoothing, embodied in the
lagged interest rate term. Almost all estimated Taylor rules find significant evidence of interest rate
smoothing.
While a closed-form solution for this simple system is not possible, it is helpful to develop
intuition by solving the model as if it were static – solving in terms of current shocks, expected future
values, and the lagged interest rate. In particular, we can use equations (1) and (28)-(30) to find:

ασδ

Et ρt +1 =
qt +
−
D
− it
it* =

σδ
∆

ασ (δ + β )
1 + σδ
αφ *
ασδ
it =1 − it −1 ) +
Et qt +1 −
Et (π t*+1 − π t +1 )
ηt −
(
∆
∆
∆
∆

( qt + ηt ) +

φ

(i
∆

*
t −1

− it −1 ) −

σδ
∆

Et qt +1 +

σ (δ + β )
∆

Et (π t*+1 − π t +1 )

where ∆ ≡ 1 + σδ (1 + α ) .
First consider a positive realization of the shock to the equilibrium real exchange rate, qt > 0 .
This tends to push up foreign inflation, inducing a foreign monetary tightening, which directly increases
it* − it . From the model of liquidity returns, equation (28) implies Et ρt +1 must fall. The liquidity return of

the foreign bond has increased, so its relative pecuniary return declines. Holding the expected future
exchange rate constant, both the increase in it* − it and the decline in Et ρt +1 work to depreciate the home
currency in real terms, so qt rises. This increase in qt lowers foreign relative inflation, π t* − π t . In

28

response, monetary policymakers lower it* − it , which offsets some of the initial increase in the interest
differential. Hence the effect of a qt shock on it* − it is less than one-for-one in equilibrium.
If there is a positive liquidity shock in the home country, so ηt is positive, the ex-ante excess
return on the foreign deposits, Et ρt +1 , rises. Holding the expectation of the future real exchange rate
constant, and holding interest rates constant, this induces an appreciation of the home currency (a drop in
qt .) This in turn causes foreign inflation to rise relative to home inflation, inducing policymakers to

increase it* relative to it . The increase in it* − it , ceteris paribus, contributes to a drop in Et ρt +1 , partially
offsetting the direct effect on an increase in ηt , so Et ρt +1 rises less than one-for-one in equilibrium.
The shock to the equilibrium real exchange rate contributes toward a negative correlation
between the short-run ex ante excess return on the foreign deposit and the foreign less home interest
differential, while the liquidity shock contributes to a positive correlation. Can this model reproduce the
∞

empirical findings that cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 and cov( Et ∑ ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt ) < 0 ? It can because there is
j =0

protracted adjustment of the nominal interest rate differential, arising from interest-rate smoothing and
from persistence in the underlying shocks to inflation sourced from the equilibrium real exchange rate.
If the liquidity shock, ηt , has a high enough variance relative to the monetary shock, it will be the
dominant factor in determining the covariance between the interest differential and the short-run ex ante
excess return, and will deliver cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . At longer horizons, the effect of the interest rate
differential on the liquidity premium will dominate, and we will find cov( Et ρt + j , rt* − rt ) < 0 .
This model incorporates incentives for both under-adjustment and over-adjustment by investors.
It is too simple to take directly to the data, but for plausible parameter values, the model can roughly
reproduce the regression results reported in Tables 3 and 5. As a baseline set of parameters, we take

β = 0.998 , δ = 0.014 , σ = 0.1275 , φ = 0.915 , α = 0.15 . The serial correlation of the equilibrium real
exchange rate is set to 0.99 in monthly data. We set the shocks to liquidity have a variance equal to four
percent of the variance of the equilibrium real exchange rate. The Appendix elaborates on this calibration
and examines the model under different parameter values. The parameter for time preference, β , is
calibrated at a standard level for a monthly frequency. The price adjustment parameter δ implies an
expected life of a nominal price in the Calvo model of nine months, which is a standard calibration. The
parameters for the policymaker’s interest rate rule, σ and φ imply a long-run increase in the interest rate
of 1.5 basis points for each basis point increase in inflation, which is consistent with U.S. data. The
smoothing parameter is based on an estimated Taylor rule for the U.S. relative to the G6 over our data

29

sample. The serial correlation of the equilibrium real exchange rate is set to produce a half-life of five
years, in line with the very persistent real exchange rates among high-income countries. The value of α ,
the response of the liquidity premium to changes in the interest rate, is based on estimates reported by
Nagel for spreads of various less liquid assets over the T-bill rate. Nagel reports a value of around 0.10 ,
but it is adjusted upward slightly here to capture the idea that foreign deposits are somewhat more illiquid
for domestic investors. The variance of the liquidity shocks is more difficult to calibrate, and is treated as
a free parameters here, though Nagel (2014) notes these are relatively volatile. While it may seem that a
variance of four percent of the equilibrium real exchange rate is small, this refers to the unconditional
variance of the latter. Given the persistence of the equilibrium real exchange rate, and that the liquidity
shocks have no persistence, the variance of innovations to the liquidity shock equal twice the variance of
innovations to the equilibrium real exchange rate. This parameter mainly affects the comovement of the
short-run excess return with the real interest differential.
For these parameter values, we find the model produces a coefficient of 1.81 for the regression of
Et ρt +1 on rt* − rt , corresponding to the regression results reported in Table 3. That table reports a
∞

coefficient of 1.98 for the U.S. relative to the G6. The regression of Et ∑ ρt + j +1 on rt* − rt produces a
j =0

coefficient of −20.66 in the model compared to −30.89 reported in Table 5 for the U.S. relative to the
G6. The model generates reasonable looking behavior for interest rates and inflation. One of the
important elements of a Keynesian model is its ability to replicate the high correlation of real and nominal
interest rates, which is 0.79 in our data (for the U.S. relative to the G6) and 0.77 in the model.
As the appendix shows, a greater persistence in nominal interest rates, particularly arising from
more persistent shocks to inflation, generates a larger (in absolute value) regression coefficient of
∞

Et ∑ ρt + j +1 on rt* − rt . More volatile liquidity shocks lead to a larger regression coefficient of Et ρt +1 on
j =0

rt* − rt .

The model illustrates the forces that a model requires to resolve the puzzle. The shocks that lead
to muted adjustment by investors must be volatile enough that they determine the short run positive
correlation of Et ρt +1 and rt* − rt . But their effect relative to the forces of amplified adjustment must
weaken over time, so that Et ρt + j is negatively correlated with rt* − rt for a large enough j.

30

4. Conclusions
To summarize: A large literature has been devoted to explaining the uncovered interest parity
puzzle which implies cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . Another stylized fact that is generally accepted is that when
a country’s real interest rate is relatively high, its currency is relatively strong. However, exchange rates
appear to be more volatile than can be accounted for if uncovered interest parity holds, suggesting

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . Our empirical findings confirm these relationships.
∞

These findings pose a puzzle. Models that have been built to account for the uncovered interest

(

)

parity puzzle cannot also account for cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt < 0 . Neither models of delayed reaction to
∞

monetary shocks nor models of foreign exchange risk premiums work because they imply a dampened
response, not an excessively volatile response to interest rates.
We suggest a possible avenue to explain our findings by introducing a non-pecuniary liquidity
return on assets. When a country’s assets become more valued for their liquidity, the country’s currency
appreciates. This eases inflationary pressure, allowing policymakers to lower interest rates. This provides
the under-adjustment part of the story – investors trade off the lower pecuniary return from the lower
interest rate with the higher liquidity return. On the other hand, when interest rates rise, then liquid
interest-bearing assets are more valued for their liquidity. This is the over-adjustment part of the story –
higher interest rates are accompanied by higher liquidity return, giving investors extra incentive to buy the
high-interest rate asset.
There may be other possible resolutions to the empirical puzzles presented here. Several recent
papers have explored the implications for rare, large currency depreciations for the uncovered interest
parity puzzle. Farhi and Gabaix (2014) present a full general equilibrium model of rare disasters and real
exchange rates. Their model implies that when the home real interest rate is high, the home currency is
weak in real terms, and so cannot account for the levels puzzle presented here. 20 This correlation occurs
during “normal times” in their model – the anticipation of a future disaster increases interest rates and
weakens the currency of the country that is expected to experience the future problems. Nonetheless,
there are two caveats that must be considered in light of Farhi and Gabaix and the related literature. The
first is that if rare disasters are important, than the linear VAR technology used in this paper may not
correctly capture the stochastic process for real exchange rates and real interest rates. Farhi et. al. (2013)
and Burnside et. al. (2011a, 2011b) extract information from options to infer expectations about rare large
movements in exchange rates. Moreover, if these large rare events are important, then the lognormal
approximations that lie behind our analysis of the risk premium in section 3.1 are not correct. Higher
20

See also Gourio et al. (2013).

31

order cumulants matter for the risk premium in that case. 21 In fact, since our technique only takes a firstorder approximation to the solution in terms of means and variances, we may be missing some higherorder effects coming from a more general solution, as in the general equilibrium model of Colacito and
Croce (2013).
It may be that it is necessary to abandon the assumption that all agents have fully rational
expectations. Some version of the model proposed by Hong and Stein (1999) may account for the
empirical results uncovered here, which perhaps could be described as a combination of overreaction and
momentum trading. That is, the short-term behavior of the real exchange rate under high interest rates
incorporates overreaction in that the currency appreciates more than it would under interest parity. But
perhaps momentum trading leads to expectations of further appreciation in the short run when the interest
rate is high. Burnside et al. (2011c), and Gourinchas and Tornell (2004), are recent approaches that have
relaxed the assumption of full rationality in some way. Ilut (2012) adopts an optimizing approach in
which ambiguity averse agents may underreact to good news and overreact to bad news.
This study brings two strands of the literature together. The uncovered interest parity puzzle has,
in recent years, been primarily addressed as a “finance” puzzle – it has been shown that models with
exotic preferences account for the empirical regularity as reaction to foreign exchange risk. The second
puzzle – the excess comovement of the exchange rate with interest rates – has been addressed more as an
“economics” puzzle. The literature has noted, though not successfully explained, the high volatility of the
level of the exchange rate. In bringing the two strands of the literature together, we uncover a striking
conflict in the implications of the two puzzles that poses challenges to both lines of research.

21

See Martin (2013).

32

References
Alquist, Ron, and Menzie D. Chinn. 2008. “Conventional and Unconventional Approaches to Exchange
Rate Modeling and Assessment.” International Journal of Finance and Economics 13, 2-13.
Andersen, Torben G.; Tim Bollerslev; Francis X. Diebold; and, Clara Vega. 2007. “Real-Time Price
Discovery in Global Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets.” Journal of International
Economics 73, 251-277.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2006. “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange
Rate Determination Puzzle?” American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2010. “Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution to the
Forward Discount Puzzle.” American Economic Review 100, 870-904.
Backus, David K.; Silverio Foresi; and, Chris I. Telmer. 2001. “Affine Term Structure Models and the
Forward Premium Anomaly.” Journal of Finance 56, 279-304.
Backus, David K.; Federico Gavazzoni; Chris Telmer; and, Stanley E. Zin. 2010. “Monetary Policy and
the Uncovered Interest Parity Puzzle.” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper
no. 16218.
Bansal, Ravi, and Magnus Dahlquist. 2000. “The Forward Premium Puzzle: Different Tales from
Developed and Emerging Economies.” Journal of International Economics 51, 115-144.
Bansal, Ravi; Dana Kiku; and, Amir Yaron. 2012. “An Empirical Investigation of the Long-Run Risks
Model for Asset Prices.” Critical Finance Review 1, 183-221.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich. 2007. “Risk and Return in Bond, Currency and Equity Markets.”
Working paper, Duke University.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich. 2013. “A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles in
Bond and Currency Markets.” Review of Financial Studies 26, 1-33.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
Puzzles.” Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Bekaert, Geert; Robert J. Hodrick; and, David A. Marshall. 1997. “The Implications for First-Order Risk
Aversion for Asset Market Risk Premiums.” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.
Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson. 1981. “A New Approach to Decomposition of Economic
Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular Attention to
Measurement of the ‘Business Cycle’.” Journal of Monetary Economics 7, 151-174.
Bilson, John F.O. 1981. “The ‘Speculative Efficiency’ Hypothesis.” The Journal of Business 54, 435-451.
Bjornland, Hilde C. 2009. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Overshooting: Dornbusch Was Right
After All.” Journal of International Economics 79, 64-77.

33

Brandt, Michael W.; John H. Cochrane; and, Pedro Santa-Clara. 2006. “International Risk Sharing Is
Better than You Think, or Exchange Rates Are Too Smooth.” Journal of Monetary Economics
53, 671-698.
Brunnermeier, Markus; Stefan Nagel; and, Lasse Pedersen. 2009. “Carry Trades and Currency Crashes.”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008 23, 313-347.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2011a. “Carry Trade and Momentum in
Currency Markets.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 511-535.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; Isaac Kleshchelski; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2011b. “Do Peso Problems
Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade?” Review of Financial Studies 24, 853-891.
Burnside, Craig; Bing Han; David Hirshleifer; and, Tracy Yue Wang. 2011c. “Investor Overconfidence
and the Forward Premium Puzzle.” Review of Economic Studies 78, 523-558.
Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida. 1987. “The Dollar and Real Interest Rates.” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 27, 103-140.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1987. “Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models.”
Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors.” Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Guy Meredith. 2004. “Monetary Policy and Long-Horizon Uncovered Interest
Parity.” IMF Staff Papers 51, 409-430.
Clarida, Richard H., and Jordi Gali. 1994. “Sources of Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations: How Important
are Nominal Shocks?” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 41, 1-56.
Clarida, Richard H., and Daniel Waldman. 2008. “Is Bad News About Inflation Good News for the
Exchange Rate? And If So, Can That Tell Us Anything about the Conduct of Monetary Policy?”
In Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (NBER) 371-396.
Colacito, Riccardo. 2009. “Six Anomalies Looking for a Model: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
International Finance Puzzles.” Working paper, University of North Carolina.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano M. Croce. 2011. “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange Rate.”
Journal of Political Economy 119, 153-182.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano M. Croce. 2013. “International Asset Pricing with Recursive
Preferences.” Journal of Finance 68, 2651-2686.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy
84, 1161-1176.

34

Edison, Hali J., and B. Dianne Pauls. 1993. “A Reassessment of the Relationship between Real Exchange
Rates and Real Interest Rates, 1974-1990.” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 165-187.
Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles L. Evans. 1995. “Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Shocks to
Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 975-1009.
Engel, Charles. 1996. “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of Recent
Evidence.” Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.
Engel, Charles. 2012. “Real Exchange Rate Convergence: The Roles of Price Stickiness and Monetary
Policy.” Working paper, University of Wisconsin.
Engel, Charles. 2014. “Exchange Rates and Interest Parity.” Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4
453-522.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2004. “Accounting for Exchange Rate Variability in Present Value
Models when the Discount Factor is Near One.” American Economic Review, Papers &
Proceedings 94, 119-125.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2006. “Taylor Rules and the Deutschmark-Dollar Real Exchange
Rate.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1175-1194.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. 1989. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework.” Econometrica 57, 937-969.
Evans, Martin D.D. 2011. Exchange-Rate Dynamics (Princeton).
Evans, Martin D.D. 2012. “Exchange-Rate Dark Matter,” working paper, Department of Economics,
Georgetown University.
Fama, Eugene. 1984. “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319-338.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2014. “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates.” Manuscript,
Department of Economics, Harvard University.
Farhi, Emmanuel; Samuel P. Fraiberger; Xavier Gabaix; Romain Ranciere; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2013.
“Crash Risk in Currency Markets.” Manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard University.
Faust, Jon, and John H. Rogers. 2003. “Monetary Policy’s Role in Exchange Rate Behavior.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 50, 1403-1424.
Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; Shing-Yi B. Wang; and, Jonathan H. Wright. 2006. “The High-Frequency
Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 54, 1051-1068.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1979. “On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real Interest
Differentials.” American Economic Review 69, 610-622.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Richard A. Meese. 1987. “Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1987 , 117-153.

35

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Jumana Poonawala. 2010. “The Forward Market in Emerging Currencies: Less
Biased than in Major Currencies.” Journal of International Economics 29, 585-598.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Tarun Ramadorai. 2005. “Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value, and InstitutionalInvestor Flow.” Journal of Finance 60, 1535-1566.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 179-192.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. 2014. “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics.”
National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 19854.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. “Exchange Rate Puzzles and Distorted Beliefs.”
Journal of International Economics 64, 303-333.
Gourio, Francois; Michael Siemer; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2013. “International Risk Cycles.” Journal of
International Economics 89, 471-484.
Hansen, Bruce E. 2010. Econometrics. Manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin.
Hansen, Lars P.; John C. Heaton; and, Nan Li. 2008. “Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring Long-Run
Risk.” Journal of Political Economy 116, 260-302.
Hodrick, Robert J. 1989. “Risk, Uncertainty and Exchange Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 23,
433-459.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein. 1999. “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading
and Overreaction in Asset Markets.” Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Ilut, Cosmin L. 2012. “Ambiguity Aversion: Implications for the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Puzzle.”
American Economics Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 33-65.
Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “The Carry Trade and Fundamentals: Nothing to Fear but FEER
Itself.” Journal of International Economics 88, 74-90.
Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini. 2000. “Exchange Rate Anomalies in the Industrial Countries: A
Solution with a Structural VAR Approach.” Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 561-586.
Lustig, Hanno; Nikolai Roussanov; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. “Common Risk Factors in Currency
Markets.” Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731-3777.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2007. “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and
Consumption Growth Risk.” American Economic Review 97, 89-117.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1295-1328.
Mark, Nelson. 2009. “Changing Monetary Policy Rules, Learning, and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41, 1047-1070.

36

Martin, Ian. 2013. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing with Higher Cumulants.” Review of Economic
Studies 80, 745-773.
Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1988. “Was It Real? The Exchange Rate – Interest Differential
Relation over the Modern Floating-Rate Period.” Journal of Finance 43, 933-948.
Moore, Michael J., and Maurice J. Roche. 2010. “Solving Exchange Rate Puzzles with Neither Sticky
Prices Nor Trade Costs.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 1151-1170.
Nagel, Stefan. 2014. “The Liquidity Premium of Near Money Assets.” National Bureau of Economic
Research, working paper no. 20265.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 2002. “Risk and Exchange Rates.” In Elhanan Helpman and
Efraim Sadka, eds., Contemporary Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin
(Cambridge).
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1996. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic Literature 34, 647668.
Scholl, Almuth, and Harald Uhlig. 2008. “New Evidence on the Puzzles: Results from Agnostic
Identification on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates.” Journal of International Economics 76,
1-13.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50,
665-690.
Stathopolous, Andreas. 2012. “Asset Prices and Risk Sharing in Open Economies.” Working paper,
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California.
Valchev, Rosen. 2014. “Exchange Rates and UIP Violations at Short and Long Horizons.” Working
paper, Duke University.
Verdelhan, Adrien. 2010. “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium.” Journal of
Finance 65, 123-146.
Weil, Philippe. 1990. “Non-Expected Utility in Macroeconomics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105,
29-42.

37

Table 1
Fama Regressions: st +1 − st + it* − it = ζ s + β s (it* − it ) + us ,t +1
1979:6-2009:10
Country
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
G6

ζˆs
-0.045
-0.028
0.192
0.032
0.924
-0.410
0.054

90% c.i. ( ζˆs )
(-0.250,0.160)
(-0.346,0.290)
(-0.136,0.520)
(-0.325,0.389)
(0.504,1.343)
(-0.768,-0.051)
(-0.184,0.292)

Notes: 90 percent confidence intervals in parentheses based on Newey-West standard errors.

β̂ s
2.271
1.216
2.091
0.339
3.713
3.198
2.467

90% c.i. ( β̂ s )
(1.186,3.355)
(-0.171,2.603)
(0.599,3.583)
(-0.680,1.359)
(2.390,5.036)
(1.170,5.225)
(0.769,4.164)

Table 2
Bootstrapped distribution of g11 , g12 , and g11 − g12 from VECM
Country
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
G6

Country
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
G6

g11
Estimates
-0.0187
(0.0117)
-0.0283
(0.0113)
-0.0335
(0.0105)
-0.0221
(0.0117)
-0.0242
(0.0105)
-0.0400
(0.0159)
-0.0297
(0.0105)

g 21
Estimates
0.0022
(0.0013)
0.0022
(0.0009)
0.0029
(0.0012)
0.0036
(0.0012)
0.0010
(0.0007)
0.0007
(0.0025)
0.0031
(0.0010)

1%

left tail
5%

10%

-0.0545

-0.0381

-0.0311

-0.0510

-0.0340

-0.0276

-0.0479

-0.0324

-0.0250

-0.0503

-0.0336

-0.0268

-0.0423

-0.0281

-0.0203

-0.0486

-0.0327

-0.0265

-0.0485

-0.0295

-0.0234

1%

right tail
5%

10%

0.0051

0.0032

0.0024

0.0022

0.0013

0.0009

0.0029

0.0324

0.0013

0.0027

0.0018

0.0011

0.0031

0.0014

0.0014

0.0040

0.0027

0.0019

0.0022

0.0014

0.0010

Country
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
G6

g11 − g 21
Estimates
-0.0209
(0.0116)
-0.0305
(0.0112)
-0.0364
(0.0105)
-0.0258
(0.0117)
-0.0250
(0.0104)
-0.0408
(0.0162)
-0.0328
(0.0105)

1%

left tail
5%

-0.0563

-0.0382

10%
-0.0318

-0.0510

-0.0352

-0.0279

-0.0480

-0.0328

-0.0257

-0.0497

-0.0339

-0.0266

-0.0416

-0.0289

-0.0207

-0.0482

-0.0333

-0.0272

-0.0492

-0.0299

-0.0235

Table 3
Fama Regression in Real Terms: qt +1 − qt + rˆt* − rˆt = ζ q + β q ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + uq ,t +1
1979:6-2009:10

Country

ζˆq

95% c.i.( ζˆq )

90% c.i.( ζˆq )

β̂ q

95% c.i.( β̂ q )

90% c.i.( β̂ q )

Canada

0.030
(0.111)

(-0.182,0.208)
(-0.151,0.200)

(-0.141,0.171)
(-0.118,0.162)

0.722
(0.768)

(-1.103,3.065)
(-1.004,2.749)

(-0.670,2.665)
(-0.673,2.492)

France

-0.071
(0.186)

(-0.321,0.124)
(-0.312,0.107)

(-0.274,0.072)
(-0.266,0.061)

1.482
(1.089)

(-0.237,3.283)
(-0.834,3.881)

(0.076,3.004)
(-0.353,3.514)

Germany

-0.040
(0.183)

(-0.274,0.099)
(-0.257,0.087)

(-0.232,0.065)
(-0.229,0.058)

1.733
(1.112)

(0.321,4.896)
(0.246,4.740)

(0.643,4.531)
(0.546,4.405)

Italy

0.069
(0.186)

(-0.222,0.278)
(-0.182,0.262)

(-0.153,0.255)
(-0.122,0.244)

0.431
(0.971)

(-1.154,2.542)
(-1.478,2.633)

(-0.881,2.227)
(-1.125,2.196)

Japan

0.110
(0.195)

(-0.018,0.367)
(-0.007,0.363)

(0.024,0.332)
(0.023,0.331)

2.360
(0.946)

(0.593,4.595)
(0.297,4.958)

(0.985,4.320)
(0.815,4.558)

United
Kingdom

-0.165
(0.211)

(-0.521,0.029)
(-0.527,0.016)

(-0.447,-0.028)
(-0.492,-0.024)

1.850
(0.886)

(0.288,4.055)
(0.176,4.144)

(0.654,3.771)
(0.465,3.913)

G6

-0.050
(0.143)

(-0.238,0.127)
(-0.218,0.110)

(-0.194,0.091)
(-0.190,0.078)

1.983
(0.976)

(0.394,4.335)
(0.091,4.241)

(0.644,3.969)
(0.570,3.934)

Notes: The Newey-West standard error is reported below the coefficient estimate in parentheses. The confidence intervals
are bootstrapped. The first reports a percentile interval bootstrap and the second a percentile-t interval bootstrap. See
Appendix for details.

Table 4
Regression of qt on rˆt − rˆt : qt = ζ Q + βQ ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + uq ,t +1
*

1979:6-2009:10

Country

β̂Q

95% c.i.( β̂ Q )

90% c.i.( β̂ Q )

Canada

46.996
(8.688)

(25.157,95.390)
(21.633,145.736)

(31.793,90.162)
(29.714,128.420)

France

20.372
(10.854)

(-1.998,46.182)
(-11.709,65.220)

(3.549,42.051)
(-5.951,57.766)

Germany

52.410
(12.415)

(.616,91.078)
(-0.073,132.108)

(28.470,87.010)
(13.828,118.588)

Italy

38.359
(8.042)

(10.971,73.668)
(8.031,93.569)

(15.560,68.766)
(13.416,84.040)

Japan

19.650
(6.582)

(-2.817,47.262)
(0.515,50.100)

(3.032,42.822)
(5.013,45.018)

United
Kingdom

15.744
(7.875)

(-0.793,36.283)
(-8.155,48.868)

(4.006,32.573)
(-3.824,43.002)

G6

43.702
(10.124)

(17.664,80.124)
(10.506,98.543)

(23.549,75.480)
(19.449,89.191)

Notes: The Newey-West standard error is reported below the coefficient estimate in parentheses. The confidence intervals
are bootstrapped. The first reports a percentile interval bootstrap and the second a percentile-t interval bootstrap. See
Appendix for details.

Table 5
∞

∞

j =0

j =0

Regression of Eˆ t ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) on rˆt* − rˆt : Eˆ t ∑ ( ρt + j +1 − ρ ) = ζ ρ + β ρ ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + u ρ t
1979:6-2009:10

Country

βˆρ

95% c.i.( βˆρ )

90% c.i.( βˆρ )

Canada

-24.762
(5.523)

(-60.281,-10.757)
(-98.321,-10.812)

(-52.700,-15.414)
(-68.054,-14.849)

France

-13.983
(8.268)

(-39.998,3.105)
(-45.244,8.814)

(-34.960,0.200)
(-40.468,4.248)

Germany

-33.895
(10.365)

(-62.299,-5.924)
(-87.170,3.844)

(-58.804,-10.621)
(-73.809,-4.432)

Italy

-26.556
(6.206)

(-54.355,-4.446)
(-64.174,-4.848)

(-49.863,-10.649)
(-57.032,-9.335)

Japan

-15.225
(6.487)

(-41.927,2.218)
(-42.394,-0.325)

(-37.617,-2.177)
(-38.379,-3.176)

United
Kingdom

-10.717
(8.565)

(-31.865,3.436)
(-42.105,13.602)

(-27.130,1.060)
(-37.710,9.599)

G6

-30.890
(8.352)

(-59.899,-9.893)
(-68.593,-9.665)

(-56.359,-14.642)
(-60.065,-13.478)

Notes: The Newey-West standard error is reported below the coefficient estimate in parentheses. The confidence intervals
are bootstrapped. The first reports a percentile interval bootstrap and the second a percentile-t interval bootstrap. See
Appendix for details.

Figure 1

Figure 1

Figures plot the slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of these
regressions: Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( rt* − rt ) + utj
Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10
Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Figure 2

Slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of the regression: Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( it* − it ) + utj

Notes: Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10. Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Figure 3
Slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of the regression: ρt + j = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj

Notes: Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10. Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Figure 4
Slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of the regression: ρt + j = ζ j + β j ( it* − it ) + utj

Notes: Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10. Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Figure 5
Slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of the regression: Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj
12-Lag VECM

Notes: Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10. Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Figure 6
Slope coefficients and 90% confidence interval of the regression: Eˆ t ( ρt + j ) = ζ j + β j ( rˆt* − rˆt ) + utj
Stock prices, Long-term bond yields, Gold price, Oil price included in VECM

Notes: Monthly data, 1979:6-2009:10. Confidence intervals calculated from Newey-West standard errors.

Appendix

A.1
Table A1
Coefficient estimates from VECMs
1979:6-2009:10
Canada
st − st −1

-0.4584
-0.0187

ptR − ptR−1
0.0733
0.0022

itR − itR−1
-0.0144
-0.0004

-1.3804

0.3659

-0.1102

-0.0101
-0.0281

0.0324
0.0566

0.0040
-0.0170

-4.6764

0.3031

-0.0848

0.0636
-0.1542

0.0053
0.0368

0.0043
0.0195

0.3412

-0.2015

0.0166

ptR−3 − ptR− 4

0.0390
0.3320

-0.0063
0.0543

-0.0010
-0.0212

itR−3 − itR− 4

-0.5013

0.3728

0.0190

0.05

0.08

0.13

-4.8745
-0.0283

ptR − ptR−1
0.3984
0.0022

itR − itR−1
0.1067
0.0007

-0.5996

0.2497

-0.1243

0.0521
0.1457

0.0180
0.2221

0.0016
0.0148

-0.1733

0.0804

-0.3283

0.0483
0.7696

0.0093
-0.0421

0.0046
0.0206

-0.5356

0.1822

-0.0430

-0.0016
0.1393

0.0004
-0.0739

(Intercept)
st −1 − p

R
t −1

itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
ptR−1 − ptR− 2
itR−1 − itR− 2
st − 2 − st −3
R
t −2
R
t −2

p

−p

R
t −3
R
t −3

i −i
st −3 − st − 4

R

2

France
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − ptR−1

itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
R
t −1
R
t −1

p

−p

R
t −2
R
t −2

i −i
st − 2 − st −3

ptR− 2 − ptR−3
itR− 2 − itR−3
st −3 − st − 4
p

−p

0.0820
0.6618

i

−i

1.5395

-0.0271

0.0032

R2

0.05

0.22

0.22

R
t −3
R
t −3

R
t −4
R
t −4

1

Germany
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − p

R
t −1

itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
ptR−1 − ptR− 2

itR−1 − itR− 2
st − 2 − st −3

-1.4739
-0.0335

ptR − ptR−1
0.2004
0.0029

itR − itR−1
0.0067
0.0001

-2.2007

0.4995

-0.0381

0.0486
0.6154

0.0199
0.0814

0.0016
0.0055

-2.0641

0.2419

0.1724

0.0403
-0.2929

0.0060
0.0291

-0.0004
0.0056

0.7971

0.1484

-0.1350

-0.0031
-0.1026

0.0001
-0.0048

R
t −2
R
t −2

−p

R
t −3
R
t −3

p

−p

0.0639
0.5742

i

−i

536820

-0.1789

-0.0276

R2

0.06

0.12

0.07

-16.2931
-0.0221

ptR − ptR−1
2.6931
0.0036

itR − itR−1
-0.0715
-0.0001

0.1056

0.4070

-0.1151

0.0773
-0.3443

0.0113
0.3778

0.0003
-0.0068

-1.7433

0.1120

-0.1153

0.0714
0.7718

0.0028
-0.0683

0.0024
0.0043

0.1222

-0.0132

0.1360

-0.0008
0.0512

0.0039
0.0186

p

R
t −3
R
t −3

i −i
st −3 − st − 4

R
t −4
R
t −4

Italy
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − p

R
t −1

itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
R
t −1
R
t −1

−p

R
t −2
R
t −2

−p

R
t −3
R
t −3

p

−p

0.0774
0.6177

i

−i

1.7392

0.2441

-0.1464

2

0.06

0.40

0.15

p

R
t −2
R
t −2

i −i
st − 2 − st −3
p

R
t −3
R
t −3

i −i
st −3 − st − 4

R
t −4
R
t −4

R

2

Japan
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − ptR−1
itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
R
t −1
R
t −1

p

−p

R
t −2
R
t −2

i −i
st − 2 − st −3

ptR− 2 − ptR−3
itR− 2 − itR−3
st −3 − st − 4

-10.0751
-0.0242

ptR − ptR−1
0.5716
0.0008

itR − itR−1
0.1129
0.0002

-3.1859

0.3014

-0.0525

0.0143
-0.5921

-0.0140
0.0647

0.0004
-0.0018

0.3740

-0.0520

0.1390

0.0207
-0.0698

0.0111
-0.1941

0.0001
0.0122

3.0030

0.6690

0.0940

0.0020
-0.1583

0.0005
-0.0237

p

−p

0.0136
-0.0416

i

−i

3.9180

0.0092

0.0418

R2

0.05

0.11

0.10

1.8366
-0.0400

ptR − ptR−1
-0.0188
0.0007

itR − itR−1
-0.0323
0.0004

-1.9722

0.3071

-0.0674

0.0941
-0.1056

0.0255
0.0290

0.0008
0.0032

-0.3261

-0.3684

0.0684

0.0309
0.3732

0.0106
-0.0583

0.0004
-0.0023

-0.8468

0.5442

0.0627

0.0094
-0.1061

0.0002
0.0037

R
t −3
R
t −3

R
t −4
R
t −4

United Kingdom
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − ptR−1
itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
R
t −1
R
t −1

p

−p

R
t −2
R
t −2

i −i
st − 2 − st −3

ptR− 2 − ptR−3

itR− 2 − itR−3
st −3 − st − 4
p

−p

0.0238
0.0332

i

−i

-1.6905

1.0814

-0.0531

R2

0.06

0.08

0.06

R
t −3
R
t −3

R
t −4
R
t −4

3

G6
st − st −1

(Intercept)
st −1 − ptR−1
itR−1
st −1 − st − 2
R
t −1
R
t −1

p

−p

R
t −2
R
t −2

i −i
st − 2 − st −3

ptR− 2 − ptR−3
itR− 2 − itR−3
st −3 − st − 4

-6.3496
-0.0297

ptR − ptR−1
0.7123
0.0031

itR − itR−1
0.0534
0.0002

-2.2496

0.3228

-0.0641

0.0589
0.1636

0.0196
0.1552

0.0011
-0.0094

-0.2604

0.2365

-0.0349

0.0368
0.3971

0.0098
-0.0207

0.0022
0.0058

0.1497

0.2370

0.0393

-0.0019
-0.0538

0.0003
-0.0203

p

−p

0.0489
0.8704

i

−i

3.3658

0.1735

-0.0417

R2

0.05

0.12

0.07

R
t −3
R
t −3

R
t −4
R
t −4

4

A.2

Verdelhan (2010) Model
In Verdelhan (2010) there are two symmetric countries. The objective of Home household i is to

maximize
∞

(31)

Et ∑ β j (Ci ,t + j − H t + j )1−γ / (1 − γ ) ,
j =0

where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and H t represents an external habit.

H t is defined

implicitly by defining the “surplus”, st ≡ ln ( (Ct − H t ) / Ct ) , where Ct is aggregate consumption, and st is
assumed to follow the stochastic process:
(32)

st +1 = (1 − φ ) s + φ st + µ ( st )(ct +1 − ct − g ) , 0 < φ < 1 .

Here, φ and s are parameters, and ct ≡ ln(Ct ) is assumed to follow a simple random walk:
(33)

ct +1 = g + ct + ut +1 , where ut +1  i.i.d . N (0,σ 2 ) .

µ ( st ) represents the sensitivity of the surplus to consumption growth, and is given by:
(34)

µ ( st ) ≡

1
1 − 2( st − s ) − 1 , when st ≤ smax , 0 elsewhere.
S

The log of the stochastic discount factor is given by:
(35)

mt=
ln( β ) − γ [ g + (φ − 1)( st − s ) + (1 + µ ( st ))(ct +1 − ct − g ) ]
+1

When the parameters S and smax are suitably normalized, Verdelhan shows we can write the expected
rate of depreciation as:
(36)

rt* − rt= γ (1 − φ ) − ( γ 2σ 2 / S 2 )  ( st − st* ) ,

where st* is the Foreign surplus. The excess return is given by:
(37)

Et ρt +1 =
−(γ 2σ 2 / S 2 )( st − st* ) .

Under the assumption of Verdelhan (2010) that γ (1 − φ ) < γ 2σ 2 / S 2 , this model can account for the
empirical finding of cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) > 0 . However, because st − st* follows a first-order autoregressive
process, the model also implies

(

)

cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt > 0 , contrary to our empirical findings.
∞

5

A.3

Bootstraps

This appendix describes five bootstrap methods. The first, to construct the standard errors reported in
Table 2, are constructed under the null hypothesis of no cointegration between relative prices and the nominal
exchange rate. Tables 3, 4 and 5 construct bootstraps from pseudo-data generated from the estimated VECMs,
using the percentile and the percentile-t methods. We use a fourth method of bootstrapping to test the joint null
hypotheses in Tables 2, 3, 4, and 5. These bootstraps draw from the joint empirical distribution for the G6
currencies. The fifth method, which is not reported in the text, but reported in this appendix, uses Kilian’s
(1998) “bootstrap after bootstrap” method to correct for possible small sample biases in the coefficient
estimates of the parameters of the VECM that are used to construct the percentile and percentile-t confidence
intervals for Tables 3, 4 and 5.
For Table 2, we first estimate a VAR with four lags in the variables st − st −1 , pt − pt* − ( pt −1 − pt*−1 ) ,
and it − it* . In other words, this VAR is estimated under the assumption that st and pt − pt* each have a unit
root but it − it* is stationary. We use the estimates from this VAR to construct pseudo-data. Initial values are
set at the sample means. We draw the error terms with equal probability from the vector of error terms
estimated by the VAR at each date. We generate samples of 500+T observations, then use the last T
observations, where T corresponds to the length of the time series we use in estimation. For each pseudosample, we then estimate the VECM of equation (6). Table 2 reports the 1%, 5% and 10% left tails of the
empirical distribution of g11 , g12 and g11 − g12 .
For both bootstraps in the results reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5, we construct pseudo-samples using the
VECM estimates. Initial values are set as described in the previous paragraph. We draw the error terms with
equal probability from the vector of error terms estimated by the VECM at each date. For each pseudo-sample,
we estimate the VECM. We estimate all of the regression coefficients reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5, and
calculate the Newey-West standard errors for each of those regressions. We repeat this exercise 1000 times.
The first confidence interval based on the bootstraps uses the coefficient estimates reported in the
tables. Let β̂ refer to any of the coefficient estimates reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5. From the regressions on
the pseudo-samples, we order the coefficient estimates from these 1000 replications from smallest to largest -

β̂1 is the smallest and β̂1000 be the largest. The confidence interval reported in the tables is based on
( [ βˆ − ( βˆ950 − βˆ ), βˆ + ( βˆ − βˆ50 )] . That is, the reported confidence interval corrects for the asymmetry in the
distribution of β̂ i from the regressions on the pseudo-samples.

6

Hansen (2010) argues that the first bootstrap method performs poorly when the β̂ i do not have a
symmetric distribution. Instead, he recommends the following procedure.

As above, let β̂ refer to the

estimated coefficient in the data, and σˆ to be the Newey-West standard error in the data. For each pseudosample i, we will record analogous estimates: β̂ i and σˆ i . θi is defined by: θi =

βˆi − βˆ
. We arrange these θi
σˆ i

from smallest to largest, so that θ1 is the smallest and θ1000 is the largest. The third confidence interval
ˆ 950 , βˆ − σθ
ˆ 50 ] . It turns out that our two bootstraps
reported for each coefficient estimate is given by [ βˆ − σθ

generally produce very similar confidence intervals.
In each of Tables 3, 4, and 5, the slope coefficient estimates for each of the G6 currencies are all of the
same sign. This allows us to construct a very simple test of the joint null hypotheses reported in the text. We
take the errors generated from the estimated VECMs, as we did in constructing the confidence intervals in
tables 3, 4 and 5, described above. However, now we take the vector of errors for each date from all six of the
individual currency VECMs jointly as a point in the empirical distribution. That is, in constructing pseudo-data,
we draw from the 18x1 vector of errors for each date – 3x1 for each of six countries. With this data, we then
estimate VECMs as in equation (6) for each country (country by country). We estimate the coefficients of
Tables 3, 4 and 5 using each pseudo-sample, repeating this process 2000 times. We record for example for
Table 3 (but analogously for Tables 4 and 5), the proportion of times all six coefficient estimates are negative,
which gives us the probability reported in the text.
Kilian (1998) suggests that bootstrap distributions based on VAR (or VECM) estimates may be biased
in small samples. We follow Kilian’s procedure for producing unbiased distributions. Note that this is only a
problem for bootstraps such as in Tables 3 and 5 that are not constructed under the null hypothesis, as opposed
to those reported in Table 2 in which the pseudo-data is constructed under the null. Here is a concise account of
how Kilian’s method works: Estimate the VECM. Construct pseudo samples based on data generated using the
estimated coefficients from the VECM. For each pseudo sample, re-estimate the VECM. Construct the mean
parameter estimate from the pseudo samples for each parameter. Then adjust the original parameter estimates.
For example, if the original estimate of parameter aij is given by aˆij0 , and the mean of the parameter estimate
from the pseudo sample is aij0 , then construct the adjusted parameter as: =
aˆij1 2aˆij0 − aij0 . Then construct new
pseudo-samples using the adjusted parameters, and proceed as before.
We do not report the results using this method in the text because it turns out that the bootstrap
distributions for the coefficient estimates reported in Tables 3 and 5 are not much different under the original
bootstrap and the Kilian bootstrap. Here we report the median and mean parameter bias in the estimates from
Tables 3 and 5 for the “bias corrected” bootstraps and compared the bootstraps used in Tables 3 and 5. (The

7

bias is reported as the mean or median coefficient estimate from the bias corrected bootstrap less the
corresponding estimate from the original bootstrap.) In all cases, the bias correction in those coefficient
estimates is small and does not affect our conclusions:

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Japan

U.K.

G6

Table 3
Coefficient estimate

0.722

1.482

1.733

0.431

2.360

1.850

1.983

Mean bias

0.137

0.076

0.198

0.190

0.148

0.043

-0.037

Median bias

0.153

0.079

0.210

0.190

0.138

0.070

-0.056

Table 5
Coefficient estimate

-24.762

-13.983

-33.895

-26.556

-15.225

-10.717

-30.890

Mean bias

2.34

-0.933

-1.291

-2.979

-3.949

0.890

-1.8822

Median bias

2.856

-2.039

-3.491

-2.368

-3.519

0.761

-2.961

Kilian, Lutz. 1998. “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 80, 218-230.

8

A.4

Model Simulations
As stated in the text, the baseline parameters are given by

β = 0.998 , δ = 0.014 , σ = 0.1275 ,

φ = 0.915 , α = 0.15 , and ξ = 0.99 , where the latter is the serial correlation of qt assuming that variable
follows a first-order autoregressive process. In addition, the variance of ηt is set equal to 0.04 times the
variance of qt : var (ηt ) / var ( qt ) = 0.04 .
The price stickiness parameter is set as a compromise. According to Monacelli (2004), a standard
parameterization assumes that the expected price duration is one year. However, Bils and Klenow (2004) find
that the half-life of prices in the data for the U.S. consumer price index is around 5.5 months, excluding sale
items, implying an expected duration of around 8 months. The parameter δ is calculated from the formula

δ ≡ (1 − θ )(1 − θβ ) / θ , where θ is the probability of not adjusting the price in any period in the Calvo model.
We do not observe the equilibrium real exchange rate. This calibration assumes a half-life of five years
for the equilibrium real exchange rate. This is based, first, on Rogoff’s (1996) well-cited claim that the
consensus is that among high-income countries, the half-life of real exchange rates is 3 to 5 years. The upper
end of that range is appropriate because Rogoff’s consensus applies to the actual real exchange rate, rather than
the equilibrium rate, so some of the adjustment involves convergence of the disequilibrium component that
might be due to price stickiness. Rogoff’s “purchasing power parity puzzle”, however, refers in part to the fact
that the actual real exchange rate is too persistent to be accounted for by adjustment of the disequilibrium
component. Second, Engel (2000) decomposes the real exchange rate for the U.S. relative to the U.K. into a
component identified as an equilibrium component – based on the relative price of nontraded to traded goods –
and a disequilibrium component. The equilibrium component has a serial correlation of 0.97 in quarterly data,
implying a serial correlation of around 0.99 in monthly data.
The value of α is based on Nagel’s (2014) estimates in a regression of his measure of the liquidity
premium on the U.S. fed funds rate. That parameter ranges from a low of around 0.05 to a high of around 0.11,
depending on the regression specification and the measure of the liquidity premium. The liquidity premium
refers to the spread between the repo rate on repurchase agreements with Treasury collateral and the T-bill rate,
which Nagel argues captures mostly liquidity return because there is very little risk in the repos. We choose a
value of α slightly larger than Nagel’s estimates in order to capture the idea that the foreign deposits may be
even less liquid than these repos.
In the table below, we alter each parameter individually, leaving the others unchanged. (In the case of
the Taylor rule, in the first three rows, we consider changes in the smoothing parameter, φ , leaving the longrun response of policy interest rate to inflation unchanged ( φ / (1 − σ ) =
1.5 .) We report the slope coefficient for
the regression of short-run excess returns on the real interest differential as in Table 3, the regression of the
cumulated expected excess returns on the real interest differential, as in Table 5, and the correlation of real and

9

nominal interest rates (which is 0.79 in our data for the real and nominal interest rates of the U.S. relative to the
G6 average.)
Parameter

value

baseline

Slope Coefficient

Slope Coefficient

for Table 3

for Table 5

1.81

-20.66

Correlation of real
and nominal interest
rates
0.77

φ

0.95

1.09

-10.86

0.61

φ

0.90

2.09

-23.52

0.81

φ

0.85

2.93

-29.21

0.89

φ

0.95

1.93

-16.98

0.91

φ

0.90

1.63

-18.23

0.62

φ

0.88

1.03

-1.25

0.23

σ

0.10

1.04

-8.06

0.41

σ

0.20

2.53

-19.70

0.95

σ

0.30

3.18

-16.11

0.98

δ

0.01

1.21

-22.10

0.78

δ

0.015

1.94

-20.37

0.77

δ

0.02

2.66

-18.83

0.76

ξ

0.995

7.62

-49.81

0.85

ξ

0.98

0.39

-6.74

0.66

ξ

0.90

0.05

-0.11

0.45

α

0.10

1.55

-13.51

0.77

α

0.20

2.10

-27.70

0.77

α

0.30

2.78

-41.44

0.77

var (ηt ) / var ( qt )

0.02

0.78

-21.89

0.77

var (ηt ) / var ( qt )

0.05

2.32

-20.06

0.77

var (ηt ) / var ( qt )

0.10

4.79

-17.11

0.77

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.” Journal of
Political Economy 112, 947-985.
Engel, Charles. 2000. “Long-Run PPP May Not Hold After All.” Journal of International Economics 57, 243273.
Monacelli, Tommaso. 2004. “Into the Mussa Puzzle: Monetary Policy Regimes and the Real Exchange Rate in
a Small Open Economy.” Journal of International Economics 62, 191-217.

10

A.5

Relation to Froot and Ramadorai (2005)
On the surface, there appears to be a strong relationship between some of the empirical work in Froot

and Ramadorai (2005, hereinafter FR), and the empirical findings of this paper. FR write out an expression for
the real exchange rate similar to (3), and estimate a VAR that is similar to the VECM estimated in this paper.
The main focus of FR is on the contribution of institutional-investor currency flows to the
determination of exchange rates. They ask whether those flows are contributing to movements of the exchange
rate because they contribute to the component determined by the sum of expected real interest differentials or
to the sum of expected excess returns. They also ask whether it is news about future trades that affects the
exchange rate, or the actual current trades.
There is a small section of the paper (Tables 5 and 6, pp. 1558-1560) that focuses on comovements of
real interest rates and excess returns. However, their focus is on the comovement of innovations of real interest
rates and excess returns at different horizons, while this paper focuses on the unconditional covariances of ex

(

)

ante returns and real interest rates, cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt . That is, this study is
∞

concerned with unconditional covariances of returns that are known at time t, while FR are concerned with
covariances of innovations of returns with innovations in real interest rates. While these covariances are not
completely unrelated, as we will show here, they look at different aspects of the data. FR do not cite any of the
literature on the interest parity puzzle, and do not relate their findings to that work. They do have a notion of
overreaction of the exchange rate to interest rate changes, but that is different than our notion of excess
comovement – again, it reflects the different between covariances of shocks versus unconditional covariances.
The comparison of the moments estimated in the two papers is made more difficult by a problem with
FR’s estimation. Their system is overidentified, meaning that there are an infinite number of estimates of the
moments they are concerned with that could be generated from their VAR. This presents a difficulty in
comparing the moments they estimate because their Tables V and VI label moments using the notation for the
sample moments they calculate, but the overidentification causes some murkiness in translating those to
population moments.
This section of the appendix proceeds in three parts. In part A.5.a, some general observations are made
about the different information that is embodied in unconditional correlations and correlations of shocks. Part
A.5.b discusses some of the problems with FR’s estimation, and some general issues with estimating this type
of model. Part A.5.c then compares the moments estimated in this paper to the moments estimated in FR.

11

A.5.a
A useful place to point to the distinction between unconditional covariances and covariances of
innovations is in the context of the model of delayed overshooting of section 3.2 of this paper. In that section,
nominal prices are held constant, and the interest differential follows an exogenously given process. The
uncovered interest parity puzzle concerns cov( Et ρt +1 , it* − it ) , or cov( Et st +1 − st , it* − it ) . The delayed
overshooting literature has focused on impulse response functions from identified monetary shocks. If the
monetary

shock

were

the

only

(

shock,

we

could

express

these

innovations

as

)

cov st + j − Et −1st + j , it* − it − Et −1 ( it* − it ) .

It is common in the literature to invoke a “hump shape” in the impulse response function as an
explanation for the Fama regression finding of cov( Et st +1 − st , it* − it ) > 0 . (Note that the literature usually
expresses both the Fama regression and the impulse responses in terms of it − it* rather than it* − it as in this
paper.) The “delayed overshooting” literature finds that initially the domestic currency appreciates as the home

(

)

interest rate increases, so cov st − Et −1st , it* − it − Et −1 ( it* − it ) > 0 . The impulse response of future changes in
the

exchange

rate

is

(

in

the

direction

of

further

appreciation:

)

cov st +1 − st − Et −1 ( st +1 − st ) , it* − it − Et −1 ( it* − it ) > 0 , for example. The impulse responses for subsequent

changes in the exchange rate have the same sign for a number of periods before reversing sign, so that the
maximum impulse response does not occur in the first period. This is in contrast to the implications of the
Dornbusch model, and has been called delayed overshooting.

(

)

Does the finding of cov st +1 − st − Et −1 ( st +1 − st ) , it* − it − Et −1 ( it* − it ) > 0 offer an explanation for
cov( Et st +1 − st , it* − it ) > 0 ? Not necessarily. The model of section 3.2 offers a nice illustration of the point. It

was noted in that section that cov( st +1 − st , it − it* ) < 0 holds if and only if α (1 − δ ) (1 − θ 2 ) < θδ − 1 . Recall that

α determines the initial response of the exchange rate to the interest-rate shock, θ measures the persistence
of the interest differential (modeled as a first-order autoregression), and δ determines the speed of adjustment
of the exchange rate to the equilibrium exchange rate. We assumed 0 ≤ δ < 1 , 0 ≤ θ < 1 , and α < 0 . On the

(

)

other hand, cov st +1 − st − Et −1 ( st +1 − st ) , it* − it − Et −1 ( it* − it ) > 0 holds if and only if α (1 − δ ) < −1 . The two
conditions happen to be equivalent if θ = δ , but there is no economic reason that condition should hold.
Notice that the condition for positive covariance of the impulse response does not depend at all on the
persistence of the interest rate differential. Even if the impulse response function is hump-shaped, if the interest
differential is persistent enough, it will not account for the uncovered interest parity puzzle in the form
cov( Et st +1 − st , it* − it ) > 0 . That is not a trivial consideration given the persistence of interest rates among the

12

G7 countries. So a hump-shaped impulse response function is not sufficient to account for the interest-parity
puzzle.

A.5.b
FR consider a VAR with the vector of variables zt′ = [ ρt

ft

dt

qt ] . Here, ρt is defined as in this

paper, and corresponds to FR’s variable rt . f t is FR’s measure of institutional investor flows, and does not
play a role in this discussion. We adopt FR’s notation for dt , which is defined as:
dt ≡ it*−1 − π t* − ( it −1 − π t ) .
qt is the real exchange rate as defined in this paper, and corresponds to the variable δ t in FR.

FR specify a VAR for zt of the form:
Γzt −1 + ut .
zt =

FR do not impose any restrictions on the matrix Γ .
Recall ρt ≡ it*−1 + st − st −1 − it −1 =dt + qt − qt −1 .
Using FR’s notation where ej is a column vector with a one in position j and 0 elsewhere, there should
be a restriction of the form e1′ zt =
( e3′ + e4′ ) zt − e4′ zt −1 . The excess return ρt is defined in terms of dt , qt
and qt −1 , and so cannot have unrestricted dynamics that are defined independently. A key variable in FR’s
analysis is the innovation in the excess return, ρt − Et −1 ρt . Given the definition of
′ut
ρt − Et −1 ρt = dt − Et −1dt + qt − Et −1qt , or e1=

ρt , we have

( e3′ + e4′) ut . FR do not impose any restriction that insures this

equality holds. So, one could use as measures of ρt − Et −1 ρt either e1′ut or ( e3′ + e4′ ) ut or any weighted
average of the two. FR report only one of these measures, and do not test whether the overidentifying
restriction is valid.
Actually, had FR estimated the system by OLS, equation-by-equation, the restriction would be
imposed by the estimation. The covariance matrix for the system would be singular, but that is how it should
be. To see this, write out the system in detail:
 ρt 
f 
 t
=
 dt 
 
 qt 

γ 11
γ
 21
γ 31

γ 41

γ 12
γ 22
γ 32
γ 42

γ 13
γ 23
γ 33
γ 43

γ 14   ρt −1   u1t 
γ 24   f t −1  u2t 
.
+
γ 34   dt −1  u3t 
  

γ 44   qt −1  u4t 

Let a ^ represent the OLS estimate of the parameter. Since qt − qt −1 =ρt − dt , one estimated relationship from
this equation has:
qt − qt −1 = ( γˆ11 − γˆ31 ) ρt −1 + ( γˆ12 − γˆ32 ) f t −1 + ( γˆ13 − γˆ33 ) dt −1 + ( γˆ14 − γˆ34 ) qt −1 + uˆ1t − uˆ3t .

Another estimated relationship is:

13

qt − qt −=
γˆ41 ρt −1 + γˆ42 ft −1 + γˆ43 dt −1 + ( γˆ44 − 1) qt −1 + uˆ4t .
1

From the properties of OLS estimators, it is the case that γˆ=
γˆ11 − γˆ31 , γˆ=
γˆ13 − γˆ33 , and
γˆ12 − γˆ32 , γˆ=
41
42
43
uˆ1t − uˆ3t . However, it is apparent from the discussion of estimation in FR on pages
γˆ44 − 1= γˆ14 − γˆ34 , so uˆ=
4t

1544-1545 that the overidentifying restrictions are not imposed, either deliberately or by dint of the estimation
technique.
In fact, FR report moments involving the residuals of the first three elements of ut but not the fourth. It
is tempting to believe that an easy fix to the problem is for FR to drop qt from their VAR. However, that points
to another issue. Suppose their VAR only contains ρt and dt but not qt (we ignore f t for simplicity.) So let
xt′ = [ ρt

dt ] , and consider a VAR of the form xt =
Βxt −1 + vt . In this case, there is only one measure of

ρt − Et −1 ρt given by e1′ut . However, FR base their analysis on this version of equation (3) above:
∞

∞

qt Et ∑ ( rt*+ j − rt + j ) − Et ∑ ρt + j +1 ,
=

=j 0=j 0

where, to make the correspondence between notation clear, Et ( rt*+ j − rt + j ) =
Et d t + j +1
∞

∞

j =0

j =0

for j ≥ 0 . One can

construct measures of Et ∑ ( rt*+ j − rt + j ) and Et ∑ ρt + j +1 from the VAR, as FR do from their VAR. However,
the value of qt constructed this way does not satisfy the identity qt = qt +1 + dt +1 − ρt +1 . Crucially for FR it
therefore does not satisfy the relationship ρt − Et −1 ρt = dt − Et −1dt + qt − Et −1qt . Why not? The easiest way to
see this is that the VAR involving the variables ρt and dt is equivalent to a VAR in the two variables dt and
qt − qt −1 , since ρt is constructed as the sum of dt and qt − qt −1 . However, such a VAR allows qt − qt −1 to be

nonstationary, contrary to FR’s assumption that it is stationary. FR’s forward looking equation for the real
exchange rate is not correct if the real exchange rate is nonstationary. It requires the additional term
lim( Et qt + k ) , the permanent component of the real exchange rate, that appears in equation (3) above. That is,

k →∞

∞

∞

=
qt lim( Et qt + k ) + Et ∑ ( rt*+ j − rt + j ) − Et ∑ ρt + j +1 .
k →∞
=j 0=j 0

If the VAR were instead defined in terms of dt and qt , which is a simplified version of the
specification in this paper, no problem arises. In this specification ρt is a residual, calculated to satisfy

ρt = dt + qt − qt −1 , and it follows that the relationship ρt − Et −1 ρt = dt − Et −1dt + qt − Et −1qt holds, and there are
no overidentifying restrictions that are ignored.

14

A.5.c
In order to compare the moments calculated in this paper with those that FR intended to calculate,
following the logic of the previous paragraph, consider an example of a stochastic system involving dt and qt .
It is useful to consider an MA representation. Assume:
=
qt

∞

∑α ε

∞

+ ∑ β i ut −i

i t −i
=i 0=i 0

=
dt

∞

∞

∑ γ iε t −i + ∑ δ i ut −i .

=i 0=i 0

Here ε t and ut are i.i.d., mean zero, mutually uncorrelated random variables. We specify dt and qt as the sum
of two moving average processes to facilitate intuition for the empirical findings in this paper.

(

)

The two moments we focus on in this paper are cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt ,

(

∞

)

which equal cov( Et ρt +1 , Et dt +1 ) and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , Et dt +1 , respectively. With a bit of work, one finds:
∞

∞

∞

cov( Et ρt +1 , Et dt +=
var ( ε ) ⋅ ∑ γ i (α i − α i −1 − γ i ) + var ( u ) ⋅ ∑ δ i ( β i − β i −1 − δ i )
1)
=i 1 =i 1

(

)

∞
∞
∞
∞
∞

∞

∞
cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , E
var ( ε )  ∑ γ i ∑ γ i − ∑ γ iα i −1  + var ( u )  ∑ δ i ∑ δ i − ∑ δ i β i −1  .
=
t d t +1
=
=
 i 1 =j i =i 1

 i 1 =j i =i 1


(

)

The finding that cov( Et ρt +1 , rt* − rt ) is positive and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , rt* − rt is negative is easy to reconcile in
∞

this general unstructured setting. With two economic forces driving real exchange rates and interest rates, one
might be more important in the short run and one more important in the longer run. For example we might have
var ( ε ) > var ( u ) , but the coefficients on ε in the moving average processes for dt and qt might die out more

quickly than those on u.
FR’s Tables V and VI calculate covariances of four innovations related to excess returns with four
innovations related to interest rate differentials. In terms of our MA example, the innovations in excess returns
(reading across the top row of FR’s tables) are:

ρt − Et −1 ρt = (α 0 + γ 0 ) ε t + ( β 0 + δ 0 ) ut




( Et − Et −1 )( ρt +1 + ρt + 2 +  + ρt + k ) =  α k − α 0 + ∑ γ i  ε t +  β k − β 0 + ∑ δ i  ut
k



k





=i 1 =i 1



∞









∞





( Et − Et −1 )( ρt + k +1 + ρt + k + 2 + ) =  −α k + ∑ γ i  ε t +  − β k + ∑ δ i  ut


∞

i=
k +1



i=
k +1

∞

( Et − Et −1 )( dt + dt +1 + =) ∑ γ iε t + ∑ δ i ut
=i 0=i 0

15

The innovations in interest rates (reading down the column in FR’s tables) are:
dt − Et −1dt =
γ 0ε t + δ 0ut
k

k

( Et − Et −1 )( dt +1 + dt + 2 +  + dt +=
∑ γ iε t + ∑ δ i ut
k)
=i 1 =i 1
∞

∞

=
( Et − Et −1 )( ρt + k +1 + ρt + k + 2 + 
) ∑ γ iε t + ∑ δ i ut
i=
k +1

∞

i=
k +1

∞

( Et − Et −1 )( dt + dt +1 + =) ∑ γ iε t + ∑ δ i ut
=i 0=i 0

(Note that the last innovation in each group is the same, but in FR is different because of their
overidentification. Also, in deriving the expressions from FR, it is helpful to note a typo in that paper. In the
lower part of page 1543, FR state ver ,=
e1′Φut and viv ,=
e1′Ψut . But given how ver ,t and viv ,t are defined on
t
t
page 1541, these are expressions for ver ,t −1 and viv ,t −1 .)
Inspecting the covariances of the first set of innovations with the second set, we find no moments that

(

correspond to cov( Et ρt +1 , Et dt +1 ) and cov Et ∑ 0 ρt + j +1 , Et dt +1
∞

)

as calculated above. This is not surprising

given the example in A.5.a, which showed how covariances of innovations may give quite different
information than unconditional covariances.

16

