                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL CARBON ABATEMENT IN A STOCHASTIC EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
                       WITH CLIMATE CHANGE

                                     Christoph Hambel
                                       Holger Kraft
                                     Eduardo Schwartz

                                    Working Paper 21044
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w21044


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2015, Revised July 2019




We thank Christian Gollier, Lars Hansen, Frederick van der Ploeg, Armon Rezai, and Christian
Traeger for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank participants of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the European Association of Environmental and Resource Economists (EAERE
2017), the Finance UC Conference, Santiago, Chile, the Santiago Finance Workshop, Chile, the
Frankfurt- Mannheim Macro Workshop, and the joint seminar of the Humboldt University Berlin
and ESMT for their comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are of course our own.
Holger Kraft and Christoph Hambel gratefully acknowledge financial support by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Christoph Hambel, Holger Kraft, and Eduardo Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Carbon Abatement in a Stochastic Equilibrium Model with Climate Change
Christoph Hambel, Holger Kraft, and Eduardo Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 21044
March 2015, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D81,Q54

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model involving climate change. Our
frame- work allows for feedback effects on the temperature dynamics. We are able to match
estimates of future temperature distributions provided in the fifth assessment report of the IPCC
(2014). We compare two approaches to capture damaging effects of temperature on output (level
vs. growth rate impact) and combine them with two degrees of severity of this damage (Nordhaus
vs. Weitzman calibration). It turns out that the choice of the damage function is crucial to answer
the question of how much the distinction between level and growth rate impact matters. The
social cost of carbon is similar for frameworks with level or growth rate impact if the potential
damages of global warming are moderate. On the other hand, they are more than twice as large
for a growth rate impact if damages are presumably severe. We also study the effect of varying
risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal substitution on our results. If damages are moderate
for high temperatures, risk aversion only matters when climate change has a level impact on
output, but the effects are relatively small. By contrast, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
has a significant effect for both level and growth rate impact. If damages are potentially severe
for high temperatures, then the results also become sensitive to risk aversion for both damage
specifications.

Christoph Hambel                                   Eduardo Schwartz
Goethe University                                  Anderson Graduate School of Management
Department of Finance                              UCLA
Frankfurt                                          110 Westwood Plaza
Germany                                            Los Angeles, CA 90095
christoph.hambel@hof.uni-frankfurt.de              and NBER
                                                   eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu
Holger Kraft
Goethe University
Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
60323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
holgerkraft@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
1       Introduction

Our paper proposes a stochastic optimization-based general equilibrium model for the optimal
abatement policy and optimal consumption. In contrast to most of the literature, we allow
for random evolutions of the key variables such as CO2 concentration, global temperature and
world GDP. We determine the optimal abatement policy and study this policy across different
future scenarios for several model specifications. We provide detailed calibrations where we
simultaneously match two decisive climate-sensitivity measures (TCR, ECS), which play an
important role in the report of the IPCC (2014).1 A unique feature of our paper is that we
analyze the implications of alternative assumptions about the impact of climate change on output
if there are potentially climate feedback loops. We compare frameworks where climate change
has either a level or growth rate impact on output and show that significant differences arise
when key variables are assumed to be stochastic and damages are severe for high temperatures
as in Weitzman (2012). In particular, the differences are amplified by climate feedback loops
leading to right-skewed temperature distributions. In contrast to the existing literature, we can
thus identify states where the difference between growth rate and level impact matters the most.

We also document that the size of the social cost of carbon (SCC) is heavily driven by the
assumptions about the damage specification. If climate damages are severe for high tempera-
tures, a growth rate impact leads to significantly higher SCC than a level impact and induces a
higher variation in the optimal emissions, abatement, and SCC. On the other hand, if climate
damages are moderate as in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013), median results over the next 100 years
are similar for a level and growth rate impact. We also complement the results in Crost and
Traeger (2014), Jensen and Traeger (2014), and Ackerman et al. (2013), among others, who find
that risk aversion has only a second-order effect in their models. By contrast, we show that
risk aversion significantly matters if climate damages are severe and the temperature dynamics
involve the above-described feedback loops.

Our novel approach to include stochastic feedback loops allows us to match moments beyond
the first and second moment of the temperature dynamics. This gives us the opportunity to
study the effects of fat-tailed and right-skewed temperature distributions and to capture some
of the inherent uncertainty of the problem.2 One can think of the feedback loops as a very
tractable modeling alternative to tipping points that avoids additional state variables, but can
still generate domino effects in the climate system and thus in the damage distribution.3
    1
     Transient climate response (TCR) measures the total increase in average global temperature at the date of
carbon dioxide doubling. Equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) refers to the change in global temperature that
would result from a sustained doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration after the climate system
will have found its new equilibrium.
   2
     See, e.g., the remarks of Nordhaus (2008) on the uncertainty of the problem.
   3
     Formally, the feedback loops in this paper are captured by a so-called self-exciting process (see Section 2.2
for details). By contrast, tipping points are typically modeled using Markov chains. See, e.g., Cai and Lontzek
(2018), Lemoine and Traeger (2016), Cai et al. (2016), and van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw (2018).




                                                        1
There are several important papers on integrated assessment models that are related to our
analysis: First, the DICE model (Dynamic Integrated Model of Climate and the Economy)
is a widely used framework to study optimal carbon abatement. It combines a Ramsey-type
model for capital allocation with deterministic dynamics of emissions, carbon dioxide and global
temperature. In contrast to our paper, the DICE approach focuses on a level impact only.
The original model is formulated in a deterministic setting, see for example Nordhaus (1992,
2008, 2017), Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013). When we refer to DICE in this article, we mean the
DICE-2013R-version that is presented in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013).

Kelly and Kolstad (1999) and Kelly and Tan (2015) extend DICE and allow the decision maker
to learn about the unknown relation between greenhouse gas emissions and temperature. In
frameworks with recursive utility, Crost and Traeger (2014), Jensen and Traeger (2014), and
Ackerman et al. (2013) analyze versions where one component is assumed to be stochastic.
In contrast to our paper, Crost and Traeger (2014) and Jensen and Traeger (2014) do not
allow for stochastic temperature dynamics, but consider uncertainties in economic growth and
the damage function. Ackerman et al. (2013) introduce transitory uncertainty of the climate
sensitivity parameter into the DICE model. These studies indicate that risk aversion has a smaller
effect on the social cost of carbon than the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. We confirm
the earlier results for moderate climate damages and show that risk aversion can have a crucial
effect if damages are severe for high temperatures. Cai and Lontzek (2018) study a stochastic
generalization referred to as DSICE model. Their approach is computationally involved since it
is based on high-dimensional Markov chains. However, both carbon and temperature dynamics
are deterministic and the model only involves a level impact on economic growth induced by
climate change (as all variants of the DICE model).

There are also IAM frameworks not falling into the class of DICE models. Golosov et al. (2014)
use a stylized framework involving log utility, Cobb-Douglas production and full depreciation
to obtain closed-form solutions. Traeger (2015) generalizes this setting to recursive preferences
and provides a sound description of the carbon cycle and the climate system. An alternative
approach is proposed by van den Bremer and van der Ploeg (2018) who combine AK-growth
and recursive preferences to solve for the optimal fossil fuel use. These paper focus on a level
impact of climate change only, which is in contrast to our paper. Finally, there is the FUND
model which involves a detailed representation of the impacts of climate change. In contrast
to our paper the optimal actions are assumed to be deterministic and there are no disastrous
impacts of climate change, see, e.g., Tol (2002a,b).

Further related literature includes Bansal and Ochoa (2011), Dell et al. (2009, 2012) and Burke
et al. (2015) who provide empirical evidence that temperature negatively affects the growth
rate of output rather than its level (as in the DICE approach). Pindyck (2011, 2014) studies
the effect of a growth rate impact in an endowment economy. He solves a static instead of a
dynamic optimization problem and calculates the so-called willingness to pay. This is the fraction


                                                2
                                                           Economic Model
                                                     ‐    Gross Domestic Product
                                                     ‐    Green Technology
                                                     ‐    Abatement Cost
                                                     ‐    Economic Shocks
                            Abatement Policy:
                                                                                                   Damage Process:
                          Expenditures for green
                                                                                               Translate damages in the
                          technologies are costly,
                                                                                                 ecosystem in reduced
                           but reduce emissions
                                                                                                   economic growth
                                                                Equilibrium
                                                         Maximize global welfare by
                                                         choosing an optimal abatement
                                                         policy and optimal consumption


                  Carbon Dioxide Model                                                           Climate Model
                 ‐   Carbon Dioxide Emissions               Climate Change Process:       ‐   Global Temperature
                 ‐   Carbon Dioxide Concentration          Emissions yield an increase    ‐   Climate Shocks
                 ‐   Natural Sinks, Carbon Shocks            in global temperature        ‐   Feedback Effects / Fat Tails




                                           Figure 1: Building Blocks of the Model.


of consumption that is necessary to keep global warming below some target temperature, e.g.,
3◦ C. However, he abstracts from carbon dioxide emissions and abatement costs. Dietz and Stern
(2015) study a stochastic version of DICE that is plagued by persistent impacts on economic
growth and involves a fat-tailed ECS. Using a Monte-Carlo approach, they provide a solution
where decisions are formed before the first period and are not revised. Moore and Diaz (2015)
study the effect of growth rates impacts in a deterministic two-region version of DICE and find
that a growth rate impact warrants stringent mitigation policy. Finally, similar as in our paper,
Pindyck (2012) studies the difference between level and growth rate effect, but in the stylized
setting of Pindyck (2011, 2014).

As in most of the above-mentioned papers, the starting point for our economic analysis of
climate change is an integrated assessment model. Consequently, our model consists of three
components: carbon dioxide model, climate model, and economic model. Section 2 describes
these components and characterizes the equilibrium of the economy. Section 3 calibrates all
model components. Section 4 presents our benchmark results. Additional robustness checks can
be found in Section 5. Section 6 concludes. An appendix contains details on the calibration.
Additional robustness checks and a description of the solution method can be found in an online
appendix.4



2        Model Setup

This section presents the model setup and describes its equilibrium. Figure 1 depicts the three
building blocks of our framework (carbon dioxide model, climate model, and economic model).

The carbon dioxide model keeps track of the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere.
    4
        This online appendix is also available from the authors upon request.



                                                                       3
This concentration increases by anthropological and also non-man made carbon dioxide shocks
and it decreases since natural sinks such as oceans absorb carbon dioxide. Society can control
anthropological carbon dioxide emissions by choosing an abatement strategy which reduces the
current (business-as-usual) emissions. These efforts are costly.

The climate model measures the average world temperature and its departure from the pre-
industrial level. Empirically, there is a (noisy) positive relation between carbon dioxide concen-
tration and world temperature. Our temperature process captures this relation and allows for
possible feedback effects.

The economic model describes the dynamics of global GDP (syn. output) in a stylized production
economy. In our benchmark setting, global warming has a negative influence on economic
growth, i.e. on the drift of global GDP. Alternatively, we also study a framework with a level
impact as in DICE. Society can only indirectly mitigate this damaging effect by choosing the
above mentioned abatement strategy. This is the link of the economic model to the emission
model, which completes the circle.

Society (syn. mankind or decision maker) chooses optimal consumption and an optimal abate-
ment strategy whose costs contemporaneously reduce economic growth. The remaining part of
output must be invested so that an equilibrium materializes.


2.1   Carbon Dioxide Model

The average pre-industrial concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is denoted by M PI .
The total current concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is given by

                                        MtΣ = M PI + Mt ,                                       (1)

where Mt denotes the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide that is caused by human activities,
i.e., the part of atmospheric carbon dioxide that exceeds the pre-industrial concentration. Its
dynamics are assumed to be

                             dMt = Mt [(gm (t) − αt )dt + σm dWtm ] .                           (2)

We refer to (2) as carbon dioxide dynamics or process. Here W m = (Wtm )t≥0 is a standard
Brownian motion that models unexpected shocks on the carbon dioxide concentration. These
could be the result of environmental shocks such as volcano eruptions or earthquakes, but they
can also be man-made. The volatility of these shocks σm is assumed to be constant. Atmospheric
carbon dioxide increases with an expected growth rate of gm that models the current growth path
of the carbon dioxide concentration. In other words, gm is the growth rate if society does not take
additional actions to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. We thus refer to gm as the business-as-
usual drift of the carbon dioxide process. Notice that it also involves all past policies which have


                                                 4
been implemented to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. We emphasize that the phenomena of
carbon dioxide depletion can be captured by calibrating the business-as-usual drift appropriately.

Society can however pursue new policies to reduce emissions. We refer to such an additional
effort as an abatement strategy α = (αt )t≥0 . In other words, the abatement policy α models how
additional actions change the expected growth of the carbon dioxide concentration, i.e. these are
abatement policies beyond business-as-usual (BAU). By definition, this differential abatement
policy has been zero in the past (αt = 0 for all t < 0). If no abatement policy is chosen and
society sticks to BAU, we also use the notation M BAU instead of M .

Our dynamics of the carbon concentration M are formulated in terms of the abatement policy
α. However, we are also interested in the resulting CO2 emissions. To back out the implied
CO2 emissions that are consistent with (2), we now consider alternative dynamics of M where
– up to environmental shocks – the change in M is expressed as the difference between CO2
emissions and the amount of carbon absorbed by natural sinks. Formally, if Et denotes the
time-t anthropological carbon dioxide emissions, then we obtain

                             dMt = ζe Et dt − δm (Mts )Mt dt + Mt σm dWtm ,                             (3)
                            dMts = δm (Mts )Mt dt,                                                      (4)

where ζe is a factor converting emissions into concentrations.5 The variable Mts measures the
total quantity of atmospheric carbon dioxide that has already been absorbed by natural sinks.
The function δm models the decay rate of carbon dioxide, i.e., the speed at which carbon dioxide
is absorbed from the atmosphere. We assume δm to decrease in M s , i.e., the capacity of natural
sinks declines with the quantity of carbon that has already been absorbed. This assumption is in
line with the findings of Le Quéré et al. (2007), Nabuurs et al. (2013), and Hedin (2015), among
others. Equation (3) can be considered as an ecological budget constraint: The total change in
carbon dioxide is (up to environmental shocks) the difference between anthropological emissions
and natural carbon sequestration.

The dynamics (2) and (3) can be interpreted as a system of two equations with the two unknowns
dM and E. By equating (2) and (3), we can solve for the anthropological emissions of carbon
dioxide (short: emissions) that are consistent with both dynamics:

                                          Mt
                                   Et =      [gm (t) + δm (Mts ) − αt ] .                               (5)
                                          ζe

Equation (5) provides the relation between the abatement strategy and the anthropological
emissions under that strategy. We use the notation EtBAU for business-as-usual emissions (α =
0).
  5
    Carbon dioxide emissions are measured in gigatons (GtCO2 ), whereas concentrations are measured in parts
per million (ppm).




                                                     5
Finally, we define the so-called emission control rate as

                                                            Mt
                    εt = (E BAU − E)/E BAU = 1 −                  (gm (t) + δm (Mts ) − αt ).                   (6)
                                                         ζe EtBAU

This quantity denotes the fraction of abated carbon dioxide emissions compared to BAU. Equiv-
alently, it is the percentage of carbon dioxide emissions that is prevented from entering the
atmosphere if the abatement policy α is implemented. As in the DICE model, we assume that
the emission control rate ε is between 0 and 1. The assumption ε ≥ 0 excludes strategies that
lead to emissions beyond BAU. On the other hand, the assumption ε ≤ 1 implies that emissions
cannot be negative, which might only be possible if there are major technological breakthroughs
(e.g., direct carbon removal (DCR)).

Notice that the restriction ε ≤ 1 yields to the following upper bound on the abatement policy

                                             αt ≤ gm (t) + δm (Mts )                                            (7)

i.e. technological restrictions prevent society from implementing very high abatement policies.
This constraint makes it harder to make up for opportunities that have been missed in the past.6


2.2    Climate Model

We assume that the average global increase in temperature from its pre-industrial level is given
by the dynamics

                  M t ητ                    Mt σ τ          m
                                                                  p             
                                                                          2 dW τ + θ (T − )dN τ ,
          dTt =          gm (t) − α t   dt +          ρ mτ dW t +   1 − ρ mτ  t     τ  t     t                  (8)
                  MtΣ                        MtΣ

which can be seen as a dynamic stochastic version of the empirically well-documented logarithmic
relationship between global warming and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations (see IPCC
(2014))

                                                                 MtΣ
                                                                       
                                             Tt = ητ log                    .                                   (9)
                                                                 M PI

Appendix A gives a motivation for the climate dynamics (8) and lists assumptions that imply
these dynamics. We refer to (8) as global warming process. The parameter ητ is a constant
relating the change in global temperature to changes in carbon dioxide concentration. The
   6
    If it were really possible to actively remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere (direct carbon removal), then
negative CO2 emissions would be feasible. As in the DICE model, we do not allow for negative emissions in our
benchmark calibration. However, our results are robust to this assumption. In robustness checks not reported
here, we have assumed that the emission control rate is restricted to εα                     α
                                                                        t ∈ [0, 1.2], where εt > 1 involves negative
emissions. On a time scale of 100 years, our median main results however hardly change. Only on extreme paths,
society implements more stringent abatement policies leading to negative emissions.



                                                         6
Brownian motions W τ and W m are independent. The diffusion parameter στ is assumed to be
constant. Furthermore, N τ = (Ntτ )t≥0 is a self-exciting process whose jump intensity πτ (Tt ) and
jump size θτ (Tt ) can depend on Tt itself. There is empirical evidence that the distribution of
future temperature changes is right-skewed (see IPCC (2014)). One reason for this is that there
might be delayed climate feedback loops triggered by increases in global temperature. This line
of argument suggests that the temperature dynamics involve a self-exciting jump process whose
jump intensity and jump size depend on the temperature itself. Intuitively, this means that an
increase in temperature makes future increases both more likely and potentially more severe.
Therefore, a self-exciting process captures the idea of feedback loops and at the same time allows
for calibrating the skewness of the distribution of future temperature changes.


2.3     Economic Model

This paper studies two approaches of how to model economic damages induced by climate
change. First, we analyze a framework that models damages as a negative effect on the growth
rate of GDP, which is suggested by empirical evidence (see, e.g., Dell et al. (2009, 2012)). Second,
we consider the standard approach which assumes that current temperatures directly affect the
level of GDP (see, e.g., Nordhaus (2008)).


2.3.1    Production

As Barro (2006, 2009), Pindyck and Wang (2013), among others, we use a version of the Harrod-
Domar model and postulate that output is given by

                                                Yt = AKt ,                                        (10)

where K denotes the aggregate capital stock, which is the only factor of production. The
parameter A denotes its productivity that is assumed to be constant. In this specification,
K is the total stock of capital including physical, human, and firm-specific intangible capital.
Following Nordhaus (2008), among others, we assume that output can be used for investment
I, abatement expenditures X and consumption C, i.e.,

                                           Yt = Xt + Ct + It .                                    (11)


2.3.2    Impact of Global Warming

Growth Rate Impact            In the framework with growth rate impact, capital accumulates ac-
cording to

             dKt = Φ(It , Xt , Kt )dt − ζd Ttn Kt dt + σk Kt (ρkm dWtm + ρbkτ dWtτ + ρbk dWtk )   (12)


                                                     7
where the scaling parameter ζd and the exponent n are positive parameters that relate temper-
ature increase T to loss of economic growth. W k = (Wtk )t≥0 is a third Brownian motion that
is independent of W m , W τ and N τ . The volatility σk of the economic shocks is assumed to be
constant. Output is correlated with carbon concentration and temperature via ρkm and ρkτ .
Standard arguments then lead to the following specifications:7

                                          ρkτ − ρkm ρmτ
                                                                          q
                              ρbkτ =        q           ,         ρbk =       1 − ρ2km − ρb2kτ .
                                              1 − ρ2km

The adjustment function Φ(I, X, K) captures effects of depreciation and costs of installing cap-
ital and implementing an abatement policy. As in Hayashi (1982), we assume Φ(I, X, K) is
homogenous of degree one in K, i.e. Φ(I, X, K) = φ KI , K
                                                        X
                                                          
                                                            K. We choose the following adjust-
ment function involving quadratic adjustment costs

                                                                                              X 2
                                                                                             
                            I X                I                                    1     I
                    φ        ,        =                 −        δk      −            ϕ     +      ,    (13)
                            K K                K                |{z}                2     K   K
                                                            depreciation
                                              |{z}                                 |       {z    }
                                          investments                              adjustment costs

where ϕ is a positive constant that scales the adjustment costs and δk denotes the depreciation
rate of capital.8

Following Nordhaus (1992, 2008), among others, the abatement expenditures X are assumed to
be proportional to output and convex in the emission control rate ε. More precisely, we assume

                                                     Xt = a(t)εbt Yt ,                                  (14)

with b > 1 implying that the costs for the implementation of more stringent abatement policies
increase disproportionately. The time-dependent coefficient a(t) > 0 captures exogenous tech-
nological progress and is assumed to decline over time.9 We refer to a as the cost function trend.
To simplify the notation, we set κ(t, εt ) = Aa(t)εbt so that

                                                     Xt = κ(t, εt )Kt .

Using relation (6), we can rewrite κ in terms of time t, carbon concentration M and abatement
policy α. Therefore, we also use the notation κ(t, Mt , αt ) instead of κ(t, εt ). Combining (10),
(11), (12), (13), and (14), we obtain
                  h                                                                           i
          dYt = Yt (g(t, χt ) − κ(t, εt ) − ζd Ttn )dt + σk (ρkm dWtm + ρbkτ dWtτ + ρbk dWtk ) ,        (15)
  7
     Formally, this is a Cholesky decomposition.
  8
     Homogeneous adjustment costs have been widely used in the literature, see, e.g., Hayashi (1982), Jermann
(1998), Pindyck and Wang (2013), van den Bremer and van der Ploeg (2018).
   9
     The assumptions regarding the abatement cost functions are standard in the IAM literature (e.g., DICE
model).



                                                              8
where χ = C/Y is the fraction of output used for consumption. Furthermore, g(t, χ) = A(1 −
χ) − 12 ϑ(1 − χ)2 − δk with ϑ = ϕA2 denotes the expected economic gross growth rate. Therefore,
the expected economic growth rate, g(t, χt ) − κ(t, εt ) − ζd Ttn , consists of three parts that can
be interpreted as follows: (i) the expected gross growth rate g(t, χt ) models the growth rate
of capital in the absence of climate change, (ii) implementing an abatement strategy α reduces
economic growth by κ(t, εt ), (iii) the growth rate is negatively affected by current temperatures
via ζd Ttn .


Level Impact        The framework with level impact relies on the same assumptions regarding
adjustment and abatement costs. With a level impact, the capital stock K is given by

                                              Kt = K
                                                   b t D(Tt ),

where the dynamics of the temperature anomaly are given by (8) the dynamics of K
                                                                               b are given
by10

                   dK                              b t (ρkm dW m + ρbkτ dW τ + ρbk dW k )
                                      b t )dt + σk K
                    b t = Φ(It , Xt , K
                                                              t           t          t


and D is sufficiently smooth damage function with D(0) = 1 and limT →∞ D(T ) = 0.


2.4     Equilibrium

It is well-known that for a decision maker with CRRA utility changing the degree of relative
risk aversion has at first sight a counterintuitive effect: The abatement policy is less stringent if
risk aversion increases.11 In order to resolve this puzzle and to disentangle relative risk aversion
from elasticity of intertemporal substitution, we follow Crost and Traeger (2014), Jensen and
Traeger (2014) and Ackerman et al. (2013) and assume the decision maker’s preferences to be of
Epstein-Zin type. This allows us to analyze the effects of varying EIS and risk aversion separately.
The society’s time-t utility index Vtα,χ associated with a given abatement-consumption strategy
(α, χ) over the infinite planning horizon [0, ∞) is thus recursively defined by
                                                   Z   ∞                       
                                    Vtα,χ   = Et            f (Cs , Vsα,χ )ds       ,                     (16)
                                                    t
  10
     We can interpret K
                      b as capital stock before damages.
  11
     Pindyck (2013) explains this fact as follows: For a higher level of risk aversion, the marginal utility of
consumption declines faster. However, consumption is expected to grow and consequently utility from future
consumption decreases with risk aversion. For a higher level of risk aversion society thus implements a less
stringent abatement policy leading to higher emissions and a higher global temperature.




                                                        9
where C = χY denotes consumption. Following Duffie and Epstein (1992) the aggregator
function f is given by the continuous-time Epstein-Zin aggregator
                                             h                    1− 1        i
                                                         C                ψ
                                         δθV                                 −1 ,    ψ 6= 1
                                        
                                                             1
                          f (C, V ) =                       ] 1−γ
                                                    [(1−γ)V                                                (17)
                                                                      C
                                         δ(1 − γ)V log                           ,   ψ=1
                                        
                                                                             1
                                                              [(1−γ)V ] 1−γ

            1−γ
with θ =   1−1/ψ .   The parameter γ > 1 measures the degree of relative risk aversion, ψ > 0 reflects
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), and δ > 0 denotes the time-preference rate.12
For θ = 1 (or equivalently ψ = 1/γ), the preferences simplify to standard time-additive CRRA
                                             1 1−γ
utility with utility function u(c) =        1−γ c  .   For θ < 1 (i.e., ψ > 1/γ) the agent prefers early
resolution of uncertainty and is eager to learn outcomes of random events before they occur. On
the other hand, if θ > 1 (i.e., ψ < 1/γ) the agent prefers late resolution of uncertainty. Notice
that although recursive utility allows to disentangle risk aversion from EIS, it does not allow to
disentangle prudence from the other two parameters as well. Following Kimball and Weil (2009)
prudence is given by γ(1 + ψ). Therefore, risk aversion and EIS affect prudence in a linear way.
We will discuss the impact of prudence in the robustness section where we vary risk aversion
and EIS separately.

The decision maker chooses an admissible abatement-consumption strategy (α, χ) in order to
maximize his utility index Vtα,χ at any point in time t ∈ [0, ∞). An admissible strategy must
ensure that output, consumption, investment and abatement expenditures remain positive, i.e.,
Yt , Ct , It , X ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0. Furthermore, the abatement policy must satisfy (7) and lead to a
positive emission control rate. The class of all admissible abatement-consumption strategies at
time t is denoted by At . The indirect utility function is given by

               V (t, y, m, ms , τ ) =     sup {Vtα,χ | Yt = y, Mt = m, Mts = ms , Tt = τ }                   (18)
                                        (α,χ)∈At


We solve the utility maximization problem (18) by applying the dynamic programming principle.
Details of the HJB equation and the solution method are presented in Appendix E of the online
appendix.


2.5    Social Cost of Carbon

Our model can be used to calculate the social cost of carbon (SCC). Following Nordhaus and
Sztorc (2013), Traeger (2014) and others, we define the social cost of carbon as the marginal rate
of substitution between carbon dioxide emission and GDP. Formally, the social cost of carbon
  12
    Although empirical evidence suggests that γ > 1 is the reasonable specification for the index of relative risk
aversion, it is also possible to define aggregator functions for γ ∈ [0, 1].




                                                       10
                                             Carbon Dioxide Model
                            M PI   Pre-industrial carbon dioxide concentration       280
                            M0     Initial excess carbon dioxide concentration       121
                            ζe     Conversion factor                                   0.1278
                            σm     Carbon dioxide volatility                           0.0078
                                               Climate Model
                            T0     Current global warming                              0.9
                            ητ     Temperature scaling parameter                       2.592
                            στ     Temperature volatility                              0.1
                            ρmτ    CO2 /temperature correlation                        0.04
                                               Economic Model
                            Y0     Initial GDP (trillion US-$)                        75.8
                            A      Productivity                                        0.113
                            ϑ      Adjustment cost parameter                           0.372
                            σk     GDP volatility                                      0.0162
                            ρkτ    GDP/temperature correlation                         0
                            ρkm    GDP/CO2 correlation                                 0.29
                            ζd     Damage scaling parameter                            0.00026
                                                    Preferences
                            δ      Time-preference rate                                0.015
                            γ      Relative risk aversion                             10
                            ψ      Elasticity of intertemporal Substitution            1

Table 1: Benchmark Calibration. This table summarizes the parameters of the benchmark calibra-
tion which is described in Section 3.


is given by

                                                             ∂Vt . ∂Vt
                                                 SCCt = −              .                                      (19)
                                                             ∂Et ∂Yt

Intuitively, the social cost of carbon measures the increase in current GDP that is required to
compensate for economic damages caused by an marginal increase of time-t emissions. Therefore,
SCC can be interpreted as an optimal carbon tax, i.e. the tax that compensates for the negative
external effects from burning carbon. More details on how SCC is calculated can be found in
Appendix E of the online appendix.



3         Calibration

This section provides a detailed calibration of all model components. Table 1 summarizes the
calibration results and serves as our benchmark calibration. This calibration assumes a growth
rate effect of climate change. We choose the year 2015 as starting point of our model (t = 0).13
    13
         Since DICE starts in 2010 and evolves in steps of 5 years, this assumption simplifies comparisons.




                                                            11
3.1    Preferences

In order to disentangle risk aversion from elasticity of intertemporal substitution, we use recursive
preferences. In the literature, there is no consensus on how to choose γ and ψ.14 Many studies
that incorporate recursive utility in an IAM choose γ = 10 and ψ in the range between 0.5 and
1.5 (see, e.g., Ackerman et al. (2013), Crost and Traeger (2014), Jensen and Traeger (2014) and
Cai and Lontzek (2018)). We follow that literature and choose ψ = 1 as the benchmark value
for EIS. The time-preference rate is δ = 0.015, which is a standard assumption in the IAM
literature (see, e.g., the recent version of the DICE model by Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013)). In
robustness checks, we vary these parameters and study their effects on our results.


3.2    Carbon Dioxide Model

The fifth assessment report of the IPCC (2014) provides four stylized climate scenarios depending
on the future evolution of greenhouse gas emissions referred to as representative concentration
pathways (RCPs). The RCP 8.5 scenario is characterized by high CO2 emissions where the
atmospheric concentration is supposed to stabilize at a high level in the second half of the 23th
century.15 Consequently, the RCP 8.5 data is well-suited to serve as the average BAU scenario
for CO2 emissions and concentrations. Notice that all RCPs are deterministic, i.e., they can
only be used to calibrate averages. Therefore, we use historical data to estimate the randomness
of the carbon dioxide concentration.


Carbon Dioxide Dynamics To calibrate (1) and (2), we fix the pre-industrial carbon dioxide
concentration at M PI = 280 ppm, which is a common assumption in the literature. Furthermore,
in the year 2015 (t = 0) the carbon dioxide concentration was 401 ppm, which implies M0 = 121
ppm as starting value for the carbon dioxide process (2). Then we calibrate the drift gm (t) such
that the drift of the average BAU evolution (i.e., α = 0 and σm = 0 in (2)) is close to the drift
of the RCP 8.5 scenario that is marked by crosses in Graph (a) of Figure 2.16 Obviously, RCP
8.5 assumes three different regimes. For the first 40 years, the drift is virtually flat at a level
close to the historical trend. Then the drift falls to zero over the next 200 years where it remains
afterwards. This functional form of the drift rate can be captured in the following way:

                          gm (t) = 0.022 1{t<40} + (at2 + bt + c) 1{40≤t≤240}                           (20)
  14
     Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Vissing-Joergensen and Attanasio (2003) combine equity and consumption data
and estimate an EIS of 1.5 and a risk aversion in the range between 8 and 10. On the other hand, Hall (1988),
Campbell (1999), Vissing-Joergenen (2002) estimate an EIS well below one.
  15
     The data is available at http://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/RcpDb
  16
     We have calculated the drift of the RCP 8.5 scenario by computing the log-returns of the excess carbon
dioxide concentration of two consecutive years.




                                                     12
                  (a) Drift [%]                 (b) Concentration [ppm]           (c) Emissions [GtCO2]
         2.5                                                                120
                                         2000

                                         1800                               100
          2
                                         1600
                                                                             80
         1.5                             1400

                                         1200                                60
          1                              1000
                                                                             40
                                         800
         0.5
                                         600                                 20

                                         400
          0                                                                   0
                 2100      2200   2300             2100      2200    2300            2100      2200   2300
                        Year                              Year                              Year


Figure 2: Calibration of the Carbon Dioxide Model. The crosses in Graph (a) depict the implied
drift of the evolution of atmospheric carbon dioxide in the RCP 8.5 scenario. The solid line is our
calibration of gm . The crosses in Graph (b) depict the evolution of atmospheric carbon dioxide in the
RCP 8.5 scenario. The solid line shows our calibration to that data. The crosses in Graph (c) depict
the emission prognosis in the RCP 8.5 scenario. The solid line shows our calibration to that data and an
extension until 2300.


where a = 3.107 · 10−7 , b = −1.963 · 10−4 , c = 0.0292. Graph (b) shows that, by applying
(20), our median path simulated using the calibration of gm (t) (solid line) fits the the RCP
8.5 concentration data points (crosses) very well (R2 < 99%). To determine the volatility of
carbon dioxide, we cannot apply the RCP 8.5 data which is deterministic. We thus use historical
carbon dioxide records to estimate this parameter.17 Calculating the standard deviation of the
log changes of M yields a volatility of σm = 0.0078.


Ecological Budget Constraint In a second step, we calibrate the decay rate of carbon
dioxide δm (Mts ) such that the model-implied carbon dioxide emissions (5) match the RCP 8.5
emissions (crosses in Graph (c) of Figure 2). The main issue here is that RCP 8.5 provides con-
centration data until 2300, but emission data only until 2100. We thus perform our calibration
in two steps: First, we use both concentration and emission data until 2100 and determine the
                                                                          ppm
functional form of δm . Here we fix the conversion factor at ζe = 0.1278 GtCO 2
                                                                                , which converts
emissions into concentrations (see, e.g., IPCC (2014) and the references therein). Then we use
this functional form and the concentration data to extrapolate the emissions until 2300.

As can be seen from Graph (b), the concentration of RCP 8.5 has an inflection point around
2100 and remains flat after the year 2240. Consequently, the emissions of RCP 8.5 must be
hump-shaped. Since these emissions level off around 2100 in the data (crosses in Graph (c)), it
  17
       Source: Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii. Data available at http://co2now.org/Current-CO2/CO2-Now/.



                                                          13
is reasonable to expect a turning point around that year or shortly after, although - as noted
above - RCP 8.5 is silent about emissions after the year 2100.18 This is exactly what our
extrapolation yields.

The solid line in Graph (c) depicts the fit to that data and our BAU-emission forecast until 2300.
It turns out that the following functional form of the decay rate of carbon dioxide matches the
data well:
                                                               M −bδ 2
                                                               s   
                                                  s          −
                                            δm (M ) = aδ e      c   δ



where we estimate aδ = 0.0176, bδ = −27.63, cδ = 314.8 (R2 > 99%). Appendix B describes the
technical details. Notice that the presumed evolution of BAU emissions beyond 2100 is similar
to the baseline evolution in DICE. For instance, in the year 2200 DICE predicts 59GtCO2 , which
is close to the estimate of 54GtCO2 in our model.


3.3    Climate Model

The calibration of the global warming process (8) is divided into two steps: First, we calibrate the
direct impact of the carbon dioxide concentration on global warming (captured by the continuous
part of the model). The drift is calibrated using historical data, whereas the estimate of the
volatility involves data on the transient climate response (TCR). In a second step, we calibrate
the jump size and jump intensity such that the model can generate the above mentioned feedback
effects. Here we use data on the equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS).


Direct Impact: Drift and Volatility                   To estimate the parameter ητ in the drift of the
process, we use historical data on carbon dioxide concentration and global warming.19 Notice
that the starting point for our model of the global warming dynamics is (9). Therefore, we
estimate ητ by running a linear regression of global warming data on log-carbon dioxide data.
Put differently, we calculate

                                            N                             2
                                                                    MiΣ
                                            X                   
                                      min         Ti − ητ log                    .                           (21)
                                       ητ                           M PI
                                            i=1


Here Ti denotes the temperature above the pre-industrial level and MiΣ denotes the carbon
dioxide concentration at time ti . Our estimation yields ητ = 2.592. The linear model performs
well with R2 > 0.8. Graph (a) of Figure 3 depicts the data and the estimate. We also use
that data in order to estimate the correlation between carbon dioxide and global warming. We
  18
      Therefore, we can merely extrapolate the emissions from 2100 onwards. It is however obvious that concen-
tration can only flatten out if emissions eventually decrease and reach a low level where natural sinks can absorb
all emissions such that concentration does not increase any more.
   19
      Source:    United Kingdom’s national weather service.               Global warming data available at
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/.




                                                       14
         (a) Temperature Anomaly [°C]       (b) Transient Climate Response   (c) Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity
                                         0.14                              0.18

                                                                             0.16
         1                               0.12
                                                                             0.14
       0.8                                0.1
                                                                             0.12
       0.6                               0.08                                 0.1

       0.4                               0.06                                0.08

                                                                             0.06
       0.2                               0.04
                                                                             0.04
         0                               0.02
                                                                             0.02

      −0.2                                  0                                   0
              300       350        400             1        2       3                 0      5      10
             CO2 Concentration [ppm]            Temperature Anomaly [°C]            Temperature Anomaly [°C]



Figure 3: Calibration of the Climate Model. The crosses in Graph (a) depict pairs of empirical
global warming and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. The solid line depicts the regression curve
(21). The estimated parameters of the fitted curve is ητ = 2.592. Graph (b) shows a histogram of the
simulated transient climate response. Graph (c) depicts a histogram of the equilibrium climate sensitivity.
The histograms are based on a simulation of 1 million sample paths.


obtain a correlation parameter ρmτ = 0.04.

To calibrate the diffusion coefficient στ of (8), we use data on a measure called the transient
climate response (TCR). TCR measures the total increase in average global temperature at
the date of carbon dioxide doubling, t2× = inf t {t ≥ 0 | Mt = M PI }. The data comes from
CMIP5.20 They simulate the future climate dynamics and obtain a multimodel mean (as well
as median) of about E[TCR] = 1.8◦ and a 90% confidence interval of [1.2◦ C, 2.4◦ C]. This points
towards an approximately symmetric distribution of TCR, which is in line with our Brownian
assumption. Further, notice that our above estimate of ητ leads to a total temperature increase
of about ητ log(2) = 1.797 at the relevant date t2× for TCR. This is also in line with the CMIP5
estimate. Therefore, we are left with finding στ , which we achieve by using the information
about the confidence interval. The 95%-quantile is 1.65 standard deviations above the mean.
This implies a standard deviation of σTCR = 0.6◦ C/1.65 = 0.364◦ C. We choose the volatility
parameter στ such that our model fits the distribution of TCR at the time when carbon dioxide
is supposed to double. For this purpose, we estimate the doubling time t2× via Monte Carlo
simulation: We sample 1 million uncontrolled carbon dioxide paths to determine the time of
carbon dioxide doubling. Then, we simulate 1 million global warming paths and choose the
diffusion parameter such that the simulated distribution of TCR matches the above mentioned
quantiles at the time of carbon dioxide doubling (see Graph (b) of Figure 3).21 On average,
  20
     CMIP5 refers to Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5. See http://cmip-pcmdi.llnl.gov/cmip5/
for further information.
  21
     Here we set the jump part equal to zero such that the results are not driven by warming feedback effects. See



                                                         15
doubling occurs in 2055. As a result of the calibration, we estimate στ = 0.1 and a small
correlation of about ρmτ = 0.04.


Feedback Effects: Jumps In a second step, we calibrate the jump intensity and size using
IPCC estimates for the equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS). ECS refers to the change in global
temperature that would result from a sustained doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration after the climate system will have found its new equilibrium. This process is
presumably affected by feedback effects kicking in after the temperature has increased signif-
icantly (e.g., the date related to TCR). Since the jump part in our model captures feedback
effects, we use ECS data to estimate the corresponding parameters. Unfortunately, there is
no consensus distribution for ECS because finding a new equilibrium might take hundreds of
years. Summarizing more than 20 scientific studies, the IPCC (2014) however states that ECS
is “likely” in the range of 1.5◦ C to 4.5◦ C with a most likely value of about 3◦ C.22 Additionally,
there is a probability of 5 to 10% that doubling the carbon dioxide concentration leads to an
increase in global temperature of more than 6◦ C, while its extremely unlikely (i.e., less than 5%)
that temperature increase is below 1◦ C. These numbers suggest that ECS has a right-skewed
distribution which can be generated by jumps.

We assume that the climate system will find its new equilibrium 100 years after the carbon
dioxide concentration will have doubled. We choose a functional form and an appropriate
parametrization for the jump size and jump magnitude such that we can reproduce the above
mentioned mean and quantiles of ECR by running Monte Carlo simulations. Furthermore, we
perform the calibration in such a way that the constructed distribution for TCR is preserved.
The latter is achieved by allowing for very small negative jumps when the temperature increase
is still low. We thus choose the following parametrization of the climate shock intensity and
magnitude:
                                              +
                              0.95
        πτ (τ ) =                        − 0.25   ,        θτ (τ ) = −0.0029τ 2 + 0.0568τ − 0.0577
                        1 + 2.8e−0.3325τ

Notice that we calibrate the jump intensity such that πτ (τ ) = 0 for all τ ≤ 0, i.e., there are no
feedback effects if the global temperature is at or below its pre-industrial level. The simulated
ECS distribution is depicted in Graph (c) of Figure 3.


3.4    Economic Model

We calibrate the expected gross growth rate, g in (15) such that our economic model closely
matches the evolution of GDP growth in the DICE model. Additionally, we chose the abatement
also the definition of ECS in the next section.
  22
     In the language of IPCC, the word “likely” means with a probability higher than 67%.




                                                      16
             Specification   Calibrated with respect to     Parametrization
                                  Level Impact
             (L-N)           Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013)     DN (T ) = 1+0.00266T
                                                                           1
                                                                                 2
                                                             W                     1
             (L-W)           Weitzman (2012)                D (T ) = 1+(T /20.64)2 +(T /6.081)6.754

                                 Growth Impact
             (G-N)           Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013)     ζdN = 0.00026, n = 1
             (G-W)           Weitzman (2012)                ζdW = 0.000075, n = 3.25



Table 2: Damage Specifications. The table summarizes the four different damage specifications that
are studied in this paper.


cost function from DICE and derive the functional form of κ. The technical details can be
found in Appendix C. In order to analyze the impact of warming, we consider a set of possible
specifications. The standard approach in the literature assumes that warming has a direct
impact on the level of GDP via a sufficiently smooth damage function D(T ) with D(0) = 1.
Thus, GDP at time t is Yt = AK b t D(Tt ), where K
                                                 b denotes capital before damages. There is
however empirical evidence that rather the growth rate of GDP than the level is affected by
global warming, e.g., Dell et al. (2009, 2012). To compare the effects of different damage types,
we implement our model with four different specifications for the impact of warming. Table 2
summarizes these specifications.


Level Impact      The standard damage function in DICE is inverse quadratic. Nordhaus and
Sztorc (2013) use the parametrization

                                                          1
                                       DN (T ) =                  ,
                                                   1 + 0.00266T 2

which we refer to as (L-N) specification. They calibrate the damage function to temperature
increases between 0◦ C to 3◦ C. They acknowledge that adjustments might be needed in case of
higher warming. Weitzman (2012) proposes an alternative damage function that is based on an
expert panel study involving 52 experts on climate economics. His damage function is designed
to capture tipping point effects for very high temperature increases:

                                                            1
                             DW (T ) =                                        ,
                                         1+   (T /20.64)2   + (T /6.081)6.754

which we refer to as (L-W) specification. The two damage functions are very close for tem-
peratures in the range between 0◦ C and 3◦ C. From 3◦ C onwards, the losses start to deviate
significantly. For instance, for a temperature increase of 6◦ C, Nordhaus’ damage function DN
predicts a GDP loss of 9.2% percent, while Weitzman’s specification DW generates a loss of
approximately 50% of GDP.




                                                    17
 Model                                             2015    2035    2055    2075     2095     2115     2150     2200
    (G-N)    GDP [trillion $]                      75.8    138.9   228.9   345.4    483.7    637.1    941.8    1435.6
             SCC [$/tCO2 ]                         11.12   21.75   50.67   102.52   171.21   225.10   254.12   353.25
             Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]   0.01    0.11    0.59    2.02     4.58     6.87     7.11     5.72
             Emission Control Rate                 0.12    0.24    0.41    0.61     0.82     0.95     1        1
             Temperature rise [◦ C]                0.9     1.3     1.7     2.1      2.4      2.5      2.7      3.1
    (L-N)    GDP [trillion $]                      75.8    139.3   230.4   348.7    490.2    652.7    988.0    1558.3
             SCC [$/tCO2 ]                         10.63   24.23   58.37   116.84   183.03   221.77   254.70   376.68
             Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]   0.01    0.12    0.73    2.41     4.98     6.69     6.99     6.00
             Emission Control Rate                 0.12    0.25    0.44    0.65     0.83     0.93     1        1
             Temperature rise [◦ C]                0.9     1.3     1.7     2.0      2.3      2.4      2.5      2.9



Table 3: Median Results for the Nordhaus Calibration. The table reports the median evolution
of selected variables for the growth rate (G-N) and level (L-N) impact.


Growth Rate Impact To compare the effects of level and growth rate impacts, we first
calibrate the growth rate impact such that the GDP dynamics are close to those resulting from
a Nordhaus’ level damage (L-N). In (15) we set n = 1. Furthermore, we choose the damage
parameter ζdN = 0.00026 such that the average GDP losses in the year 2100 coincide for both
specifications. Formally, using the following equation implicitly determines ζdN ,
                                   h N Rt              i  h               i
                                                    ck         ck
                                  E e−ζd 0 Ts ds+σk Wt = E eσk Wt DN (Tt ) ,

      c k = ρkm W m + ρbkτ W τ + ρbk W k and t denotes the year 2100. We refer to the resulting
where W t        t          t         t
specification as (G-N). Notice that this parameter is in line with the calibration of Pindyck
(2014). Similarly, we calibrate the growth rate impact (G-W) such that the GDP dynamics
are close to those resulting from a Weitzmans’ level damage (L-W). This yields n = 3.25 and
ζdW = 0.000075.



4      Main Results

This section presents our main results for the model introduced in Section 2. In particular,
we determine the optimal abatement policy, its costs, the evolution of real GDP as well as the
evolution of the carbon dioxide concentration and global average temperature changes over the
next 100 years. Unless otherwise stated, we use our benchmark calibration from Section 3 that
is summarized in Table 1.


4.1         Level vs. Growth Rate Impact for the Nordhaus Calibration

Table 3 and Figure 4 compare the evolutions of key state variables for the growth and level
damage specifications (G-N) and (L-N). Both models behave similarly until the end of this
century. This is not surprising as we calibrate the growth rate impact (G-N) such that the


                                                           18
                (a) GDP [trillion US−$]                                   (b) GDP [trillion US−$]

600                                                        600
400                                                        400
200                                                        200

       2020   2040    2060    2080     2100                      2020   2040    2060    2080     2100
                        Year                                                      Year
              (c) CO Concentration [ppm]                                (d) CO Concentration [ppm]
                     2                                                         2
800                                                        800

600                                                        600

400                                                        400
       2020   2040       2060   2080      2100                   2020   2040       2060   2080      2100
                           Year                                                      Year
               (e) Global Warming [°C]                                    (f) Global Warming [°C]
   4                                                         4

   2                                                         2

   0                                                         0
       2020   2040     2060    2080     2100                     2020   2040     2060    2080     2100
                         Year                                                      Year
        (g) Emissions [GtCO ], Control Rate [%]                   (h) Emissions [GtCO ], Control Rate [%]
                             2                                                         2
120                                               100      120                                              100
100                                                        100
 80                                                         80
 60                                               50        60                                              50
 40                                                         40
 20                                                         20
  0                                               0          0                                              0
       2020   2040     2060     2080     2100                    2020   2040     2060      2080    2100
                          Year                                                      Year
          (i) Social Cost of Carbon [$/GtCO2]                       (j) Social Cost of Carbon [$/GtCO2]
300                                                        300
200                                                        200
100                                                        100
   0                                                         0
       2020   2040       2060   2080      2100                   2020   2040       2060   2080      2100
                           Year                                                      Year


Figure 4: Results for the Nordhaus Calibration. Based on the calibration of Section 3, the graphs
depict our results for the level impact (L-N) (left column) and the growth rate impact (G-N) (right
column). Optimal paths are depicted by solid lines and BAU paths by dotted lines. Dashed lines show
5% and 95% quantiles of the optimal solution. Graphs (a) and (b) deptict the evolution of world GDP,
(c) and (d) the carbon dioxide concentration, (e) and (f) changes in global temperature, (g) and (h)
carbon dioxide emissions and the median optimal emission control rate (dash-dotted line), (i) and (j) the
social cost of carbon.




                                                      19
BAU evolution of world GDP until 2100 it is close to the one in (L-N). However, there are two
main differences between these specifications. First, although the optimally controlled outputs
in models (G-N) and (L-N) are similar until 2115, they diverge significantly in later years such as
2200 where the median output is almost 9% smaller in the model with growth impact. Second,
the variation of global temperature in (G-N) is much higher than in (L-N), while the variability
of emissions and concentrations is lower.

Notice that for a level impact damages are directly related to the current temperature, whereas
for a growth rate impact damages depend on the whole temperature path so that the weight
of the current temperature is much smaller and the damaging effects of high temperatures are
delayed. Therefore, the abatement policy in (L-N) is slightly more stringent on average, but
far more stringent for high temperatures. This implies a higher variability in carbon dioxide
emissions and concentrations, but a lower variability in global temperature compared to (G-N).
It also leads to a higher median output for (L-N), since more rigorous abatement policies tend
to avoid economic damages more effectively.

Our analysis confirms and extends the results in Pindyck (2012). He shows in a static model
that the willingness to pay 23 for keeping global warming below a certain threshold is higher for
level damages than for growth damages, a finding that is in line with our results. However,
Pindyck (2012) also states that there are no substantial differences between the two models.
Our findings challenge this conclusion. First, output levels are significantly different in the year
2200, which is reported in Table 3. Second, the optimal emission path depends strongly on both
the current state of the climate system and the damage specification. For instance by 2095, the
95% quantile of temperature is 3.1 (2.6) ◦ C in the model with growth (level) impact leading to
optimal carbon dioxide emissions of 19 (0) GtCO2 . This implies that the choice of the damage
specification (growth rate or level impact) can have a significant effect, in particular for extreme
paths.


4.2      Level vs. Growth Rate Impact for the Weitzman Calibration

We now consider the specifications (L-W) and (G-W), which are described in Section 3.4. Table 4
and Figure 5 show our corresponding findings. The graphs of Figure 5 on the left-hand (right-
hand) side depict the results for the level (growth rate) impact. To avoid the potentially severe
consequences of global warming, society keeps temperature low and in a narrow confidence band,
which can be seen in Graphs (e) and (f). In turn, this leads to abatement strategies that are
more sensitive to changes in current temperature. Therefore, most of the damaging effects of
climate change can potentially be avoided resulting in steady economic growth (see Graphs (a)
and (b)). From the end of the century onwards, the BAU paths of GDP are significantly lower
  23
   The willingness to pay is defined as the percentage of output that society is willing to sacrifice to keep the
temperatures below a specified threshold.




                                                       20
                  (a) GDP [trillion US−$]                                      (b) GDP [trillion US−$]
600                                                          600
400                                                          400
200                                                          200

      2020      2040    2060    2080     2100                      2020      2040    2060    2080     2100
                          Year                                                         Year
               (c) CO2 Concentration [ppm]                                  (d) CO2 Concentration [ppm]
600                                                          600

500                                                          500

400                                                          400
      2020      2040     2060   2080        2100                   2020      2040    2060   2080         2100
                           Year                                                        Year
                 (e) Global Warming [°C]                                      (f) Global Warming [°C]
  3                                                            3
  2                                                            2
  1                                                            1
  0                                                            0
      2020      2040   2060    2080     2100                       2020      2040   2060    2080     2100
                         Year                                                         Year
        (g) Emissions [GtCO2], Control Rate [%]                      (h) Emissions [GtCO2], Control Rate [%]
120                                                100       120                                                100
100                                                          100
 80                                                           80
 60                                                50         60                                                50
 40                                                           40
 20                                                           20
  0                                                0           0                                                0
      2020      2040     2060     2080      2100                   2020      2040      2060     2080     2100
                            Year                                                         Year
             (i) Social Cost of Carbon [$/tCO2]                           (j) Social Cost of Carbon [$/tCO2]
300                                                          300
200                                                          200
100                                                          100
  0                                                            0
      2020      2040     2060   2080        2100                   2020      2040    2060   2080         2100
                           Year                                                        Year


Figure 5: Weitzman Damage Specification. The graphs depict our results for the level impact (L-
W) (left column) and the growth rate impact (G-W) (right column). Optimal paths are depicted by solid
lines and BAU paths by dotted lines. Dashed lines show 5% and 95% quantiles of the optimal solution.
Graphs (a) and (b) show the evolution of world GDP, (c) and (d) the carbon dioxide concentration in
the atmosphere, (e) and (f) median changes in global temperature, (g) and (h) carbon dioxide emissions
and the median optimal emission control rate (dash-dotted line), (i) and (j) the social cost of carbon.




                                                        21
 Model                                             2015    2035    2055     2075     2095     2115     2150     2200
 (G-W)     GDP [trillion $]                        75.8    138.1   223.4    330.3    459.4    610.4    921.1    1451.1
           SCC [$/tCO2 ]                           42.86   92.55   145.93   172.82   188.20   198.44   219.77   333.00
           Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]     0.14    0.99    3.06     4.59     5.37     5.63     5.58     4.89
           Emission Control Rate                   0.30    0.53    0.75     0.83     0.87     0.89     0.92     0.96
           Temperature rise [◦ C]                  0.9     1.1     1.2      1.3      1.4      1.4      1.4      1.4
 (L-W)     GDP [trillion $]                        75.8    139.2   229.4    343.4    480.6    642.0    975.3    1551.0
           SCC [$/tCO2 ]                           18.07   42.40   93.19    152.92   189.00   207.09   222.51   346.33
           Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]     0.03    0.29    1.50     3.69     5.28     5.93     5.46     4.94
           Emission Control Rate                   0.16    0.35    0.57     0.76     0.85     0.89     0.89     0.93
           Temperature rise [◦ C]                  0.9     1.2     1.5      1.7      1.8      1.9      2.0      2.4



Table 4: Median Results for the Weitzman Calibration. The table reports the median evolution
of selected variables for the growth rate (G-W) and level (L-W) impact.


than the optimally controlled paths.

Although in both scenarios society acts more rigorously than in the previous case, there are
quantitative differences between the level impact (L-W) and the growth rate impact (G-W) that
are also qualitatively different from our previous results on the Nordhaus calibration. For the
growth rate impact, SCC is initially 42.86 and thus more than twice as high as for the level
impact where it is 18.07. This implies more rigorous abatement activities in (G-W) than in (L-
W). Therefore, the temperature increase is significantly smaller. Surprisingly, now the growth
rate impact involves a higher SCC. This can intuitively be explained by the attitude of an agent
with recursive preferences towards changes in the drift of his endowment stream. The long-run
risk literature (see, e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004)) documents that this type of agents is very
sensitive to persistent changes of the growth rate. Whereas in the Nordhaus calibration the
effect on the growth rate is apparently too moderate, this property has a significant influence in
the Weitzman calibration.



5        Robustness Checks

This section presents robustness checks for elasticity of intertemporal substitution, risk aversion,
and diffusion parameters. We also compare our findings to the results in the DICE model.


5.1      Preference Parameters

Optimal Abatement and SCC                        We first consider the effect of varying the elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution, ψ ∈ {0.5, 1, 2}. Table 5 reports the results for the social cost of carbon
and shows a strong dependence on EIS.24 For a high level of EIS, society is willing to accept less
smooth consumption streams. Consequently, it implements a more rigorous abatement policy
    24
    This is in line with the findings of Cai and Lontzek (2018), Crost and Traeger (2014), Jensen and Traeger
(2014) and Bansal et al. (2014).


                                                           22
                   ψ                                                  γ
         Nordhaus Calibration          1               2               5              10              15
                 0.5              5.58 (5.75)     5.61 (5.80)     5.72 (5.98)     5.93 (6.34)     6.16 (6.79)
                  1              10.80 (9.25)    10.83 (9.38)    10.94 (9.82)    11.12 (10.63)   11.29 (11.59)
                  2              16.16 (12.55)   16.16 (12.71)   16.13 (13.24)   16.05 (14.24)   15.90 (15.41)
         Weitzman Calibration          1               2               5              10              15
                 0.5             10.54 (6.98)    11.81 (7.26)    16.50 (8.31)    18.24 (10.83)   21.06 (12.54)
                  1              18.73 (11.74)   19.69 (12.23)   24.21 (14.04)   42.86 (18.07)   72.44 (23.71)
                  2              24.58 (15.41)   25.08 (15.98)   26.81 (18.07)   51.14 (22.73)   89.93 (29.05)



Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis of SCC for Risk Aversion and EIS. The table shows SCC [$/tCO2 ]
in 2015 for different values of γ and ψ. The numbers in front of the brackets are the results for the growth
rate impact. The numbers in brackets are the results for the corresponding level impact.


raising SCC. The opposite is true for a low level of EIS. These results hold for both level and
growth rate impact regardless of the calibration of the damages.

The effect of varying the degree of relative risk aversion depends on the damage specification
and calibration. If damages are moderate for high temperatures (Nordhaus calibration), risk
aversion is negligible in a model with a growth rate impact (G-N) and slightly more pronounced
with a level impact (L-N). Nevertheless, the effects are relatively small. These results are in
line with the findings of Ackerman et al. (2013) and Crost and Traeger (2014) that risk aversion
has a much smaller effect than EIS on the optimal abatement decision and in turn on SCC.25
However, if damages are potentially severe for high temperatures (Weitzman calibration), the
results become sensitive to the choice of risk aversion for both damage specifications. Now, SCC
and optimal abatement policy increase with risk aversion.26

To summarize, abatement expenditures lead to steeper consumption streams (less consumption
today, potentially more consumption in the future) and thus the EIS has a first-order effect. On
the other hand, risk aversion or prudence become only relevant if the consequences of postponing
abatement are severe and significantly state-dependent as in (L-W) and (G-W).


Optimal Consumption and Investment For unit EIS, the optimal consumption rates are
constant. Lemma E.1 shows that for non-unit EIS the optimal consumption rate becomes
state-dependent. Table 6 summarizes the effects of varying EIS on optimal consumption and
investment, both expressed as a fraction of output.
  25
     Crost and Traeger (2014) point out that most integrated assessment models are formulated for a CRRA
decision maker with ψ = 1/γ. Since risk aversion plays an inferior role for the social cost of carbon and the
optimal abatement policy, it is important to calibrate the entangled preference parameters to match EIS, rather
than risk aversion. Especially for deterministic models, where risk aversion is in fact irrelevant, this might lead
to significant changes in the optimal abatement policies.
  26
     Our results also suggest that prudence, which is given by γ(1 + ψ) (see Kimball and Weil (2009)), has a
second-order effect as well. This is because prudence is affected similarly by risk aversion and EIS. If prudence
had a significant effect on our results, then varying γ should also lead to significant changes, but this is only true
when the consequences of postponing abatement are potentially disastrous.




                                                         23
                       ψ
              Nordhaus Calibration                  χ                               I/Y
                      0.5             [75.4%, 81.9%] (75.4%, 81.9%)    [18.1%, 24.2%] (18.0%, 23.7%)
                       1              [75.0%, 75.0%] (75.0%, 75.0%)    [24.0%, 25.0%] (23.8%, 25.0%)
                       2              [72.2%, 74.7%] (72.2%, 74.4%)    [24.5%, 27.7%] (24.2%, 27.8%)
              Weitzman Calibration                  χ                               I/Y
                      0.5             [75.6%, 81.6%] (75.6%, 82.0%)    [17.3%, 23.9%] (18.0%, 24.2%)
                       1              [75.0%, 75.0%] (75.0%, 75.0%)    [21.2%, 25.0%] (22.3%, 25.0%)
                       2              [72.2%, 75.1%] (72.2%, 74.6%)    [23.3%, 27.7%] (24.1%, 27.8%)



Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis of Consumption and Investment for EIS. The table shows the
range of optimal consumption and investment (as fraction of output) for different values of ψ. The
numbers in box brackets are the results for the growth rate impact. The numbers in curved brackets are
the results for the corresponding level impact.

                                 σk          0            0.0081          0.0162          0.0243
               Nordhaus Calibration    11.10 (10.61)   11.11 (10.62)   11.12 (10.63)   11.13 (10.64)
               Weitzman Calibration    42.84 (18.05)   42.85 (18.06)   42.86 (18.07)   42.86 (18.09)
                                 στ         0               0.05            0.1            0.15
               Nordhaus Calibration    10.14 (7.44)     10.41 (8.26)   11.12 (10.63)   11.75 (13.81)
               Weitzman Calibration    15.93 (8,67)    19.95 (10.88)   42.86 (18.07)   69.87 (33.03)



Table 7: SCC for Different Volatility Parameters. The table compares SCC [$/tCO2 ] for different
volatility parameters for the four damage specifications. The results of the level specifications are in
brackets.


We find that for ψ > 1, the optimal consumption rates are smaller than for unit EIS. Addition-
ally to the more stringent abatement policy, society also installs more new capital via higher
investment rates. Therefore, the gross growth rate of output is higher for ψ > 1. This confirms
our intuition that with higher EIS, society accepts less smooth consumption streams, while the
opposite is true for ψ < 1.27


5.2    Influence of Diffusive Shocks and Feedback Effects

Diffusive Shocks       Table 7 shows how SCC in the year 2015 changes if the diffusion parameters
of output and temperature, σc and στ , are varied. It turns out that the volatility σc of economic
shocks has a negligible effect on the current SCC. On the other hand, the effect of στ is significant,
since high variation in temperature amplifies the risk of ending up in a feedback loop during which
temperature increases heavily. This is because the jump intensity increases in temperature.
Therefore, society tries to avoid feedback loops by implementing a more rigorous abatement
policy. Table 7 reports SCC for the four damage specifications. It can also be seen that SCC is
more sensitive for the level impact.
  27
    Notice that for our benchmark choice of unit EIS, Section 3.4 calibrates ϑ = 0.372 in order to match a
consumption rate of 75%. If we choose ϑ to be 0.32(0.4) for an EIS of 0.5(2), then the consumption rate is in
the range of 72%(74%) and 79%(76%), which is well in line with the historical range of 72% and 78%. More
importantly, SCC for the different choices of ϑ are almost identical.



                                                       24
 Abatement
 Policy                                              2015    2035    2055    2075    2095    2115    2150     2200
 Optimal     GDP [trillion $] (5% quantile)          75.8    124.1   195.4   284.7   386.8   501.4   724.7    1083.6
             GDP [trillion $] (median)               75.8    139.3   230.4   348.7   490.2   652.7   988.0    1558.3
             GDP [trillion $] (95% quantile)         75.8    156.5   272.1   428.0   620.7   852.6   1351.0   2244.8
             Temperature rise (5% quantile) [◦ C]    0.9     1.0     1.3     1.6     1.8     1.9     1.9      1.8
             Temperature rise (median) [◦ C]         0.9     1.3     1.7     2.1     2.4     2.5     2.7      3.1
             Temperature rise (95% quantile) [◦ C]   0.9     1.5     2.0     2.4     2.6     2.9     3.4      4.9
             Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]     0.01    0.12    0.73    2.41    4.98    6.69    6.99     6.00
             Emission Control Rate                   0.22    0.25    0.44    0.65    0.83    0.93    1        1
 DICE        GDP [trillion $] (5% quantile)          75.8    123.9   195.1   284.6   389.3   501.9   721.9    1061.4
             GDP [trillion $] (median)               75.8    139.1   229.9   348.4   491.3   652.1   979.9    1536.2
             GDP [trillion $] (95% quantile)         75.8    156.3   271.4   427.5   620.9   850.2   1335.9   2213.3
             Temperature rise (5% quantile) [◦ C]    0.9     1.0     1.2     1.4     1.4     1.2     0.9      0.6
             Temperature rise (median) [◦ C]         0.9     1.2     1.6     1.9     2.2     2.4     2.2      2.2
             Temperature rise (95% quantile) [◦ C]   0.9     1.5     2.0     2.6     3.1     3.5     4.4      6.4
             Abatement Expenditures [trillion $]     0.05    0.24    0.82    2.20    4.91    8.45    7.74     6.13
             Emission Control Rate                   0.20    0.32    0.54    0.62    0.81    1       1        1



Table 8: Optimal vs. DICE Abatement Policy for Level Impact. The table summarizes the
simulation results obtained by running our model (L-N) with the optimal abatement policy and with the
DICE abatement policy.


Stochastic Feedback Effects              We now analyze the impact of disregarding the stochastic
feedback effects, i.e., πτ (τ ) = θτ (τ ) = 0. To obtain an expected equilibrium climate sensitivity
of 3◦ C, we now choose ητ = 4.33. Notice that this specification can match the first two mo-
ments of ECS, but it cannot generate a fat-tailed climate sensitivity. For the Nordhaus damage
specifications, SCC reduces from 11.12 (10.63) to 8.90 (4.81), where the number in brackets are
the results for the level impact (L-N). Similar, for the Weitzman specifications, SCC in the year
2015 decreases from 42.86 (18.07) to 18.97 (5.34). We thus conclude that fat-tailed distributed
climate dynamics induce a higher social cost of carbon and higher optimal abatement. The effect
is more pronounced for level impacts where a climate feedback loop has potentially disastrous
direct impacts on the economy.


5.3     Comparison with DICE

This subsection compares our benchmark results with those obtained in the DICE version of
Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013). In particular, we compare the optimal social cost of carbon to
Nordhaus’ calculations. Nordhaus estimates the social cost of carbon in 2015 to be 19.6 dollars
(expressed in 2005-dollars per ton of carbon dioxide). He uses a CRRA utility function with
γ = 1.45 implying an EIS of ψ = 1/γ. By contrast, we use recursive preferences with γ = 10 and
ψ = 1. The starting value of the social cost of carbon in our model is lower than estimated in
the latest version of DICE. In our model, however, society optimally anticipates environmental
shocks and adjusts both the optimal abatement rate and the consumption rate. Along a path
with high optimal abatement (as a response to high temperatures), the corresponding SCC



                                                        25
values are significantly larger than the estimates in DICE. It is important to mention that DICE
is formulated in a purely deterministic setting. In particular the temperature dynamics are
calibrated to expected environmental outcomes, but do not take the uncertainty immanent in
the climate system into account.

To analyze these points, we run our model with the optimal abatement policy obtained from
DICE. Notice that following this policy is suboptimal in our model. The simulation results are
summarized in Table 8. It turns out that the DICE abatement policy is more stringent than the
median optimal policy. This leads to significant GDP losses, since the benefits of the DICE policy
are lower than their abatement costs. Additionally, the DICE abatement policy is insensitive
to unexpected variations in temperature, since it is determined in a deterministic model. By
contrast, the optimal abatement policy reacts to high temperatures by tightening the abatement
activities. This raises the social cost of carbon beyond the optimal value suggested by DICE.
Conversely, along paths with low abatement, society raises consumption and SCC values are
smaller. In contrast to the outcomes of following the (suboptimal) DICE policy, the variation
of optimally controlled global temperatures and in turn the variation of climate damages is
significantly smaller, while the variation of emissions is much higher.



6    Conclusion

This paper studies a flexible dynamic stochastic equilibrium model for optimal carbon abate-
ment. All key variables such as carbon concentration, global temperature and world GDP are
modeled as stochastic processes. Therefore, we can determine state-dependent optimal policies
and provide model-based confidence bands for all our results. We perform a sophisticated cal-
ibration of all three model components (carbon concentration, global temperature, economy).
In particular, we match the future distributions of transient climate response (TCR) and equi-
librium climate sensitivity (ECS) as provided in the report of the IPCC (2014).

We study both a level and growth rate impact of temperatures on output and combine these
two specifications with two alternative calibrations of the damage function. One calibration
suggests moderate effects of climate change even for high temperature as in Nordhaus and Sztorc
(2013), whereas the other calibration involves potentially severe damages as in Weitzman (2012).
Therefore, we can compare four different scenarios: growth-rate impact and moderate damages
(G-N), growth-rate impact and severe damages (G-W), level impact and moderate damages
(L-N), level impact and severe damages (L-W)). We find that depending on the specification of
the damage function the results can be very different. First, the social cost of carbon are similar
for frameworks with level or growth rate impact if the potential damages of global warming are
moderate. This changes significantly if damages can be severe. Then SCC is more than twice
as large for a growth rate impact than for a level impact. The results are qualitatively similar
for the optimal abatement policies.


                                                26
We also document the effect of varying risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal substitution
on our results. If damages are moderate for high temperatures, risk aversion only matters when
climate change has a level impact on output. Nevertheless, the effects are relatively small. By
contrast, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution has a significant effect for both level and
growth rate impact. If however damages are potentially severe for high temperatures, the results
are sensitive to the choice of risk aversion for both impacts. Now, SCC and optimal abatement
policy increase with risk aversion.

Finally, we find that in all scenarios the optimal abatement policies are state-dependent, but the
strength of this dependence varies across scenarios. Given a Nordhaus damage calibration, the
median results for optimal abatement policies and thus optimal emissions are similar, but the
variations are higher for the level than for the growth-rate impact. In both cases, the optimal
policies are less state-dependent than for the Weitzman damage calibration where the abatement
policies are more rigorous.



References
Ackerman, F., and R. Bueno, 2011, Use of McKinsey Abatement Cost Curves for Climate
  Economics Modeling, Working Paper, Stockholm Environment Institute.

Ackerman, F., E. A. Stanton, and R. Bueno, 2011, CRED: A New Model of Climate and
  Development, Ecological Economics, 85, 166–176.

Ackerman, F., E. A. Stanton, and R. Bueno, 2013, Epstein-Zin Utility in DICE: Is Risk Aversion
  Irrelevant to Climate Policy?, Environmental and Resource Economics 56, 73–84.

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and M. Ochoa, 2014, Climate Change and Growth Risks, Working Paper,
  Duke University.

Bansal, R., and M. Ochoa, 2011, Welfare costs of long-run temperature shifts, Working Paper,
  NBER.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
  puzzles., Journal of Finance 1481–1509.

Barro, R. J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, R. J., 2009, Rare disasters, asset prices, and welfare costs, American Economic Review
  99, 243–264.

Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel, 2015, Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on
  Economic Production, Nature 527, 235–239.


                                               27
Cai, Y., T. M. Lenton, and T. S. Lontzek, 2016, Risk of multiple interacting tipping points
  should encourage rapid co2 emission reduction, Nature Climate Change 6, 520–525.

Cai, Y., and T. S. Lontzek, 2018, The social cost of carbon with economic and climate risks,
  Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.

Campbell, J. Y., 1999, Asset prices, consumption, and the business cycle, in J.B: Taylor, M.
  Woodford (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1 (Elsevier North-Holland).

Crost, B., and C. P. Traeger, 2014, Optimal CO2 Mitigation Under Damage Risk Valuation,
  Nature Climate Change 4, 631–636.

Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken, 2009, Temperature and Income: Reconciling New
  Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates, American Economic Review 99, 198–204.

Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken, 2012, Temperature shocks and economic growth: Evi-
  dence from the last half century, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 66–95.

Dietz, S., and N. Stern, 2015, Endogenous Growth, Convexity of Damage and Climate Risk:
  How Nordhaus’ Framework Supports Deep Cuts in Carbon Emissions, Economic Theory 125,
  572–620.

Duffie, D., and L. G. Epstein, 1992, Asset Pricing with Stochastic Differential Utility, Review
  of Financial Studies 5, 411–36.

Golosov, M., J. Hassler, P. Krusell, and A. Tsyvinsky, 2014, Optimal Taxes on Fossil Fuel in
  General Equilibrium, Econometrica 82, 41–88.

Hall, R. E., 1988, Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption, Journal of Political Economy 39,
  339–347.

Hayashi, F., 1982, Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation, Economet-
  rica 50, 213–224.

Hedin, L. O., 2015, Biogeochemistry: Signs of saturation in the tropical carbon sink, Nature
  519.

IPCC, 2014, Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cam-
  bridge University Press).

Jensen, S., and C. P. Traeger, 2014, Optimal Climate Change Mitigation under Long-term
  Growth Uncertainty: Stochastic Integrated Assessment and Analytic Findings, European Eco-
  nomic Review 69, 104–125.

Jermann, U. J., 1998, Asset Pricing in Production Economies, Journal of Monetary Economics
  41, 257–275.


                                              28
Kelly, D. L., and C. D. Kolstad, 1999, Bayesian Learning, Growth, and Pollution, Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 23, 491–518.

Kelly, D. L., and Z. Tan, 2015, Learning and Climate Feedbacks: Optimal Climate Insurance
  and Fat Tails, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 72, 98–122.

Kimball, M. S., and P. Weil, 2009, Precautionary Saving and Consumption Smoothing across
  Time and Possibilities, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41l, 245–284.

Le Quéré, C., C. Roedenbeck, E. T. Buitenhuis, T. J. Conway, R. Langenfelds, A. Gomez,
  C. Labuschagne, M. Ramonet, T. Nakazawa, N. Metzl, N. Gillett, and M. Heimann, 2007,
  Saturation of the southern ocean co2 sink due to recent climate change, Science 316, 1735–
  1738.

Lemoine, D., and C. P. Traeger, 2016, Economics of tipping the climate dominoes, Nature
  Climate Change 6, 515–519.

McKinsey and Company, 2009, Pathways to a Low-Carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global
  Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve (McKinsey and Company, London).

McKinsey and Company, 2010, Impact of the Financial Crisis on Carbon Economics: Version
  2.1 of the Global Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve (McKinsey and Company, London).

Moore, F. C., and D. B. Diaz, 2015, Temperature Impacts on Economic Growth Warrant Strin-
  gent Mitigation Policy, Nature Climate Change 5, 127–131.

Munk, C., and C. Sørensen, 2010, Dynamic asset allocation with stochastic income and interest
  rates, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 433–462.

Nabuurs, G., M. Lindner, P. J. Verkerk, K. Gunia, P. Deda, R. Michalak, and G. Grassi, 2013,
  First signs of carbon sink saturation in european forest biomass, Nature Climate Change 3,
  792–796.

Nordhaus, W. D., 1992, An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Greenhouse Gases, Science
  258, 1315–1319.

Nordhaus, W. D., 2008, A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
  Policies (Yale University Press, New Haven).

Nordhaus, W. D., 2017, Revisiting the social cost of carbon, Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences .

Nordhaus, W. D., and P. Sztorc, 2013, DICE 2013R: Introduction and Users Manual, Technical
  Report, Yale University.




                                              29
Pindyck, R. S., 2011, Modeling the impact of warming in climate change economics, in The
  Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present, 47–71 (NBER).

Pindyck, R. S., 2012, Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy, Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management 63, 289–303.

Pindyck, R. S., 2013, Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature 51, 860–872.

Pindyck, R. S., 2014, Risk and Return in the Design of Environmental Policy, Journal of the
  Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 1, 395–418.

Pindyck, R. S., and N. Wang, 2013, The Economic and Policy Consequences of Catastrophes,
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, 306–339.

Stern, N., 2007, The Economics of Climate Change: the Stern Review (Cambridge University
  Press).

Tol, R. S. J., 2002a, Estimates on the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part I: Benchmark
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 47–73.

Tol, R. S. J., 2002b, Estimates on the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part II: Dynamic
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 135–160.

Traeger, C., 2014, A 4-stated DICE: Quantitatively Addressing Uncertainty Effects in Climate
  Change,, Environmental and Resource Economics 59, 1–37.

Traeger, C., 2015, Analytic integrated assessment and uncertainty, Working Paper .

van den Bremer, T. S., and F. van der Ploeg, 2018, Pricing Carbon under Economic and Climate
  Risks: Leading-Order Results from Asymptotic Analysis, Working Paper .

van der Ploeg, F., and A. de Zeeuw, 2018, Pricing carbon and adjusting capital to fend off
  climate catastrophes, Environmental and Resource Economics 1–22.

Vissing-Joergenen, A., 2002, Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertem-
  poral Substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825–853.

Vissing-Joergensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio, 2003, Stock-Market Participation, Intertemporal
  Substitution, and Risk-Aversion, American Economic Review 93, 383–391.

Weitzman, M. L., 2012, GHG Targets as Insurance against Catastrophic Climate Damages,
  Journal of Public Economic Theory 14, 221–244.




                                              30
                          (a) ECS (Benchmark)                                 (b) ECS without jumps

          0.3                                                  0.3


         0.25                                                 0.25


          0.2                                                  0.2


         0.15                                                 0.15


          0.1                                                  0.1


         0.05                                                 0.05


           0                                                    0
           −2       0       2      4     6      8   10          −2        0      2      4     6       8   10
                                  °C                                                   °C



Figure 6: Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity Graph (a) shows a histogram of the simulated ECS
using the benchmark calibration. Graph (b) depicts a histogram of the ECS if we turn off the stochastic
feedback effects. The histograms are based on a simulation of 1 million sample paths.


A     Global Warming Process

The starting point for our climate model is the empirically well-documented logarithmic re-
lationship between global warming and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations (see IPCC
(2014)). A deterministic description of this relation is (9). Applying Ito’s lemma to (9) and
using (2) implies
                                                            
                              M t ητ                  1 Mt 2       Mt η τ
                        dTt =           gm (t) − αt −      σm dt +        σm dWtm .                                (22)
                              MtΣ                        Σ
                                                      2 Mt         MtΣ

Notice that σm is empirically negligible. In Section 3.2, we use historical carbon dioxide data
and estimate σm = 0.0078. This implies −             1 Mt 2
                                                     2 MtΣ σm        ≤ 3 · 10−5 , so that the term − 21 M
                                                                                                        Mt 2
                                                                                                          Σ σm is
                                                                                                               t
close to zero. In the sequel, we thus drop this term.

Empirically, the relation between the temperature increase and carbon dioxide concentration
is not deterministic (as assumed in (9)), but noisy. This calls for an additional modification
wherefore we add two additional sources of randomness: First, we allow the temperature to
be driven by a Brownian shock that is not necessarily perfectly correlated with W m and that
potentially induces more noise than the shock in (22), which is in line with empirical evidence.
The latter means that we replace the diffusion parameter σm by στ . Second, there is empirical
evidence that the distribution of future temperature changes is right-skewed (see IPCC (2014)) as
a response to delayed climate feedback loops climate feedback loops. We thus add a self-exciting
process that captures the idea of feedback loops. This is why we postulate the dynamics (8).

Figure 6 shows that the model is able to generate a right-skewed distribution of the equilib-



                                                         31
rium climate sensitivity. The histograms are based on simulations of one million sample paths.
Graph (a) depicts a histogram of the equilibrium climate sensitivity using the benchmark cal-
ibration from Section 3. Graph (b) shows the corresponding histogram for a model without
stochastic feedback effects. Our benchmark calibration yields a right-skewed distribution with a
skewness of 0.92. By contrast, the skewness of the ECS in the model without stochastic feedback
effects is approximately zero.



B      Calibration of Natural Sinks

We now provide the details on how to calibrate the natural carbon dioxide sinks. We use annual
RCP 8.5 emission data denoted by {Ei }N                 N
                                      i=1 at times {ti }i=1 . This data represents our BAU-
emissions. Additionally, we use RCP 8.5 concentration data {Mi }N
                                                                i=1 at the same time points.
In the first step, we solve (5) for δm and use that data to calculate a set of model-implied carbon
dioxide decay rates via

                                          ζd Ei − Mn gm (ti )
                            δm (Mis ) =                       ,       i = 1, . . . , N.
                                                 Mi

Since the RCP 8.5 emission and concentration data is only available for steps of five years, we
interpolate the decay rate and the concentration between the data points via cubic splines. Then
we simulate the process Mts applying the Euler method to (4) with one time step per year:

                                         s
                                        Mt+1 = Mts + δm (Mts )Mt .

Here, we choose without loss of generality M0s = 0 as the starting point of the process. We
obtain pairs of annual data points {Mts , δm (Mts )}. It turns out that these decay rates can be
fitted well using the following functional form:

                                                             M −bδ 2
                                                             s   
                                                s          −
                                          δm (M ) = aδ e      c   δ    ,

where aδ = 0.017, bδ = 11.64, cδ = 279.7. This parametrization achieves an almost perfect fit
to the data (R2 > 99%), and Graph (b) in Figure 2 shows that the model excellently replicates
the RCP 8.5 emission data.



C      Calibration of the Economic Model

GDP Growth We calibrate the expected gross growth rate g in (15) such that our economic
model closely matches the evolution of GDP growth in the latest version of the DICE model.28
  28
    Notice that the GDP growth in DICE is calibrated to historical data along with projected future growth rates
of population, production and technology. In order to simplify the comparison with DICE, we have decided to


                                                      32
                                                  GDP [trillion US−$]
                  1500



                  1000



                   500



                     0
                         2020   2040   2060    2080   2100 2120         2140   2160   2180   2200
                                                        Year



Figure 7: Calibration of the GDP Process. The figure depicts GDP forecasts simulated by the
DICE model (crosses) and our median path based on simulations with the estimated parameters (solid
line).


Notice that g is the expected growth rate before abatement and climate damage. Therefore,
we simulate the output in the DICE model disregarding abatement and climate damage.29 This
yields data points (t1 , Yb1 ), . . . , (tN , YbN ), which are used to extract the corresponding future GDP
growth rates of DICE. It turns out that these growth rates (before abatement and damages) can
be fitted well using the following functional form:

                                           g DICE (t) = g0 + g1 e−δg t                                       (23)

where g0 = 0.005, g1 = 0.029, δg = 0.011, i.e., the growth rate declines at a rate of 1.1% to its
long-term steady-state level of 0.5%. Figure 7 depicts the simulated data points of the DICE
model (crosses) and the fitted values (solid line).

In a second step, we equate g with (23) and determine the unknowns.Following Pindyck and
Wang (2013), we fix the productivity at A = 0.113. To separately identify δk (t) and ϑ, we
must make an assumption about the consumption rate χ, which is an endogenous variable. The
optimal χ in DICE is pretty stable over time and close to 75%. This is also in line with historical
data. Since unit EIS is our benchmark choice, the optimal consumption rate is a constant. It
can be determined from the following quadratic equation30

                                           δ = χ∗ (A − ϑ(1 − χ∗ )).

Therefore, assuming that the optimal consumption rate of the society is χ∗ = 0.75 we obtain
match the future evolution of world GDP. The DICE model is however deterministic. So matching means that we
match the average evolution in our model to the DICE dynamics.
  29
     In the terminology of our paper, this is the shadow GDP of DICE.
  30
     See the first-order condition (29) in Appendix E of the online appendix. Notice that for unit EIS this first-
order condition does not depend on abatement or climate change. In the robustness section, we study cases where
EIS is not one.




                                                        33
ϑ = 0.372 leading to
                                      δk (t) = 0.0116 − 0.029e−0.011 t .

To determine the volatility of the GDP process, we cannot use the DICE model which is de-
terministic. We thus use historical data from the website of the International Monetary Fund
starting in 1960 to estimate this parameter.31 Calculating the standard deviation of the log
returns yields a volatility of σk = 0.0161. Furthermore we obtain the following correlations with
global temperature and carbon dioxide ρkτ = 0 and ρkm = 0.29.


Abatement Costs            Following Nordhaus (2008) and Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013) we assume
that abatement expenditures are proportional to the current level of GDP:

                                                X = Yt a(t)εbt                              (24)

for a constant b and a time dependent function a that gradually decreases over time. The de-
creasing trend in abatement expenditures reflects the widening menu of sustainable technological
alternatives implying that abatement becomes cheaper over time. We adopt the parametrization
from the DICE model and use a(t) = 0.05506 exp(−0.0148t) + 0.00043 and b = 2.8.




 31
      Available at: https://www.imf.org/external/data.htm


                                                      34
                                               Endogenous Variables
                        MΣ           Atmospheric CO2 concentration
                        M            Atmospheric excess CO2 concentration
                        α            Abatement policy
                        E            CO2 emissions
                        Ms           CO2 concentration stored in sinks
                        ε            Emission control rate
                        T            Global average temperature increase
                        Y            Aggregate output
                        C            Aggregate consumption
                        I            Aggregate investment
                        X            Abatement expenditures
                        K            Aggregate capital stock
                        V            Indirect utility
                        χ            Consumption rate
                                              Exogenous Parameters
                        ητ           Temperature scaling parameter
                        ζe           Conversion factor
                        M PI         Pre-industrial CO2 concentration
                        δk           Depreciation rate
                        A            Productivity
                        ϑ            Adjustment cost parameter
                        ζd           Growth rate impact scaling parameter
                        n            Growth rate impact exponent
                        σm           CO2 volatility
                        στ           Temperature volatility
                        σk           GDP volatility
                        ρmτ          CO2 /temperature correlation
                        ρkm          GDP/CO2 correlation
                        ρkτ          GDP/temperature correlation
                        δ            Time-preference rate
                        γ            Relative risk aversion
                        ψ            Elasticity of intertemporal Substitution
                        θ            Preference parameter
                                                     Functions
                        gm (t)       Expected BAU growth of excess CO2
                        g(t, χt )    Expected economic gross growth rate
                        κ(t, ε)      Forgone economic growth due to abatement
                        D(T )        Level impact damage function
                        f (t, V )    Epstein-Zin aggregator
                        δm (M s )    CO2 Decay rate
                        πτ (T )      Temperature jump intensity
                        θτ (T )      Temperature jump size
                        Ψ(I, X, K)   Adjustment function

Table 9: Variable Overview. This table summarizes all variables, parameters and functions occurring
in the paper.




                                                  35
       Online Appendix to Optimal Carbon Abatement in a Stochastic Equilibrium
                                 Model with Climate Change




                      Christoph Hambela , Holger Kraftb,* , Eduardo Schwartzc



a,b
      Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Theodor-
W.-Adorno-Platz 3, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
c
    UCLA Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles.



                                    This version: July 13, 2019



Abstract

This online appendix contains additional robustness checks and a description of the numerical
solution method.




∗   Corresponding author. Phone: +49 69 798 33699.

E-mail addresses: christoph.hambel@finance.uni-frankfurt.de (Christoph Hambel),
holgerkraft@finance.uni-frankfurt.de (Holger Kraft),
eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu (Eduardo Schwartz)
               (a) CO Concentration [ppm]                                      (b) GDP growth [%]
                       2


600
                                                             0.03

500
                                                             0.02

400
                                                             0.01
       2020     2040       2060    2080    2100                     2020   2040     2060     2080    2100
                             Years                                                    Years
                 (c) Global Warming [°C]                             (d) Emissions [GtCO2], Control Rates [%]
                                                             100                                                100

  3                                                           80                                                75
                                                              60
  2                                                                                                             50
                                                              40
  1                                                                                                             25
                                                              20
  0                                                            0                                                0
       2020     2040       2060    2080    2100                     2020   2040     2060    2080     2100
                             Years                                                    Years


Figure 8: Sensitivity Analysis for the Preferences. The graphs show the median paths of the
key variables for different preference specifications. Median optimal paths are depicted by solid lines and
median BAU paths by dotted lines. The benchmark scenario is depicted by black lines. Grey lines show
the DICE preference structure and light lines represent Stern discounting. Graph (a) shows the carbon
dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, (b) median GDP growth rates, (c) median changes in global
temperature, (d) carbon dioxide emissions and the optimal emission control rates (dash-dotted lines).


D        Further Robustness Checks

D.1        Comparison with Standard Preference Choices

We now compare our benchmark preference structure with two specifications that are standard
in the literature. First, we consider a time-additive CRRA utility function with a risk aversion
parameter of γ = 1.45 and time-preference rate of δ = 1.5%. This utility specification is
used as benchmark specification in DICE. Earlier versions and other models use similar CRRA
specifications.32 Second, we simulate our model using a log-utility function (ψ = γ = 1) with a
very low discount rate (δ = 0.1%). Pindyck (2013), among others, argues that optimal abatement
policies crucially depend on the time-preference rate. In general, there is a lot of debate about
this parameter in the IAM literature. This is because time-preferences put implicitly weights on
the current and future generations: A higher value puts more weight on the current generation,
whereas a lower value shifts some of this weight to future generations. A tension arises since the
current generation is not as severely affected by the climate change as the future generations,
  32
       See, e.g., Nordhaus (2008), Pindyck (2012), Ackerman et al. (2011).



                                                         1
               Preferences   2015    2035    2055     2075     2095     2115     2150     2200
               Benchmark     11.12   21.75   50.67    102.52   171.21   225.10   254.12   353.25
                    DICE     7.67    14.03   35.15    77.01    137.83   201.57   243.49   324.95
                    Stern    38.11   77.30   139.02   185.47   208.60   223.44   250.53   377.84



Table 10: SCC for Different Preference Specifications. The table compares SCC [$/tCO2 ] for
different preference specifications. The results are generated using the (G-N) damage specification. DICE
preferences are γ = 1.45, ψ = 1/γ, δ = 1.5%. Stern refers to γ = 1, ψ = 1, δ = 0.1%.


but must today decide upon an optimal abatement policy and pay for it. Of course, more
stringent actions reduce current consumption, but have far reaching consequences for future
generations who might benefit the most. We refer to the very low discount rate of δ = 0.1%
in combination with log-utility as Stern discounting since Stern (2007) suggests this preference
structure. Intuitively, with such a low rate of time-preference, real interest rates are lower and,
in turn, the social cost of carbon is higher. This also implies that society implements a very
stringent abatement policy.

Table 10 and Figure 8 summarizes our findings on how the preference structure affects our
results. With the standard DICE preference structure, both risk aversion and EIS are lower
which leads to a moderate abatement policy. The resulting evolution of median global warming
is in line with the results presented in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013) although SCC is significantly
smaller. Stern discounting yields a very stringent abatement policy and a high social cost of
carbon. Following this policy reduces carbon dioxide emissions so that the median temperature
increase peaks by the end of this century at 1.5◦ C. Additionally, climate variability is significantly
dampened (not shown in the figure).


D.2    Alternative Abatement Costs

We now study the effects of using an alternative cost function κ. Instead of the benchmark spec-
ification, we derive an abatement cost function using the prognosis for the marginal greenhouse
gas abatement costs for the year 2030 provided by McKinsey and Company (2009, 2010).


Calibration     The calibration is based on a prognosis for the marginal greenhouse gas abate-
ment costs for the year 2030 provided by McKinsey and Company (2009, 2010). For that year,
they estimate that under BAU the total emissions of greenhouse gases would reach 66GtCO2 e
and analyze the expected abatement expenditures. Under rather optimistic assumptions, they
report an abatement potential of 38GtCO2 e at a total cost of 150 billion euros. McKinsey
supposes that for 11GtCO2 e of abatement the net costs are negative because savings from
implementing energy-efficient measures – compared to the BAU scenario – exceed the initial in-
vestment costs. To avoid issues arising from negative abatement costs, we follow Ackerman and
Bueno (2011) and disregard the negative part of the marginal costs. Therefore, our calibration


                                                       2
                                                  (a) MAC Curve, 2030 [$]

                                      60

                                      40

                                      20

                                       0

                                    −20

                                    −40

                                    −60

                                           0       10        20       30
                                                 Abatement, 2030 [GtCO e]
                                                                         2



Figure 9: Calibration of the Abatement Costs. The figure depicts the marginal abatement cost
(MAC) for the reference year 2030 (solid line). The prices of the y-axis are in 2005 euros. GtCO2 e stands
for gigatons of carbon dioxide equivalents. The MAC function is calibrated such that it fits the positive
part of the McKinsey data (crosses).


is more conservative than the McKinsey prognosis.

In a first step, we fit the McKinsey data using the following functional form for the marginal
abatement cost function:
                                                                c1 q
                                               MAC(q) =                      .
                                                          c2 + c3 q + c4 q 2
The variable q is the absolute quantity of greenhouse gas abatement (measured in GtCO2 )
compared to the business-as-usual scenario, i.e., the difference between BAU-emissions and
controlled emissions, q = E BAU − E. As can be seen in Figure 9, our estimates of ci fit the
positive part of the marginal abatement costs well (R2 > 0.96). The coefficients are c1 = 0.00039,
c2 = 0.0016, c3 = −3.25 · 10−5 , c4 = −7.27 · 10−8 . Then, we transform the marginal costs MAC
into (absolute) expenditures, which in our paper are denoted by X. We thus compute the anti-
derivative X(q) of the marginal costs with respect to q and evaluate X at the available data
points q1 , . . . , qn . This yields values X1 , . . . , Xn .

The resulting data points (q1 , X1 ), . . . , (qN , XN ) can now be used to determine the cost func-
tion κ(t, ε) for the year 2030. Notice that the McKinsey data maps absolute quantities of
abatement q into marginal expenditures, whereas our cost function maps emission control rates
into reductions of economic growth. Therefore, we transform absolute quantities of greenhouse
gas abatement q into emission control rates using εi = qi /E BAU , i = 1, . . . , N , and absolute
abatement expenditures X in relative expenditures by κi = Xi /E[Y ], i = 1, . . . , N , where E[Y ]
denotes the expected GDP in 2030. We assume the functional form (24) still to hold. We cali-
brate the parameters such that (24) is close to the data points (ε1 , κ1 ), . . . , (εN , κN ). As a result


                                                           3
              (a) CO Concentration [ppm]                                       (b) GDP growth [%]
                      2

600

                                                             0.03
500
                                                             0.02
400
                                                             0.01
      2020     2040       2060    2080    2100                      2020   2040     2060     2080    2100
                            Years                                                     Years
                (c) Global Warming [°C]                              (d) Emissions [GtCO2], Control Rates [%]
                                                             100                                                100
  3
                                                              80                                                75
  2                                                           60
                                                                                                                50
                                                              40
  1                                                                                                             25
                                                              20
  0                                                            0                                                0
      2020     2040       2060    2080    2100                      2020   2040     2060    2080     2100
                            Years                                                     Years


Figure 10: Sensitivity Analysis for the Cost Function. The graphs show the median paths of
the key variables for different specifications of the cost function. Median optimal paths are depicted
by solid lines and median BAU paths by dotted lines. The benchmark scenario is depicted by black
lines. Grey lines show the results using McKinsey abatement costs. Graph (a) shows the carbon dioxide
concentrations, (b) median GDP growth rates, (c) median changes in global temperature, (d) carbon
dioxide emissions and the optimal emission control rates (dash-dotted lines).


of the calibration we obtain a = 0.035, b = 3.186 (R2 > 99%) for the year 2030. We take the
rate at which abatement becomes cheaper over time from DICE, i.e. the relative expenditures
for complete abatement (ε = 1) decline at rate of 1.48% to its long-term level of 0.043%. As a
result, we obtain a(t) = 0.0443 exp(−0.0148t) + 0.00043. Notice that the calibration based on
the McKinsey prognosis makes abatement slightly cheaper than in DICE since b is smaller.


Results for (G-N) Figure 10 depicts the median results for both cost specifications and
(G-N).33 It turns out that the results are similar. Implementing the McKinsey specification,
slightly raises the optimal abatement policy leading to lower carbon dioxide concentrations and
temperatures compared to the benchmark case. Therefore, net GDP growth is slightly higher and
SCC in the year 2015 is reduced from $11.12 to $10.05. Notice that, by the end of this century,
the optimal abatement activity becomes higher for the DICE cost function. This is because for
high emission control rates the marginal costs of the McKinsey calibration are higher than for
DICE since θ2 is higher (3.186 instead of 2.8). In turn, the marginal benefits from abatement
are lower when control rates are high.
 33
      The results for (L-N) are similar and available from the authors upon request.



                                                         4
E       Solution Method

The optimization problem (18) cannot be solved explicitly.34 This appendix summarizes how
the problem can be solved numerically.


E.1       Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equation

In case of a growth rate impact, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation reads
        n                                       1                                          1
0 = sup Vt + y g(t, χ) − ζd τ n − κ(t, ε) Vy + y 2 σk2 Vyy + m(gm (t) − α)Vm + m2 σm              2
                                         
                                                                                                    Vmm
    α,χ                                         2                                          2
                            mητ                          1  σ τ m 2                     m2
      − δm (ms )mVms +
                                                 
                                     g m (t) − α   V τ +                     V ττ   +             ρmτ σm στ Vmτ
                         m + M PI                        2 m + M PI                   m + M PI
                                        στ m                                   s
                                                                                                               o
      + ymρkm σk σm Vym + yσk ρkτ              V  yτ  + πτ (τ )  V (t, y, m, m    , τ + θ τ ) − V   + f (χy, V ) .
                                    m + M PI
                                                                                                           (25)

Subscripts of the indirect utility function V denote partial derivatives (e.g., Vt = ∂V /∂t). The
corresponding HJB equation for a level impact can be found in Section E.3. First, we establish
the following separation result:

Lemma E.1. The indirect utility function of the optimization problem (18) has the form

                                                          1
                                V (t, y, m, ms , τ ) =       y 1−γ F (t, m, ms , τ ),                            (26)
                                                         1−γ

where F solves the simplified HJB equation
               n                                                     1
       0 = sup Ft + m gm (t) − α + (1 − γ)σk σm ρkm Fm + m2 σm              2
                                                                              Fmm + δm (ms )mFms
                                                           
                                                                                                       (27)
           α,χ                                                       2
                   mητ                                              1  mστ 2
             +              g m (t) − α + (1  −  γ)ρkτ σ k στ  F τ +                   Fτ τ
                 m + M PI                                             2 m + M PI
                   m2                                  h
                                                                                 α     1 2     δ   i
             +             ρ    σ   σ
                             mτ m τ mτF    +  (1  − γ)  g(t,  χ) − ζ d τ − κ(t, ε  ) −  γσ  −        F
                 m + M PI                                                              2 k 1 − 1/ψ
                                                                               o
             + πτ (τ ) F (t, m, ms , τ + θτ (τ )) − F + δθχ1−1/ψ F 1−1/θ ,
                                                     


The optimal abatement strategy is given by
                                                                      mητ
                                                                                 !
                                                           mFm +           F
                                                                     m+M PI τ
                                  αt∗ = κα (t, m, ·)−1                             ,                             (28)
                                                                (γ − 1)F
  34
    Notice that closed-form solutions are only available in rare special cases. A prominent example is the com-
bination of log-utility, a Cobb-Douglas production technology and some further debatable assumptions as in
Golosov et al. (2014). As discussed in Section 5, log-utility is too restrictive for studying the effects of preference
parameters.




                                                           5
and the optimal consumption rate satisfies

                                                                    ∂
                                       δ(χ∗t )−1/ψ F −1/θ = −         g(t, χ∗t ).                      (29)
                                                                   ∂χ

Proof. Substituting the conjecture into the HJB equation yields the simplified HJB equation
(27). The representations of the optimal controls are then obtained by calculating the first-order
conditions.                                                                                              2


The HJB equation cannot be simplified further. Therefore, we have to determine F by solving
equation (27) numerically. First, we consider a simplified problem where the capacity of natural
sinks is assumed to be unconstrained, i.e., the decay rate of carbon dioxide is assumed to be
constant at δ m = δm (0). This provisional assumption makes the state variable M s redundant
and significantly simplifies the solution algorithm. In a second step, we address the general case.


E.2    Numerical Solution Approach

Basic Idea We use a grid based solution approach to solve the non-linear PDE. We discretize
the (t, m, τ )-space using an equally spaced lattice. Its grid points are defined by
                   
                       (tn , mi , τj ) | n = 0, · · · , Nt , i = 0, · · · , Nm , j = 0, · · · , Nτ ,

where tn = n∆t , mi = i∆m , and τj = j∆τ for some fixed grid size parameters ∆t , ∆m , and
∆τ that denote the distances between two grid points. The numerical results are based on a
choice of Nm = 500, Nτ = 1000 and 1 time step per year. Our results hardly change if we use a
finer grid or more time steps per year. The parameters Nτ and Nm are chosen sufficiently large
such that it is very unlikely that these boundaries are reached within the given time horizon. In
the sequel, Fn,i,j denotes the approximated indirect utility function at the grid point (tn , mi , τj )
and αn,i,j refers to the corresponding optimal abatement policy. We apply an implicit finite
difference scheme.


Terminal Condition Since the optimization problem (18) has an infinite time horizon, we
must transform it into a problem with a finite horizon. Therefore, we approximate the indirect
utility function at some point tmax = Nt ∆t in the distant future – we choose the year 2500 – by
the solution of a similar problem where the world is in a steady state: We assume that from time
tmax onwards the emission control rate is one, i.e., anthropological carbon dioxide emissions are
zero. To approximate the indirect utility function at the grid point (tmax , mi , τj ), we simulate
sample paths for further 500 years and determine the utility index (16).




                                                           6
Finite Differences Approach                In this paragraph, we describe the numerical solution ap-
proach in more detail. We adapt the numerical solution approach used by Munk and Sørensen
(2010).

The numerical procedure works as follows. At any point in time, we make a conjecture for the
                          ∗
optimal abatement policy αn,i,j . A good guess is the value at the previous grid point since the
                                                                                  ∗
abatement strategy varies only slightly over a small time interval, i.e., we set αn,i,j = αn+1,i,j .
Substituting this guess into the HJB equation yields a semi-linear PDE:

                     1
 0 = Ft + K1 F 1− θ + K2 F + K3 Fm + K4 Fmm + K5 Fτ + K6 Fτ τ + K7 Fτ m + πτ F (t, m, τ + θτ )

with state dependent coefficients Ki = Ki (t, m, τ ). Due to the implicit approach, we approximate
the time derivative by forward finite differences. In the approximation, we use the so-called
’up-wind‘ scheme that stabilizes the finite differences approach. Therefore, the relevant finite
differences at the grid point (n, i, j) are given by

               Fn,i+1,j − Fn,i,j                    Fn,i,j − Fn,i−1,j
  D+
   m Fn,i,j =                    ,   D−m Fn,i,j =                      ,
                      ∆m                                    ∆m
               Fn,i,j+1 − Fn,i,j                    Fn,i,j − Fn,i,j−1
  D+
   τ Fn,i,j =                    ,   D−τ Fn,i,j =                     ,
                      ∆τ                                    ∆τ
                Fn,i+1,j − 2Fn,i,j + Fn,i−1,j                       Fn,i,j+1 − 2Fn,i,j + Fn,i,j−1
  D2mm Fn,i,j =                                ,     D2τ τ Fn,i,j =
                             ∆2m                                                ∆2τ
               Fn+1,i,j − Fn,i,j                    Fn,i,j+1 − Fn,i−1,j+1 − Fn,i+1,j−1 + Fn,i−1,j−1
  D+
   t Fn,i,j =                    ,   D2τ y Fn,i,j =                                                 .
                      ∆t                                                  4∆τ ∆m

We approximate the jump terms via linear interpolation between the closest grid points:

                             F (t, m, τ + θτ ) = kτ 1 Fn,i,j+θbτ 1 + kτ 2 Fn,i,j+θbτ 2 ,

where θbτ 1 and θbτ 2 denote the closest grid points of τ + θτ . The variables kτ · denote the weights
resulting from linear interpolation. Substituting these expressions into the PDE above yields
the following semi-linear equation for the grid point (tn , mi , τj )
                                                                       
          1                    1         K3             K5        K4     K6
 Fn+1,i,j    = Fn,i,j −K2 +      + abs          + abs        +2 2 +2 2
          ∆t                  ∆t         ∆m             ∆τ       ∆m      ∆τ
                         −                       +         
                         K3     K4                K       K4
             + Fn,i−1,j      −       + Fn,i+1,j − 3 − 2
                         ∆m ∆2m                   ∆m ∆m
                         −
                                                  K + K6
                                                          
                         K5     K6
             + Fn,i,j−1      − 2 + Fn,i,j+1 − 5 − 2
                         ∆τ     ∆τ                ∆τ     ∆τ
                            K7                   K7                   K7                  K7
             + Fn,i−1,j+1        + Fn,i+1,j−1          − Fn,i+1,j+1        − Fn,i−1,j−1
                          4∆τ ∆m              4∆τ ∆m                4∆τ ∆m              4∆τ ∆m
                                                                   1− 1
             + πτ (kτ 1 Fn,i,j+θbτ 1 + kτ 2 Fn,i,j+θbτ 2 ) − K1 Fn,i,jθ .




                                                           7
Therefore, for a fixed point in time each grid point is determined by a non-linear equation. This
results in a non-linear system of (Nm + 1)(Nτ + 1) equations that can be solved for the vector

               Fn = (Fn,1,1 , · · · , Fn,1,Nτ , Fn,2,1 , · · · , Fn,2,Nτ , · · · , Fn,Nm ,1 , · · · , Fn,Nm ,Nτ ).

Notice that in case of CRRA utility the system becomes linear. Using this solution we update
our conjecture for the optimal abatement policy at the current point in the time dimension. We
apply the first-order condition (28) and finite difference approximations of the corresponding
derivatives. In the interior of the grid, we use centered finite differences. At the boundaries, we
apply forward or backward differences. For instance, for (i, j) ∈ {2, . . . , Nm −1}×{2, . . . , Nτ −1},
we compute the new guess as
                                                                                                          !
  ∗                         −1    (mi + M PI )∆τ mi (Fn,i+1,j − Fn,i−1,j ) + ∆m mi (Fn,i,j+1 − Fn,i,j−1 )
 αn,i,j   = κα (tn , mi , ·)                                                                               .
                                                   ∆m ∆τ (mi + M PI )(γ − 1)Fn,i,j

Similarly, we compute the social cost of carbon for fixed GDP Y in the grid point (i, j) ∈
                    
  2, . . . , Nm − 1 × 2, . . . , Nτ − 1 as

                                             Y Fn,i+1,j − Fn,i−1,j       ξe
                            SCCn,i,j =                                        ∗     .
                                            1−γ     ∆m Fn,i,j      µm + δm − αn,i,j

With this new guess for the optimal policy we perform a new iterative step. We continue the
iteration until there is no significant change of the result. Then the algorithm continues with
the previous point tn−1 in the time directions until we reach the end of the grid.


Implementation of State-Dependent Sinks                             The solution procedure described so far does
not deal with state dependent sinks. Since in general the constraint (7) involves M s , we first
solve for the optimal abatement policy if the weaker constraint αt ≤ gm (t) + δ m is imposed. The
corresponding abatement decision is then given by
                                                                                       mη
                                    "                                                               !#
                                                                     −1
                                                                           mFm +            F
                                                                                      m+M PI τ
                       αt = min gm (t) + δ m , κα (t, m, ·)                                              .
                                                                                 (1 − γ)F

Since the modified constraint is always weaker, we obtain an upper bound J(t, y, m, ms , τ ) ≥
J(t, y, m, ms , τ ) for the indirect utility function of the true model where (7) is imposed. Of
course, αt is not feasible in the true model. To obtain a feasible strategy, we thus define

                                          αt = min [gm (t) + δm (Mts ), αt ] ,

where we cut off αt if it violates (7). Notice that the strategy αt is suboptimal. Since we have
the upper bound J, we can compute an upper bound on the loss that occurs if we implement
αt instead of the (unknown) optimal strategy. If J(t, y, m, ms , τ ) denotes the indirect utility


                                                               8
associated with αt , the upper bound on the welfare loss is given by

                             J(t, y, m, ms , τ ) = J(t, y(1 − L), m, ms , τ ).

It turns out that this upper bound for the welfare loss is significantly below 0.1% and thus the
strategy αt is close to optimal.


Comparison with Value Function Iteration Most IAMs are formulated in discrete time.
The corresponding Bellman equation is usually solved by dynamic programming with value
function iteration (see, e.g., Crost and Traeger 2014; Traeger 2014; Cai and Lontzek 2015). The
main idea is as follows: One first discretizes the state space and chooses an appropriate func-
tional form to approximate the value function in those nodes. A typical choice are multivariate
orthogonal polynomials (e.g., Chebychev polynomials). Starting from the terminal date, one
iterates backwards through time. For every tn one pointwise maximizes the right-hand side of
the Bellman equation and determines the approximate value function in every node. Then the
algorithm goes step-by-step back in time until the end of the time grid is reached.

Since our model is formulated in continuous time, we derive and solve the corresponding Hamilton-
Jacobi-Bellman equation. This partial differential equation can be solved numerically by a grid-
based finite-differences approach as described above. Our method is thus the continues-time
analogue to discrete-time value function iteration. Notice that it is not necessary to make any
assumptions on the functional form of the value function.


E.3    Level Impact

Now, the dynamics of output dynamics are more involved than in the growth rate impact. It is
thus more convenient to use Yb = AK
                                  b as a state variable rather than Y . Its dynamics are given
by
                        h                                                                  i
              dYbt = Ybt (g(t, χt ) − κ(t, εαt ))dt + σk (ρkm dWtm + ρbkτ dWtτ + ρbk dWtk )

and output is thus

                                             Y = Yb D(Tt ).

Then, the HJB equation reads
         n                                  1                                     1 2 2
 0 = sup Vt + yb (g(t, χ) − κ(t, εα )) Vyb + yb2 σk2 Jybyb + m(gm (t) − α)Vm +      m σm Jmm
     α,χ                                    2                                     2
                                                       mητ                        1  σ τ m 2
       − δm (ms )mVms + ybmρkm σk σm Vybm +
                                                                          
                                                             PI
                                                                gm (t) − α Vτ +                Vτ τ
                                                  m+M                             2 m + M PI



                                                    9
             m2                                     στ m                                   s
                                                                                                                  
       +            ρ mτ σ m σ τ V mτ + y σk ρ kτ          V y τ + π τ (τ )  V (t, y , m, m   , τ + θ τ (τ )) − V
           m + M PI                               m + M PI
                                        b                    b                     b
                         o
       + f (b
            y D(τ )χ, V ) .

Lemma E.1 is then modified as follows:

Lemma E.2. The indirect utility function of the optimization problem has the form

                                                         1
                              J(t, yb, m, ms , τ ) =        yb1−γ F (t, m, ms , τ ),
                                                        1−γ

where F solves the simplified HJB equation
              n                                                     1
      0 = sup Ft + m gm (t) − α + (1 − γ)σk σm ρkm Fm + m2 σm              2
                                                                             Fmm + δm (ms )mFms
                                                          
          α,χ                                                       2
                  mητ                                              1  mστ 2
            +              g m (t) − α + (1  −  γ)ρ   σ
                                                    kτ k τσ    Fτ +                 Fτ τ
                m + M PI                                             2 m + M PI
                  m2                                  h
                                                                         α     1 2        δ  i
            +             ρ    σ   σ
                            mτ m τ mτF    +  (1  − γ)   g(t, χ)  − κ(t, ε  ) −  γσ −          F
                m + M PI                                                       2 k 1 − 1/ψ
                                                                                        o
            + πτ (τ ) F (t, m, ms , τ + θτ (τ )) − F + δθχ1−1/ψ D(τ )1−1/ψ F 1−1/θ ,
                                                    


The optimal abatement strategy is given by
                                                                     mη
                                                                               !
                                                           mFm +          F
                                                                    m+M PI τ
                                 αt∗                −1
                                       = κα (t, m, ·)
                                                                (γ − 1)F

and the optimal consumption rate satisfies

                                                                       ∂
                               δ(χ∗t )−1/ψ F −1/θ D(τ )1−1/ψ = −         g(t, χ∗t ).
                                                                      ∂χ




                                                         10
