NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASK YOUR DOCTOR? DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER ADVERTISING OF PHARMACEUTICALS
Michael Sinkinson
Amanda Starc
Working Paper 21045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21045
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable advice and suggestions provided by Jason Abaluck,
Patricia Danzon, Liran Einav, Brett Gordon, Wes Hartmann, Gunter Hitsch, JF Houde, Ginger Jin,
Marc Meredith, Andrew Sfekas, Brad Shapiro, Ashley Swanson, and Bob Town. We would further
like to thank workshop participants at Wharton and Boston College, the Columbia Commuter Strategy
Conference, Marketing Dynamics, IIOC, NBER IO, QME, and the Econometric Society for their comments
and feedback. Starc gratefully acknowledges funding from the Leonard Davis Institute. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael Sinkinson and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Ask Your Doctor? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceuticals
Michael Sinkinson and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 21045
March 2015
JEL No. I11,L1
ABSTRACT
We measure the impact of direct-to-consumer television advertising (DTCA) by drug manufacturers.
Our identification strategy exploits shocks to local advertising markets generated by idiosyncrasies
of the political advertising cycle as well as a regulatory intervention affecting a single product. We
find that a 10% increase in the number of a firm's ads leads to a 0.76% increase in revenue, while the
same increase in rival advertising leads to a 0.55% decrease in firm revenue. Results also indicate
that a 10% increase in category advertising produces a 0.2% revenue increase for non-advertised drugs.
Both the business-stealing and spillover effects would not be detected through OLS. Decomposition
using micro data confirms that the effect is due mostly to new customers as opposed to switching among
current customers. Simulations show that an outright ban on DTCA would have modest effects on
the sales of advertised drugs as well as on non-advertised drugs.
Michael Sinkinson
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
msink@wharton.upenn.edu
Amanda Starc
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Room 303 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
astarc@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

This paper provides new causal estimates of the impact of advertising on consumers and firms using a novel identification strategy. While advertising is a ubiquitous part of life, economic theory
offers few conclusions on its welfare effects, as ads can provide valuable information for consumers or, alternatively, create “spurious product differentiation” (Bagwell 2007). The impact
and consequences of advertising are empirical questions, although estimation is challenging due
to endogeneity, issues in measurement, and heterogeneity across consumers. This paper credibly
shows that advertising can generate both positive spillovers within a product category and businessstealing effects among rivals. This paper provides evidence on the impact of advertising and, therefore, strategic incentives facing firms. In addition, our estimates focus on a policy-relavant product
class: prescription drugs.
Pharmaceutical companies are known for aggressively advertising their products directly to
both physicians and consumers. Direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) of drugs accounted for
over $3 billion in spending in 2012. DTCA has been controversial since the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) loosened restrictions in 1997. While the Federal Trade Commission has encouraged DTCA due to its perceived informational qualities, some in the industry are skeptical,
noting that it can effectively create a wasteful arms race among competitors selling similar products. Industry insiders suggest that strategic interaction among firms is an important component of
direct-to-consumer advertising, with advertising often being purchased to “blunt the impact of ...
competitors’ ads.”1
We identify the effectiveness of TV advertising for anti-cholesterol drugs known as statins.2
Statins are an excellent market to examine the impact of DTCA for a number of reasons. First,
there are a small number of advertised drugs - four during our sample period - allowing us to
explore the importance of competitive interaction between firms. Second, the products, whether
advertised or not, are close substitutes, and idiosyncratic consumer preferences are less important
in this setting. Third, the products are considered effective with few side-effects. Fourth, unique
variation that combines regulatory action and displacement from political advertising allows us
to identify the effect of both own and rival advertising. Finally, the category is economically
important, generating $34 billion in sales in 2007, with substantial ad spending.
Estimating returns to advertising is challenging because firm advertising decisions are endogenous: they depend both on unobserved market characteristics and actions of rival firms. First, firms
are more likely to advertise in markets where advertising is likely to be most effective, due to either
1 Ian

Spatz, formerly of Merck, has been especially critical (Spatz (2011)).
paper focuses on television advertising only, but evidence is presented that the results are not contaminated
by spending in other channels, such as print or radio. Television is the primary medium for advertising in the data,
accounting for over twice the spending in any other channel.
2 This

2

a transitory or permanent demand shock. Interaction between firms also has major implications for
measurement and estimation: if advertising is largely business stealing, firms may be trapped in
a prisoner’s dilemma, where all would prefer to pre-commit to lower levels of advertising. By
contrast, if advertising is characterized by large positive spillovers, firms may have an incentive
to under-advertise. We utilize a model of firm advertising decisions that allows us to quantify the
direction of potential bias and highlight the need for exogenous variation in advertising levels to
measure effectiveness.
Our identification strategy exploits novel variation in advertising due to political campaigning
in the lead-up to the 2008 national election. Idiosyncrasies of the US political process meant that
in January of 2008, voters in New Hampshire, Iowa, and South Carolina saw large quantities of
political ads, while in May of 2008, political advertising was concentrated in Indiana, Pennsylvania and North Carolina. In the months leading up to the general election, advertising was heaviest
in “swing states” in the presidential contest, and where House and Senate races were most competitive.3 Our first-stage estimates imply that the thousands of political ads aired through the election
cycle had a significant displacement effect on DTCA. However, this shock affected all products.
To separately estimate the impact of own and rival advertising, we interact political advertising
with a regulatory action that temporarily halted a Lipitor campaign for part of 2008.
Graphical analyses show that political primaries are associated with statistically significant
reductions in drug sales using market-month-drug level usage data from Truven Medstat. Our
main regression results show an own-advertising elasticity of revenue with respect to the quantity
of ads of .0764 for a sample of privately insured consumers. We also provide estimates of revenue
elasticities with respect to rival advertising: here, we estimate an elasticity of -.0548. We separately
estimate the impact on non-advertised branded and generic drugs and estimate an elasticity with
respect to branded advertising of 0.02. Therefore, advertising has a business-stealing effect among
branded, advertised drugs, but a positive spillover effect to non-advertised drugs.
Elasticities are similar in a sample of Medicare Part D beneficiaries, and we cannot reject that
our elasticities are the same across samples. We also examine heterogeneity across different subsets
of consumers in the Part D sample. We estimate much larger elasticities for new consumers who
have no history of statin use. Both data sets tell a consistent story: DTCA has an economically
important impact on drug sales. Competitive interaction between rivals is an important feature of
the market, and rival advertising can have a significant business-stealing effect among some drugs,
while having a beneficial effect on others.
We use our estimates in a number of policy simulations. First, we show that the estimated
3 While

the list of swing states varies from election to election and there is no clear definition, Politico determined
that the 2008 presidential race was most competitive in Colorado, Florida, Indiana, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire,
New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. Source: http://www.politico.com/convention/swing
state.html

3

business-stealing effect is economically meaningful: revenue for branded advertised drugs would
21-24% higher absent the effect of rival advertising. Second, banning DTCA harms sales of unadvertised drugs. For advertised drugs, business stealing mutes the impact of a ban: the net effect
of eliminating both the positive and negative effects of advertising is a modest 2.6% reduction in
quantity for Lipitor and only a 1% reduction for Crestor.
While we believe our paper is the first to exploit this form of political advertising as an instrument for drug advertising, we build on a substantial literature examining the impact of DTCA.4
Previous researchers have found significant evidence for the market-expanding or spillover effects
of DTCA on outcomes such as doctors visits, drug sales, and drug adherence (Berndt 2005, Jin
and Iizuka 2005, Wosinska 2002, Wosinska 2005, Rosenthal et al. 2003, Berndt et al. 1995). The
paper closest to our study is Shapiro (2014), which estimates economically significant spillover
effects in the anti-depressant market using a cross-border strategy and structural model of demand.
Our paper is consistent with these previous studies, while finding an additional, economically important role for business stealing in the statin market. This paper also contributes to a literature
that attempts to measure the causal impact of advertising. Recent work (Lewis and Rao 2013,
Blake, Nosko and Tadelis 2013) has utilized randomized experiments on online platforms. Similar
to these studies and work by Ackerberg (2001), our natural experiment finds heterogeneity in the
effect of advertising in a setting with plausibly exogenous variation in advertising levels. While
our focus is on the statin market, the identification strategy we propose is likely to be useful in
many other product markets.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the market and setting. Section 3
presents a of model of strategic interaction and explores potential estimation biases. Section 4
describes the data and empirical strategy, while Section 5 presents results and robustness checks.
Section 6 details simulations, and Section 7 concludes.

2

Setting

Cholesterol is a waxy substance that is both created by the body and found in food. Low-density
lipoprotein (LDL, or "bad" cholesterol) is associated with a higher risk of heart attack and stroke.
While cholesterol can usually be well controlled with diet and exercise, drug therapy can also
be effective. A large class of drugs - statins - work by preventing the synthesis of cholesterol in
the liver. Statins are big business: each year during our sample period, Lipitor and Crestor alone
had nearly $15 billion in combined sales. The first statin on the market was Mevacor, which was
introduced in 1987 by Merck. Mevacor was followed by a large number of “me-too” drugs: similar,
4A

recent literature has examined the effect of political advertising in political campaigns and explores supply side
competition. (see Gordon and Hartmann 2013 and Gordon and Hartmann 2014).

4

but chemically distinct, compounds with the same mechanism of action. Zocor was introduced by
Merck in 1991, as was Pravachol.
During 2007 and 2008, four branded anti-cholesterol medications were being advertised. The
two largest products by both advertising and sales were Lipitor and Crestor, while Vytorin and
Zetia were also marketed to consumers during this time period. Lipitor was manufactured by
Pfizerstarting in 1997, and Crestor was manufactured by AstraZeneca starting in 2003. Pfizer
marketed Lipitor to consumers aggressively beginning in 2001. According to trade press and
news, this heralded an increase in the “’arms race’ of drug marketing.”5 Zocor’s patent expired
in 2006, and heavy generic competition began shortly thereafter. This hurt the sales of not only
Zocor, but also Crestor and Lipitor, as cheaper generic substitutes flooded the market and Zocor
gave aggressive rebates to insurers to keep consumers taking their product. Prescription drugs
without patent protection are rarely advertised by their manufacturers.6 Lipitor’s patent expired at
the end of November 2011 and Crestor’s is scheduled to expire in 2016.
Manufacturer strategies for differentiating their products often rely on results from clinical
trials showing efficacy. Zocor marked an early use of clinical trials in marketing drugs (largely
to physicians): Merck showed in the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S) that Zocor
prevented additional heart attacks among patients who had already suffered a heart attack. In April
2008, AstraZeneca released the results of the ECLIPSE trial, which favored Crestor relative to
Lipitor for some sub-populations of patients,7 corresponding to the increase in Crestor marketing.
Two issues affected the marketing of statins during our sample period. First, the ENHANCE
trial results led to the end of advertising of Vytorin and Zetia in 2008.8 The study showed that
Vytorin (Zetia and Zocor combined) was no better than Zocor alone.9 The American Academy
of Cardiologists recommended that doctors no longer prescribe Vytorin and strongly discouraging
the use of Zetia.10 The effect on Vytorin’s market share was dramatic, falling 10% immediately
and 40% over the course of 2008 in our sample data; Zetia sales fell by 5% immediately.11 Second, Lipitor halted its advertising campaign featuring Dr. Robert Jarvik (developer of the Jarvik
artificial heart) in April of 2008. Many, including Congress, had concluded that the advertisements
5 For a more complete historical narrative, see Jack (2009). While initially Pfizer priced aggressively and detailed
heavily, they eventually turned to DTCA as a way to expand the market and gain market share.
6 This is in contrast to over-the-counter medications, which are often advertised even though an exact molecular
substitute is available. See Bronnenberg et al. (2014) for details.
7 They use the results of this trial in marketing. See, for example, http://www.crestor.com/c/about-crestor/crestorclinical-studies.aspx, and Faergeman et al. (2008) for the clinical trial results.
8 Congress specifically sent a letter to the FDA to challenge marketing of Vytorin (Mathews (2008)).
9 The study was completed in 2006. See Greenland and Lloyd-Jones (2008)
10 Davidson and Robinson (2007)
11 By contrast, a recent, much larger study (18,000 subjects vs. just 750) found Vytorin to be more effective than
simvastatin (Zocor) alone. See Kolata (2014) for news coverage and Blazing et al. (2014) for study design. We do not
take a strong stand on the role of these studies except to point out that the findings are often referenced in DTCA and
this advertising, in addition to the information content of the studies themselves, may affect demand.

5

were misleading.12 As a result, Crestor was the only statin airing TV spots from April 2008 until
August 2008. In 2008, Lipitor’s sales fell by 2% and Crestor’s sales rose by nearly 29%.13

2.1

Demand

Statins are widely covered by insurance plans. Most consumers with employer-sponsored health
insurance have prescription drug coverage as part of their benefits package.14 Insurance coverage
is usually generous, and consumers will face only a small fraction of a branded statin’s $3/day
price tag. Consumers in employer-sponsored insurance tend to have a limited number of choices
(Dafny, Ho and Varela 2013) and are unlikely to select into insurance plans based on their coverage
or cost sharing for particular drugs.
By contrast, most seniors obtain their drug coverage through the Medicare Part D program.
Consumers in Medicare Part D face a very non-linear insurance contract: there is an initial deductible, followed by (an average of) 25% co-payment rates up to an initial coverage limit. Once
a consumer hits the initial coverage limit, they must pay for all of their expenditure in the “donut
hole” or coverage gap until they meet a catastrophic cap. The donut hole is now closing due to
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), but this basic structure would have been in
place during our sample period. There are many plans available to most consumers and these plans
are likely to vary substantially in terms of their formularies, that is, the specific drugs covered by
the plan.
A savvy consumer will choose a plan based on their expected drug demand over the course
of the year, and consumer price sensitivity will be a function of complex plan features (Dalton,
Gowrisankaran and Town (2014); Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf (2014); Abaluck, Gruber and
Swanson (2015)). Meanwhile, insurers have incentives to steer consumers to lower cost drugs and
manufacturers provide rebates to plans in exchange for preferred positioning on formularies. This
has led to lower prices for branded drugs (Duggan and Scott Morton (2010)). Therefore, plan
selection and copay structure are more likely to be a concern in the Medicare Part D setting.
Finally, to obtain a statin, a patient must have a prescription. Manufacturers advertise their
products to physicians, through detailing, as well as directly to consumers. Physicians and consumers may disagree about the best course of treatment, and asymmetric information creates the
potential for physician agency to be an important feature of prescription drug markets. Prescription drug manufacturers, aware of the influence of physicians, engage in substantial detailing at
the doctor level in addition to DTCA (detailing is known as a “push” technique, as opposed to
“pull” techniques that target the consumer). Both plan selection and physician agency are outside
12 Dr.

Jarvik was not a licensed cardiologist and was replaced by a stunt double in some of the TV spots.
12.
14 This insurance coverage may be provided by the consumer’s health insurer or by a pharmacy benefits manager.
13 See

6

the scope of this paper. While they influence the market, their effects are likely to remain fixed
over our short time period, allowing us to focus on measuring the impact of DTCA given consumer
price sensitivity and agency.

3

Firm Advertising Decisions and Estimation Bias

The direction of bias in OLS estimates is ambiguous in the context of firm advertising decisions.
Consider a static, simultaneous move advertising game among two single-product firms with demand for drugs j ∈ 1, 2 given by
D j (a j , a− j , ξ ),
where a j is firm j’s advertising level and a− j is rival advertising. While we assume this game
takes place across many markets, we will suppress market notation. The vector ξ is a set of shocks
to demand for each good, ξ = {ξ1 , ξ2 }. The per-unit cost of advertising is c, and profit per unit
sold is ρ.
In equilibrium, firms choose a j such that the marginal benefit of advertising equals its marginal
cost. Firms observe their demand shock, but not their rivals’, when choosing their advertising. The
econometrician observes the realized D j and the chosen a j for all firms across many markets and
over time, but never the vector ξ .15
The econometrician observes many outcomes from this game and estimates the demand elasticity of own and rival advertising, using a specification such as
ln(D j ) = α + β1 ln(1 + a j ) + β2 ln(1 + a− j ) + ε j .

(1)

Because the demand shock ξ is unobserved to the econometrician, OLS estimates of β suffer
from omitted variables bias.16
Advertising levels depend on consumer responsiveness to ads, which will in turn depend on the
functional form and parameters of the demand system.17 In the case of a single firm advertising (so
that a− j = 0 for that firm), optimal advertising choices that create a positive correlation between
15 Appendix

A lists regularity assumptions for the analysis that follows.
∂D
∂D
It is common to think of the shock as positive in the sense that ∂ ξ j > 0 and rival shocks as negative ∂ ξ j < 0 ,
j
−j
as we will do here. It is also typically the case that this heterogeneity is positively correlated with the input of interest,
∂a
e.g. ξ j > 0, such as in the returns to schooling literature, although this need not be the case in general.
j
17 Returns to advertising need not be linear and may depend on relative market shares. For example, in the empirical application in Dubé, Hitsch and Manchanda 2005, the authors assume thresholds and diminishing returns to
advertising.
16

7

demand shocks and advertising lead to upward bias in OLS estimates. By contrast, a negative
correlation between demand shocks and advertising leads to downward bias in OLS estimates.
In the case of multiple firms advertising, the levels of a are equilibrium objects of a game, where
a firm’s best response to rival advertising may be to either increase or decrease its own advertising.
Consider an example: Lipitor has a positive demand shock in a market, which increases their
return to advertising. Lipitor’s heightened advertising increases Crestor’s return from advertising,
so both firms advertise at high levels. This would create positive correlation between Crestor
ads and positive demand shocks for Lipitor. Such correlation would lead the econometrician to
conclude that Crestor advertising has a positive spillover effect on Lipitor, when that is not the
case. The strategic interactions among firms can therefore lead to correlations between advertising
levels and unobservables that result in upward or downward bias in OLS estimates.
From a welfare perspective, understanding the forces that shape equilibrium outcomes is critical. If advertising generates spillovers, we would expect it to be under-supplied in equilibrium
relative to the social optimum: the advertising firm cannot capture all of the surplus generated.
Similarly, if advertising is business-stealing, it would be oversupplied, as private firms do not account for the negative effect it has on rivals. This latter case is an example of a prisoner’s dilemma
where both firms would prefer to commit to lower levels of advertising, while in the former case
both firms would do best to have a joint marketing agreement.18

3.1

Model Simulation

We simulate a Logit formulation of the above setting to explore estimation bias. Our formulation
has the following utility functions in each simulated market m

ui jm = α j + β1 ln(1 + a jm ) + β2 ln(1 + a− jm ) + ξ jm + εi jm
ui0m = εi0m ,
where ui0 denotes the utility of the outside good. Assuming εi jm is i.i.d. type I extreme value,
market shares D jm can be computed given parameters and advertising levels using the standard
Logit formula. Firm profits in this model are given by π jm = ρD jm − ca jm , where ρ is the margin
on an individual unit. We solve for advertising levels in each market such that both firm’s firstorder conditions are satisfied and create a dataset containing demand and advertising data. We
then estimate equation (1), and compare the estimated elasticity with respect to own and rival
advertising with analytic values (full details are in Appendix A).
18 This

is nicely illustrated in the market for antidepressants by Shapiro 2014.

8

We simulate 200 markets and optimal advertising decisions for both firms at a range of parameter values for β1 and β2 . The plots below show the difference between estimated and analytic
elasticities. The level of the surface indicates the bias in different areas of the parameter space:
it is apparent that there can be upward (greater than zero) or downward (less than zero) bias in
both own and rival advertising elasticities. In no simulation were own and rival elasticities both
estimated with less than 5% bias.19
Figure 1: Simulations of OLS Estimate Bias

4

Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1

Identification Strategy

We exploit shocks from political advertising in markets over time. These shocks are a result of the
staggered nature of the party nomination processes and variation in competitiveness of different
races in the general election. The United States holds quadrennial general elections for the presidency, which coincide with elections for all seats of the House of Representatives, numerous state
governors, and approximately one-third of seats in the Senate. The election is held on the Tuesday
following the first Monday of the month of November in the election year. Presidential campaigns
begin well over a year before the general election as candidates seek their party’s nomination,
which is conferred by delegates voting at each party’s national convention. Individual states and
state political parties determine the timing and format of the contest to determine the state’s delegation to each party’s national convention, with the majority of states using government-run primary
elections, and the remainder using party-run caucuses. The staggered nature of the primaries increases the national attention on and importance of early contests in Iowa and New Hampshire,
19 Table

11 shows estimates and standard errors for a particular set of parameter values.

9

as well as South Carolina, Florida and Nevada.20 In 2008, the Democratic party contest between
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama extended into June, while John McCain secured the Republican
nomination by March of 2008. Figure 2 highlights the staggered nature of the process by showing
political ad concentrations for January to June, 2008.
During the general election, the “winner take all” nature of the Electoral College means that
political advertising in swing states is likely to be far more valuable than in “safe states”, leading
to large variations in the numbers of ads different markets are exposed to (Gordon and Hartmann,
2013). For example, in October of 2008, New York, NY had 0 television ads for presidential candidates (547 for Governor/House/Senate candidates), while Cleveland, OH had 8,073 television
ads for presidential candidates (and another 2,439 for Governor/House/Senate candidates). Political campaigns have preferential rules for buying advertising and both them and outside influence
groups often purchase premium advertising slots that can pre-empt previously purchased advertising.21 The 2008 election cycle was notable for breaking records for spending by candidates,
with Barack Obama alone spending more than the total spent by both presidential candidates in
2004. The lengthy primary process and the rejection of public funding both contributed to the vast
amounts of money spent during the campaign cycle.
The Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 established several regulations over the purchasing of advertising by political campaigns during our time period. In particular, in the 45
days leading to a primary or 60 days leading to a general election, broadcast outlets can only
charge qualified political campaigns their “lowest unit rate” (LUR) for a given class of advertising
(e.g. non-premptible, preemptible with notice, or run-of-schedule). They are further required to
offer “reasonable access” to federal office candidates, and “equal opportunity” for candidates in
non-federal races. More recently, advertising agencies are actively warning clients about “heavy
pre-emption of existing advertising schedules”22 due to the steady increase in election spending
and the 2010 Citizens United Supreme Court ruling.23
While political advertising provides useful variation that allows us to identify the effect of
advertising, we are interested in both the effect of the focal firm’s advertising and their rivals’ advertising. To separately identify the two effects, we use an additional shock specific to the statin
market. As discussed above, Pfizer was forced to halt its consumer advertising in mid-2008. In
20 New Hampshire law stipulates that no other state can have a primary earlier: “The presidential primary election
shall be held on the second Tuesday in March or on a date selected by the secretary of state which is seven days or
more immediately preceding the date on which any other state shall hold a similar election, whichever is earlier, of
each year when a president of the United States is to be elected or the year previous.” NH RSA 653:9
21 See the discussion in Gordon and Hartmann (2014) regarding how political campaigns purchase advertisements.
22 “Navigating Media Through Political Season”,
Mark Buchele, Gragg Advertising.
URL:
http://www.graggadv.com/navigating-media-political-season/
23 This is also explored in Moshary (2014), whose author examines differential pricing among political action committees (PACs). She further argues that LUR regulation may lead stations to withhold some slots.

10

order to separately identify the effect of own and rival advertising, we interact the political advertising instrument with the timing of this regulatory action. We assume that the relative impact of this
regulatory shock on displacement from political advertising across markets is uncorrelated with
drug demand; this allows us to compare the effect of political advertising shocks in markets with
substantial Crestor advertising but no Lipitor advertising to markets where political advertising
displaces both Lipitor and Crestor advertising.

4.2

Data

We combine two sources of advertising data. First, data from Kantar Media contain both the number of ads and the level of spending for 2007-2008 at the month-drug level for every designated
market area (DMA) in the United States. We also have a record of every political ad (house, presidential, senatorial, and gubernatorial) aired during the 2007-2008 election cycle in every DMA
from the Wisconsin Advertising Project, which we normalize to a 30-second length and aggregate
into monthly figures.
The number of political ads in a market-month varies widely during the Jan 2007-Nov 2008
time period: half of the month-market observations during this period have zero ads, while some
markets have over 20,000 political ads in a month (e.g. Denver, CO in October of 2008). Figure 2
shows the progression of the political ad shocks for the first six months of 2008, where each DMA
is represented by a circle sized proportionally to the number of political ads. The mean number
of monthly ads by market from Jan 2007 to Nov 2008 is 535, with a standard deviation of 1600.
By contrast, there are fewer drug ads in general: when combining national ads with local ads, the
average number of statin ads aired in a market during a month is 98 with a standard deviation of
59. (“National” and “local” refer to the level of the ad buy, not the content.) Figure 3 shows the
total number of monthly national ads for the advertised statins during our sample period, while
Figure 4 shows the highest number of monthly local ads for each of the drugs (the minimum is
always zero).24 Local advertising can be a substantial portion of a firm’s total advertising. While
some markets receive no additional advertising, the maximum amount of local advertising is often
higher than the national advertising, indicating that a substantial proportion of advertising comes
from local ads and that there is substantial geographic variation.
We combine this advertising data with prescription drug usage and revenue data from two
sources. First, we used Truven MarketScan data, which draws from a convenience sample of large,
self-insured firms. These data represent individuals enrolled in traditional, employer-sponsored in24 National

advertising levels are driven by a number of factors, including the release of clinical trial data that may
impact demand. For example, Vytorin and Zetia quit advertising after the release of the ENHANCE trial (Greenland
and Lloyd-Jones (2008)) and Crestor increased advertising after the release of the ECLIPSE study (Faergeman et al.
(2008)).

11

surance. Our sample consists of market-level aggregated revenues, quantities, and covered lives.25
Summary statistics for the data sources are shown in Table 1. We utilize data covering 189 DMAs
and 17 months, spanning July of 2007-November of 2008. The sample is younger than the population on the whole, and a relatively small proportion of this population takes statins. The largest
branded drug captures just less than 5% of the total market, defined as all enrollees in the Truven
sample.
We supplement this data with data from the Medicare Part D program, where we have individual demographic information. Our data represent a 10% random sample of all Medicare Part D
beneficiaries. This data allows for tracking of individual consumers. We restrict our sample to the
same 189 DMAs, 17 months, and four drugs in the Truven data. We then aggregate the data to the
product-month-DMA level and perform a parallel analysis. The combination of data sets allows us
to explore heterogeneity in the effectiveness of DTCA and provides additional confidence in the
magnitude of our empirical results.
To test for covariate balance, we utilize the Part D data. For simplicity, we split the sample into
markets that experience more or less than the median level of political ads during our entire sample
period. Table 2 provides summary statistics; the unit of observation is the DMA. We consider age,
gender, and race as well as mortality rates (a crude measure of health) and dual eligible status
(a crude measure of poverty). None of the differences between the two groups are statistically
different with the exception of % dual eligible. Consumers in markets with fewer political ads
seem to be slightly poorer; if anything, income effects would only increase drug demand in above
median markets and thus bias our results toward zero, assuming prescription drugs are a normal
good.

5

Results

5.1

First-Stage Results

Political advertising is plausibly exogenous: the political primary and caucus schedule is set independently of any prescription drug market factors and the competitiveness of specific races is
unlikely to be correlated with the market for statins. We next demonstrate that the level of political
advertising predicts drug advertising. Figure 5 shows a scatter plot highlighting the relationship
between political advertising and statin advertising, where observations are de-meaned by market
and drug-year-month, and then binned to create a scatter plot of the data. This scatter plot shows
the relationship between political advertising and drug advertising looking across markets within
a drug-month pair. For example, this shows that an increase in political ads in Iowa in January
25 We

aggregate MSAs to DMAs to arrive at our analysis data set.

12

of 2008 leads to lower Crestor (Lipitor) advertising as compared to the level of Crestor (Lipitor)
advertising in other DMAs in January of 2008.26
In order to estimate the impact of own and rival ads, we need an additional source of identifying
variation. Figure 13 describes how regulatory action combines with political advertising to give us
sufficient advertising variation to identify both effects. The right-hand panel shows the relationship
between political and drug advertising for all drugs except Lipitor. There is a strong negative
correlation between the two series during our entire sample period. By contrast, the left-hand
panel shows the relationship between political advertising and Lipitor advertising. During the time
period excluding the regulatory action months, the effect of political advertising is still strong
and negative. However, during the regulatory action period, Lipitor runs no ads for plausibly
exogenous reasons. This additional variation allows us to separately identify the effect of own and
rival advertising.
Table 3 presents a regression of the log of the number of statin advertisements for a drug in a
market on the log of the number of political advertisements (in 1000s). The level of observation is
a DMA-month for January 2007 until November 2008. We include a variety of fixed effects across
different specifications. The OLS results show that a 10% increase in political advertising leads to
a 1.2% decrease in statin advertising. The effect is slightly larger if you do not account for month
fixed effects. To account for the fact that drug ads cannot be negative, the last columns of Table 3
estimates a Tobit model. We find a significantly larger effect: the elasticity of an individual drug’s
ads with respect to political ads in a market is -0.2598 in our preferred specification, implying that
a 10% increase in political ads decreases each drug’s ads by 2.6%. Appendix Table 14 shows the
analogous results using levels instead of logs, with all results strongly negative and significant.
We address four possible concerns about this strategy. First, since the political cycle is known
in advance, firms could have substituted ads to months before or after a market received a large
number of political ads. In Table 13, we show that leads and lags of political advertising are not
predictive of drug ads in the current month, indicating that there was not substitution to earlier
or later months. Second, firms may substitute from TV advertising to other local media (radio,
newspaper) when political ads displace television advertising. In Table 12, we show that total local
drug ad spending is not affected by political ads once local TV ads are controlled for.27 Third,
firms may modify their detailing plans due to the displacement of their local TV ads by political
ads. While we do not have data to directly test for this, discussions with industry managers led
26 In our main specifications, the endogenous regressor is the total level of advertising, rather than local advertising alone. Local and national advertising are positively correlated (the correlation coefficient is 0.4). However, the
variation we exploit is all from the local advertising levels; we control for product fixed effects and allow for flexible
product time trends.
27 The results appear to show that local TV ads and other local media are complements, not substitutes, and is
consistent with the political cycle being a shock to all forms of media in a local market.

13

us to conclude that this is infeasible, as detailing plans are set at the annual level and cannot be
quickly scaled up or down at the market level.28 Finally, we do not believe that drug firms are
responding to political advertising shocks by buying more advertising in less desirable time slots,
which would create measurement error in the number of effective ads in our data. The relationship
between political advertising and drug advertising is largely driven by availability and pre-emption
as opposed to prices.

5.2

Graphical Evidence

First, we present a number of simple graphical analyses. We initially focus on unadvertised drugs,
for which there is only one causal effect to estimate. During the time leading up to a primary,
consumers are exposed to fewer ads for Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia. If these ads have
spillover effects on unadvertised (often generic) drugs, we would expect a drop in sales at the time
of the primaries. The timing of primaries is staggered, giving a simple test of the effect. Figure 6
shows the effect of primaries on overall market share growth for unadvertised drugs. While sales
are stable in the months before the primary, there is a statistically significant reduction in sales
growth concurrent to the primary. We argue that the natural mechanism for this reduction is a
drop in statin advertising. Appendix Figure 14 shows a placebo test where we artificially move
primaries to 2009 and find no effect.
We are also interested in the effect on branded drugs. Here, the competitive interaction makes
interpretation more difficult. While the political process displaces Lipitor ads, it displaces Crestor
ads as well, and we will only be able to measure the net effect without additional variation or
assumptions. However, some primaries take place during the months in which Lipitor was not
advertising due to regulation. Given this additional fact, we would expect the direct effect of
the primary to be larger for Crestor than for Lipitor. That is exactly what we see in Figure 7; the
magnitude of the effect of primaries on Crestor sales is nearly twice as large as the effect on Lipitor
sales. During this time period, Crestor and Lipitor are the primary advertisers. The overall effect is
negative: the effect of a firm’s advertising is not outweighed by its rival’s advertising. Furthermore,
these results imply that the absence of DTCA would lead to a drop in overall drug sales.
We observe political advertising in 1,434 of our 3,200 market-month combinations. Because
political advertising displaces drug advertising, we expect prescription fills to be lower in markets
with political advertising, just as we expect lower sales in primary months. Table 15 confirms this
intuition. In the first two columns, we show that prescription fills of Crestor and Lipitor are approximately 3% lower in markets with political advertising, controlling for DMA and drug fixed effects.
28 A

greater concern is that Lipitor detailing may have increased during the regulatory action period. This could
potentially bias our estimates of the effect of own advertising toward zero. However, our results are robust to including
both a regulatory action dummy and its interaction with product fixed effects in both stages of the model.

14

The final two columns explore the impact of both political advertising and regulatory action. In
column 3, we show that the regulator action does not have a differential impact on Crestor fills
(the omitted category). The regulatory action has a large, negative impact on Lipitor fills, which
we attribute to the lack of drug advertising. Finally, column 4 looks at the interaction of political
advertising and regulatory action. We restrict the sample to the months affected by the regulatory
action. The positive coefficient on “Any Political Ads” implies that there is higher demand for
Lipitor and Crestor overall in markets with political advertising relative to other markets in the
same time period. At the same time, political advertising only decreases Crestor ads during this
period, and the interaction term captures the causal effect of lower drug advertising. Furthermore,
this specification indicates that strategic interaction may be important.
Figure 8 explores this idea by separating the effect of having any political advertising in a
market on market shares of Crestor and Lipitor, first outside of the regulatory action, and then
within. The data show a consistent pattern: political advertising has a negative impact on advertised
drugs, and this effect persists for Crestor during the regulatory action period, but not for Lipitor,
which appears to benefit from the displacement of rival ads.

5.3

Regression Results

We utilize the identifying variation in a regression framework to estimate elasticities. We estimate
the following equation:
log(revenue jtm ) = β0 + β1 log(1 + ad jtm ) + β2 log(1 + ∑ adktm ) + β3 X + ε jtm ,
k6= j

where X represents a vector of covariates. In all specifications, we include product and market
fixed effects. We control for time trends in product demand in two ways: drug-year fixed effects
and a drug-specific time trend. Figure 12 shows that there are important time trends during our
sample period: Lipitor’s market share is steadily decreasing over the entire sample period. There
does not seem to be a distinct, national break at the time that Pfizer pulled the Jarvik ads. At
the same time, Crestor’s market share is increasing, though not as dramatically. Because we will
eventually utilize the regulatory shock to Lipitor advertising, we cannot allow for finer (monthlyor quarterly-) product-specific fixed effects. However, we can can allow for a linear and quadratic,
product-specific time trend that approximates the data reasonably well. In Table 20, we show
that higher order, drug-specific time trends have a negligible effect on the estimates. Because the
specification is log-log, we can interpret the coefficients as elasticities.
Table 4 shows the results of OLS specifications for advertised drugs. The first three columns
use contemporaneous ads and revenues; the next three regresses this month’s revenue on the aver-

15

ages of this month’s and the previous month’s advertising levels. Previous research has shown that
advertising can be cumulative and/or have a lagged effect (Dubé, Hitsch and Manchanda 2005),
but that the effects of DTCA can depreciate quickly (Iizuka and Jin (2007)). Furthermore, the
need to obtain a prescription may delay sales after ad impressions. In each regression, the level
of analysis is the DMA-month-drug. We include each of the drugs advertised during our sample
period from July 2007 through November 2008 that are classified in the same in Truven Redbook
class 059: Lipitor, Crestor, Vytorin, and Zetia. The dependent variable is logged drug revenue per
insured individual in the market. Regardless of controls, the OLS regressions consistently show
a small, but statistically significant and positive effect of DTCA on sales. The specifications that
allow for a product specific time trend are typically smaller in magnitude.
We document the causal impact of advertising in Table 5. We instrument own and rival advertising levels using (i) the level of political ads, as well as second- and third-order polynomials
of political ads, (ii) a dummy for the congressional action that halted Lipitor advertising, and (iii)
an interaction of this dummy with the polynomials of political advertising. Our instruments are
remarkably strong predictors of own and rival advertising. The test statistic of joint significance
of the excluded instruments in the first stage of our main specifications is 493.66 for own advertising and 67.30 for rival advertising. Table 17 shows that the partial F-statistic is 2102.8 for own
advertising and 2865.17 for rival advertising, alleviating weak instrument concerns (Rossi 2014).
The excluded instruments also have substantial power if we omit the regulatory action dummy, as
shown in columns 3 and 4.29
Based on the results in the previous table, the OLS analysis underestimates the effects of own
and rival advertising. The own advertising effect in column 5 (.0064) is less than 10% of the
effect measured in the IV specification (.0764). Similarly, we find substantial evidence of business
stealing in the IV specifications that is absent from the OLS results. As discussed in Section 3,
the direction of OLS bias is ambiguous, but in this case it appears that the strategic interaction
between firms leads to the effect of own advertising being biased downward, while the effect of
rival advertising is biased upward.30
Unsurprisingly, we find that the effects are attenuated as we look at a broader window. The effect of contemporaneous advertising in the drug-year fixed effects regression is the largest (0.0808),
while the two-month (0.0764) moving average is smaller. Despite this attenuation, the results are
stable across specifications. While the estimates that allow for product-specific time trends are
smaller in magnitude, we cannot reject that they are statistically the same. We focus on the two29 We

can also include the regulatory action dummy and its interaction with product fixed effects in both stages of
the model and obtain estimates almost identical to the specification in columns 3 and 4.
30 One other possible explanation for the bias we find is that measurement error could be attenuating the OLS
estimates. Alternatively, we measure a local average treatment effect that captures the short run elasticity of sales with
respect to advertising expenditures and the long run elasticity may be smaller in magnitude.

16

month trailing average specification with drug specific time trends moving forward. We believe
this flexibly controls for trends in drug demand over time, and allows for a sufficient lag between
advertising impressions and the realization of demand. Our preferred own-revenue elasticity estimates for advertised drugs is 0.0764, from column 5. This implies that a 10% increase in advertising would yield a 0.76% increase in revenue. Our preferred cross-revenue elasticity estimate
is -0.055. Appendix Table 20 shows similar results if the outcome of interest is quantity (market share) instead of revenue. These results are consistent with a model in which advertising is
business-stealing and may create an arms race.
Table 6 estimates the spillover effects for unadvertised drugs. Columns 3 and 4 replicate the
last set of specifications in Table 5 in which two-month moving averages of drug advertising are
the independent variables of interest. However, columns 1 and 2 present OLS and IV specifications
in which logged revenue of unadvertised antihyperlipidemia drugs (as classified by Redbook) is
the dependent variable. In the OLS specifications, we find no effect of rival advertising. Once we
instrument for advertising, we find evidence that advertising has a small, but significant spillover
effect. A 10% increase in advertising for the class leads to a 0.23% increase in sales of unadvertised
drugs. Our results support a model in which advertising has largely persuasive or business-stealing
effects, but also spillovers to unadvertised drugs, consistent with informational effects.
A back-of-envelope calculation shows that our estimates are quite sensible.31 Outside of the
regulatory action period, Lipitor spent just under $10M per month on DTCA in 2008. A 1%
increase in advertising would represent $98,980 in extra spending.32 US revenue for 2008 was
$6.3B, and their financial statements indicate that costs of sales were between 16.8% and 46.9%
of revenue.33 Our elasticity estimates are 0.0764 and 0.0543 for the Truven and Part D samples,
respectively. This implies that a 1% increase in advertising ($98,980) increases total revenues net
of costs by $212,984-$333,715 using the Truven sample, or $151,374-$237,182 using the Part D
sample. While this does not exactly equate marginal costs and marginal revenues, it is a partial
elasticity: it holds rival advertising fixed. A 1% increase in Crestor’s advertising would reduce
Lipitor’s revenues net of costs by $152,769-$239,366 using the Truven sample estimates. This
highlights the role of strategic interactions in choosing advertising levels.34
31 In

this calculation, we assume that ad prices are constant, so that an increase in spending is equivalent to an
increase in the number of ads. Additional data are from Pfizer and AstraZeneca accounting filings for the year 2008.
32 This is roughly equivalent to a single national ad.
33 Direct costs of sales were 16.8% of revenue, while selling expenses were 30.1% of revenue. To the extent that
selling expenses are commissions paid to their sales force, they may be variable costs for Pfizer.
34 The OLS estimates would imply that a 1% increase in Lipitor advertising would increase revenues net of costs by
at most $28,829.

17

5.4

Part D Sample

In order to further explore the effect of DTCA, we utilize Medicare Part D claims data. Medicare
Part D covers a population that is significantly older and sicker than the Truven MarketScan data.
Furthermore, the contractual features of plans do more to alter utilization or steer consumers towards particular drugs. This analysis gives us an opportunity to compare elasticities across settings
and explore additional heterogeneity in the data.
In all our specifications, we aggregate the Part D claims data, which are individual-prescription
fill level observations, to the DMA-product-month level. We keep only those markets for which
we have Truven data, leaving us with the same number of observations in each specification and
identical first stage regressions. Any differences in the estimates are due to differences in relative
sales across the two samples.
Table 16 shows the results of OLS specifications for advertised drugs. The results are remarkably similar in magnitude to the estimates in Table 4, though slightly larger. The differences
between the estimates are rarely statistically significant. In the IV regressions in Table 7, the own
advertising elasticities range from 0.0487-0.147 for the two-month trailing average, while the estimates from the employer-sponsored sample ranged from 0.076-0.125. In both samples, we see
significant evidence of business stealing effects, though the (negative) effect of rival advertising is
smaller in magnitude than the (positive) effect of own advertising. The estimates for the Part D
sample are more precise; we cannot reject that the estimated elasticities are the same. Replicating
our main results in this sample provides additional confidence in both the qualitative pattern and
empirical magnitudes.
The Part D data also allows us to explore heterogeneity in the effect of DTCA across different
demographic groups, utilization patterns, and insurance regimes. Of primary interest is whether
these effects are driven by new consumers, with no history of statin use, or by switchers, who may
be more likely to try an alternative statin after seeing an ad. In order to quantify the separate effects
on consumers without a history of statin use, we focus on revenue from new prescriptions. We
restrict the claims data to first time prescriptions, defined by the first fill of Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin,
or Zetia. We then collapse the data to the market-month-product level and replicate the same
analysis. We have slightly fewer observations as we do not observe “new” prescriptions in every
DMA-month-product cell. Otherwise, the specifications are the same as previous specifications
but utilize a different dependent variable.
The results are presented in Table 8. We report specifications with product specific time trends.
There are two key observations. First, the own advertising elasticity is five times as large in magnitude for new consumers (0.288 versus 0.054 for the entire sample). Second, the rival elasticities

18

are larger in magnitude among new consumers as well (0.149 vs. 0.0401 for the entire sample).35
We conclude that the effect is largely being driven by new consumers, rather than switchers. This
has important implications for firm strategy, which we hope to explore in future research.
We also explore additional dimensions of heterogeneity in the Appendix. Medicare Part D has
four phases, corresponding to total spending. What phase a consumer ends the year in reflects both
the marginal cost of drugs to the consumers and their relative utilization. We show that advertising
does not have a significant effect on consumption for the sickest consumers - those who end the
year in the “catastrophic coverage” phase of Medicare Part D.36 Finally, consumers can choose
between two alternative types of insurance plans under the Part D program. They can enroll in a
stand-alone Part D plan, or a comprehensive Medicare Advantage (MA) plan. The MA plans tend
to have more supply-side restrictions, and advertising has a smaller impact among these enrollees.

5.5

Robustness Checks

We perform a number of additional analyses and robustness checks. We present four key sets of
specifications here. First, in Table 19, we explore the direction of the bias in OLS results. We
argue that strategic interaction is an important determinant of returns to advertising. To test this,
we run two specifications in which we omit the effect of rival ads. The results are in Columns
1 and 3. These specifications explicitly violate our exclusion restriction: shocks to political advertising affect drug sales not only through changes in my own advertising, but changes in my
rival’s advertising as well. Therefore, we do not interpret these estimates as causal. When we do
not control for rival advertising, the estimated own-advertising elasticity is much smaller (0.0163),
less than 15% of the effect measured in columns 2. Both my advertising and my rivals’ advertising
are endogenous and the outcome of dynamic game; our identification strategy allows us to capture
both effects.
Table 20 shows that our results are robust to the different assumptions about the timing of
advertising effectiveness. Column 2 presents a specification where advertising is measured with a
one-month lag, rather than a two-month trailing average. The estimates are quite similar, though
larger in magnitude and closer to the contemporaneous estimates in column 2 of Table 5. The
specification in column 1 controls for the fact that advertising stock might also have an effect
on drug revenues by including a one-year lag of advertising as a control. We obtain statistically
indistinguishable estimates as compared to our preferred specification. Also included in Table 20 is
35 While

we compare elasticities, we note that the levels are very different.
results do not seem to depend on effective marginal prices: the results for the initial coverage phase, in
which the consumer has a relatively small co-pay, and the donut hole, where they have effectively no coverage, are
statistically the same. This is consistent with previous research that argues that consumers tend to respond to the
spot price rather than the true marginal price (Aron-Dine et al. (2014),Abaluck, Gruber and Swanson (2015), Dalton,
Gowrisankaran and Town (2014), Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf (2014)).
36 The

19

a specification that allows for market-specific drug fixed effects and a specification that clusters the
standard errors at the market, rather than the market-month level. Throughout all of the robustness
checks, the estimates present a consistent story.
Our identification strategy exploits both the timing of the political process and the pulling of
Lipitor ads featuring Dr. Robert Jarvik. It is possible that the pulling of Lipitor ads also led to
numerous news stories and this publicity, while it contained no content about the quality of the
drug itself, may have had an impact on sales. In the third and fourth columns of Table 17, we
still interact the regulatory action with the level of political advertising and utilize the “intensity of
treatment” across areas as a second instrument, while omitting the main effect from both stages.
We are comparing those states where a primary would have had a large impact on Lipitor ads if
not for the regulatory action with those states where a primary affects all drugs more equally.37
The own advertising elasticity in this specification is larger in magnitude than our main results,
but not statistically different. Table 18 present specifications that control for the regulatory action
period and its interaction with product fixed effects. Throughout all of the robustness checks, the
estimates present a consistent story.
Finally, we perform a number of subsample analyses in Table 21. Column 2 shows that our
results are nosier but display the same general pattern as the main estimates if we restrict the data to
the primary period only.38 Column 3 shows that the effects are larger if we omit Vytorin and Zetia
from the data. Column 4 suggests that the effect of Crestor advertising is large during the period
in which Lipitor cannot advertise. However, the data are not sufficient to say this definitively.

6

Simulations

Our results can be used to quantify the magnitudes of business-stealing and spillovers in this market as well a to calculate the partial equilibrium impact of policy changes. In all simulations below,
we bootstrap by re-sampling the data set 100 times (with replacement), re-estimate our main specifications, and then compute a simulated object such as the change in revenue or quantity. We report
the mean of the bootstrapped results, as well as the 95% confidence interval.
First, we calculate sales of advertised drugs in the absence of a business-stealing effect of
competitor advertising. To do this, we set the coefficient on rival ads equal to zero in the main
specification (column 4 of Table 5) and calculate the percentage change in revenue. We do not
alter the level of the ads themselves. This is important for two reasons. First, firms still benefit
37 The

partial F-statistics indicate that we still have a great deal of power. We have also run additional specifications
that include the main effect of the Jarvik regulatory action and interactions with product fixed effects in both stages of
the regression and obtain nearly identical estimates.
38 Because of the timing of the regulatory action and the short panel, we cannot restrict attention to the sixty days
before the general election either here or in Table15.

20

from the content of their own advertising. Second, we are not measuring an equilibrium outcome;
firms may choose higher or lower levels of advertising absent a business-stealing effect.
Table 9 presents the results. Panel A shows that business-stealing has a sizable impact on revenues. Absent the negative impact of rival ads, sales would be 23% higher for Lipitor and 21%
higher for Crestor over the sample period.39 To the extent that business-stealing is less likely to
be seen as welfare-enhancing, this has important implications for policy. This also suggests that
DTCA can create a prisoners’ dilemma, where an individual firm has a strong incentive to advertise, but in equilibrium, all are spending more on advertising and seeing minimal effects. Panel
B performs the same simulation for non-advertised drugs, which effectively eliminates spillovers
from other drug advertising. In the absence of such spillovers, revenues for unadvertised drugs
would fall by 9.7%. This indicates a potentially large role for welfare-enhancing spillovers in drug
advertising.
We can also quantify the impact that the political process’s shock had on drug firm revenues.
We first predict what advertising levels would have been in the absence of any political ads, and
then use our main results to predict revenues in the absence of political ads. Panel A shows that
if the political process had not displaced drug advertising, revenues for Crestor and Lipitor would
have been roughly two percent higher over the study period.
Finally, we analyze the impact of changes in the regulatory environment: a ban on DTCA.
This eliminates both the effect of a firm’s own ads and their rival’s ads. The FDA is unlikely
to be concerned about firm revenues, and so the outcome of interest is the quantity (share) of
consumers taking a particular drug. We proceed with our simulations based on the specification
from Appendix Table 20. Table 10 shows that all firms see fewer customers under this scenario,
although the effect is not identical across drugs. Figure 9 shows the distribution of the percent
change from each simulation for Lipitor, Crestor, and non-advertised drugs. The results show that
in the absence of DTCA, Lipitor is significantly harmed, while Crestor is harmed to a lesser degree.
In general, Lipitor advertises more than Crestor during this time period. For non-advertised drugs,
we see a more dispersed but still negative effect, as these drugs benefited from rival advertising.
Based on these calculations, we conclude that DTCA is primarily characterized by a businessstealing effect among branded competitors, with a small spillover to unadvertised drugs. Significantly, DTCA increases the number of patients taking all drugs in the category, advertised or not.
We recognize that the statin market has a small number of players that are very close substitutes
with few side-effects, and so the empirical effects may differ in other drug classes with a larger
number players or where the “match” of a patient to a drug is more important.
39 This

is a substantial increase, but not unreasonable given our estimates and the data. At $90 for a month’s supply,
this amounts to approximately 250 more monthly prescriptions in the average market.

21

6.1

Discussion

While our results present a consistent story, there are a number of caveats. First, these are shortrun elasticities. Though they are much larger for new consumers, the long-run impact is unclear.
Second, we do not consider selection into insurance plans or explore the role of physician agency.
Given that we are looking at such a short time period, we do not believe these factors bias our
results. Third, all of our results take the decision to advertise at all as given. This decision in nonrandom, and our treatment effects need not generalize. Fourth, our elasticities are local average
treatment effects and specific to the market we study, which has a limited number of advertisers
who are close clinical substitutes. Future work should explore additional strategic decisions, including formulary placement and detailing, dynamic effects, and heterogeneity both within and
across classes.40
Much of the literature has examined the antidepressant market, which is similarly characterized by spillovers, but finds little evidence of business stealing effects (Avery, Eisenberg and Simon
(2012); Donohue and Berndt (2004); Narayanan, Desiraju and Chintagunta (2004) and, most recently Shapiro (2014)). Our results are consistent with these studies; for example, Shapiro (2014)
finds that a cooperative advertising campaign that internalized spillovers would generate five times
as many ads and increase category size by 13.7%. Our simulations are different in flavor and eliminate ads completely, but find a 5% reduction in the sales on unadvertised drugs, which comprise
the bulk of the market. Here, we argue that substantial advertising expenditure is also defensive
and may not provide a great deal of value from a social perspective, but that eliminating DTCA
would significantly reduce the number of patients taking an effective, safe drug.
Our identification strategy is likely to be useful in a number of product markets, including other
drug classes. However, additional variation will be necessary to separately identify the impact of
rival advertising. Future work should also further explore the potential health consequences of
DTCA; we find spillovers to unadvertised drugs, which indicated an informational, potentially
welfare-enhancing role for these ads. A final caution is that these are only partial equilibrium
calculations. Firms may alter their pricing or detailing strategies in response to changes in the
competitive environment. Future work should further explore firm decisions to advertise in an
equilibrium model. building on the intuition in Section 3, we would like to explore a model of
advertising competition that can be estimated and used for additional counterfactual calculations.
This model should be both tractable and dynamic to capture firm incentives.
40 We

also do not consider strategic entry by generic manufacturers, as described in Scott Morton (1999).

22

7

Conclusion

This paper provides causal estimates of the impact of DTCA. The estimation strategy utilizes exogenous variation in the level of advertising generated by the political cycle. OLS estimates are
biased due to firms strategically advertising in response to both consumer demand and competitor
actions. We find significant returns to advertising in the statin market: our estimates indicate that a
10% increase in advertising leads to a 0.76% increase in revenues, holding rival actions constant.
We estimate the effect in two samples: among the privately insured and among Medicare beneficiaries. In the Medicare sample, we show that our effect is primarily driven by new prescriptions.
We find both business-stealing and spillover effects of advertising in the statin market.
Our simulations highlight the role of advertising competition, shedding light on strategic interaction between firms. Furthermore, the impact of DTCA is a question of critical policy importance;
the simulations highlight the potential for an advertising ban to reduce wasteful advertising spending. While sales of unadvertised drugs fall by nearly 5%, the savings from eliminating television
advertising are substantial. Our results help quantify the tradeoffs that policy makers may face
when regulating pharmaceutical firms. Furthermore, the impact of advertising is theoretically ambiguous and empirically challenging to quantify; our identification strategy provides new causal
estimates of the impact of ads.

23

References
Abaluck, Jason, Jonathan Gruber and Ashley T. Swanson. 2015. “Prescription Drug Use under
Medicare Part D: A Linear Model of Nonlinear Budget Sets.” NBER Working Paper 20976 .
Working Paper.
Ackerberg, Daniel A. 2001. “Empirically Distinguishing Informative and Prestige Effects of Advertising.” The RAND Journal of Economics 32(2):316–333.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Mark Cullen and Amy Finkelstein. 2014. “Moral Hazard in Health
Insurance: Do Dynamic Incentives Matter?” NBER Working Paper 17802 .
Avery, Rosemary J., Matthew D. Eisenberg and Kosali I. Simon. 2012. “The Impact of Directto-Consumer Television and Magazine Advertising on Antidepressant Use.” Journal of Health
Economics 31(5):705–718.
Bagwell, K. 2007. “The Economic Analysis of Advertising.” Handbook of Industrial Organization
3:1701–1844. Mark Armstrong and Rob Porter (eds.).
Berndt, Ernst R. 2005. “To inform or persuade? Direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription
drugs.” New England Journal of Medicine 352(4):325–8.
Berndt, Ernst R, Linda T. Bui, David H. Reiley and Glen L. Urban. 1995. “Information, Marketing
and Pricing in the U.S. Anti-Ulcer Drug Market.” American Economic Review 85(2):100–105.
Blake, T., C. Nosko and S. Tadelis. 2013. “Consumer Heterogeneity and Paid Search Effectiveness:
A Large Scale Field Experiment.”.
Blazing, MA, RP Giugliano, C Cannon, T Musline, A Tershakovec, J White, C Reist, A McCagg,
E Braunwald and R Califf. 2014. “Evaluating cardiovascular event reduction with ezetimibe
as an adjunct to simvastatin in 18,144 patients after acute coronary syndromes: final baseline
characteristics of the IMPROVE-IT study population.” American Heart Journal 168(2):205–
212.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dubé, Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2014. “Do
pharmacists buy Bayer? Informed shoppers and the brand premium.” University of Chicago
mimeo.
Dafny, Leemore, Kate Ho and Mauricio Varela. 2013. “Let Them Have Choice: Gains from
Shifting Away from Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and toward an Individual Exchange.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(1):32–58.
24

Dalton, Christina M., Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert Town. 2014. “Myopia and Complex
Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D.”.
Davidson, Michael and Jennifer Robinson. 2007. “Safety of Aggressive Lipid Management.” Journal of the American College of Cardiology .
Donohue, Julie M and Ernst R Berndt. 2004. “Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Medication Choice: The Case of Antidepressants.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 23(2):115–
127.
Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter J Hitsch and Puneet Manchanda. 2005. “An Empirical Model of Advertising Dynamics.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 3(2):107–144.
Duggan, Mark and Fiona Scott Morton. 2010. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review 100(1):590–607.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Paul Schrimpf. 2014. “The Response of Drug Expenditure to
Non-Linear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D.” 2014.
Faergeman, Ole, L Hill, E Windler, O Wiklund, R Asmar, E Duffield and F Sosef. 2008. “Efficacy and Tolerance of rosuvastatin and atorvastatin when force-titrated in patients with primary
hypercholesterolemia: results from the ECLIPSE study.” Cardiology 111(4):219–228.
Gordon, Brett R. and Wesley R. Hartmann. 2013. “Advertising Effects in Presidential Elections.”
Marketing Science 32:19–35.
Gordon, Brett R. and Wesley R. Hartmann. 2014. “Advertising Competition in Presidential Elections.” Stanford University mimeo.
Greenland, Philip and Donald Lloyd-Jones. 2008. “Critical Lessons from the ENHANCE Trial.”
Journal of the American Medical Association .
Iizuka, Toshiaki and Ginger Jin. 2007. “Direct to Consumer Advertising and Prescription Choice.”
Journal of Industrial Economics .
Jack, Andrew. 2009. “The Fall of the World’s Best-Selling Drug.” Financial Times Magazine .
URL:
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/d0f7af5c-d7e6-11de-b57800144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl
Jin, Ginger Zhe and Toshiaki Iizuka. 2005. “The Effects of Prescription Drug Advertising on
Doctor Visits.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 14(3):701–727.

25

Kolata, Gina. 2014. “Study Finds Alternative to Anti-Cholesterol Drug.” New York Times .
URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/18/health/study-finds-alternative-to-statins-inpreventing-heart-attacks-and-strokes.html
Lewis, R.A. and J.M. Rao. 2013. “On the near impossibility of measuring the returns to advertising.”.
Mathews, Anna Wilde. 2008. “Congress Investigates Vytorin Ads.” Wall Street Journal .
URL: http://blogs.wsj.com/health/2008/01/16/congress-investigates-vytorin-ads/
Moshary, Sarah. 2014. “Price Discrimination across PACs and the Consequences of Political
Advertising Regulation.” MIT Working Paper.
Narayanan, Sridhar, Ramarao Desiraju and Pradeep K. Chintagunta. 2004. “Return on Investment Implications for Pharmaceutical Promotional EExpenditure: The Role of Marketing-Mix
Interactions.” Journal of Marketing 68(4):90–105.
Rosenthal, M.B., E.R. Berndt, J.M. Donohue, A.M. Epstein and R.G. Frank. 2003. “Demand
effects of recent changes in prescription drug promotion.” Frontiers in Health Policy Research
6(1):1–26.
Rossi, Peter E. 2014. “Even the Rich Can Make Themselves Poor: a critical examination of the
use of IV methods in marketing.” Marketing Science 33(5):655–672.
Scott Morton, Fiona. 1999. “Entry Decisions in the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry.” The RAND
Journal of Economics 30(3):421–440.
Shapiro, Brad. 2014. “Positive Spillovers and Free Riding in Advertising of Prescription Pharmaceuticals: The Case of Antidepressants.” University of Chicago Working Paper.
Spatz, Ian. 2011. “Better Drug Ads, Fewer Side Effects.” New York Times .
URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/10/opinion/10spatz.html
Wosinska, Marta. 2002. “Just What the Patient Ordered? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising and the
Demand for Pharmaceutical Products.” Harvard Business School mimeo.
Wosinska, Marta. 2005. “Direct-to-Consumer Advertising and Drug Therapy Compliance.” Journal of Marketing Research 42(3):323–332.

26

Figures
Figure 2: Political Ad Levels, January-June 2008

Notes: The above maps show a dot for each DMA in the USA. The diameter of each dot is
proportional to the number of political ads aired in that market, in that month, for all races
(Presidential, Senatorial, House, Gubernatiorial). The first row are January and February; second
row are March and April, and third row are June and July.

27

Figure 3: National Pharmaceutical Ad Levels for Statins

Notes: The above graphic plots national advertising spots from the Kantar data. Data spans
January 2007-November 2008.

Figure 4: National Pharmaceutical Ad Levels for Statins

Notes: The above graphic plots the maximum of local advertising spots across DMAs from the
Kantar data. Data spans January 2007-November 2008. The axes are the same as the previous
figure.

28

Figure 5: Political Ads Displace Local Drug Ads, Binned Scatter plot

Notes: The above plots bins of observations from July 2007 to November 2008 at the
market-month level after residualizing by market and year-month fixed effects, and adding back
the sample mean. Twenty bins are used. The fitted line is based on a regression of all underlying
data, not only the binned values.

Figure 6: Effect of Primary Timing on Non-Advertised Statins

Note: The above plots estimated coefficients for timing dummies relative to a market’s primary
month. The dependent variable is the (one-month) change in market share, defined as the
percentage of the population taking a non-advertised statin.

29

Figure 7: Effect of Primary Timing on Crestor and Lipitor

Note: The above plots estimated coefficients for timing dummies relative to a market’s primary
month. The dependent variable is the (one-month) change in market share, defined as the
percentage of the population taking Lipitor or Crestor.

Figure 8: Effect of Political Ads During FDA Ban

Note: The above plots estimated coefficients for dummies for any political advertising in a month,
either outside of the FDA action period, or during the FDA action period (April-August 2008). The
dependent variable is the log of the days supply per insured, defined as the percentage of the
population taking Lipitor or Crestor. Controls include product-specific time trends, market fixed
effects, and fixed effects for the FDA action.

30

Figure 9: Simulation Results: Eliminating DTCA

Note: The above plots are histograms of the change in quantity for each drug (or drug group) from
bootstrapped simulations that eliminate DTCA from the market over the sample period. See
section 6 for an extended discussion of the methodology.

31

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Drug
Number of Markets
Number of Months
Advertised Statins

189
17
4

Political Ads
Average
774
Standard Deviation 1,897
Minimum
0
Maximum
22,636

Drug Usage (Truven Analysis Data set)
Average Branded Share
0.829%
Range, Branded Share
(0.000%, 4.71%)
Average Generic Share
3.05%
Range, Generic Share
(0.000%, 7.62%)
Drug Ads
Conditional Mean of Local Ads by Drug
9.67
Range, Local Ads
(0, 105)
Conditional Mean of National Ads by Drug
45.31
Range, National Ads
(0, 145)

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: left panel,
Wisconsin and Kantar; right panel, Truven) span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and
include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia. Averages in top right panel are over the entire
population. Means in bottom right panel condition on advertising.

Table 2: Covariate Balance, Part D Data
Average Age
% Female
% White
% Black
% Hispanic
Mortality Rate
% Low Income Subsidy

Below Median Markets
71.109
0.5489
0.8536
0.0849
0.0147
0.0423
0.6874

Above Median Markets
71.309
0.5519
0.8727
0.0933
0.0088
0.0425
0.6657

Difference
−0.1994
−0.0030
−0.0190
−0.0083
0.0058
−0.0002
0.0217∗∗

Notes: We split the Part D beneficiary summary sample into two groups. We take the sum of
political advertising over the 2008 calendar year and compare demographics for markets above and
below the median. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and
∗∗∗ .

32

33

X
X
X
14, 280
0.357

X
14, 280
0.267

X

OLS
−0.1825∗∗∗
(0.0129)
X
X
X
X
14, 280
0.477

14, 280
0.213

X

X

14, 280
0.348

X
X
X

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Wisonsin and
Kantar) span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 across 210 markets and include
Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia. OLS and Tobit standard errors clustered at the market-month
level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ . Reported
R2 is adjusted for OLS, pseudo for Tobit.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year-Month FEs
Drug FEs
Drug-Year-Month FEs
N
R2

Model:
Log(Political Ads in 1000s + 1)

Dependent Variable: Log(Local Statin Ads + 1)
Tobit
OLS
OLS
Tobit
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
−0.1063
−0.1063
−0.7729
−0.2329∗∗∗
(0.0143)
(0.0143)
(0.0581)
(0.0494)

Table 3: Political Ads Displace Drug Ads

X
X
X
X
14, 280
0.519

Tobit
−0.1940∗∗∗
(0.0103)

34
X
11, 551
0.842

X
X
X

11, 551
0.847

X
X
X
X

11, 551
0.848

X
X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.843

X
X
X

11, 550
0.847

X
X
X
X

11, 550
0.848

X
X
X
X
X

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. Number of observations is smaller than Table 3 because these specifications drop DMAs
with no local advertising. This primarily affects small DMAs. Finally, we lost one observation
between columns 1-3 and columns 4-6 due to a missing observation for Zetia in the Paducah, KY
DMA. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
Drug FE*Time Trend^2
Drug-Year FEs
N
R2

Rival Ads

Own Ads

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
This Month
Two Month Trailing Average
0.0194∗∗∗ 0.0064∗∗∗ 0.0114∗∗∗ 0.0239∗∗∗ 0.0066∗∗∗ 0.0096∗∗∗
(0.0022) (0.0020) (0.0023) (0.0021) (0.0021) (0.0023)
0.0016
0.0042∗
0.0056∗∗ 0.0061∗∗
0.0036
0.0039
(0.0025) (0.0023) (0.0026) (0.0027) (0.0026) (0.0028)

Table 4: OLS Revenue Regressions for Advertised Drugs

35
X
11, 551
0.755

X
X
X

0.1559∗∗∗
(0.0251)
−0.1064∗∗∗
(0.0179)

11, 551
0.819

X
X
X
X

11, 551
0.822

X
X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.788

X
X
X

11, 550
0.824

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.832

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. First stage excluded instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy
that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions
of the political variables and the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in
Table 17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
Drug FE*Time Trend^2
Drug-Year FEs
N
R2

Rival Ads

Own Ads

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
This Month
Two Month Trailing Average
0.0808∗∗
0.0923∗∗
0.1252∗∗∗
0.0764∗∗∗
0.0734∗∗∗
(0.0136)
(0.0344)
(0.0373)
(0.0258)
(0.0270)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
−0.0966
−0.0548
−0.0425∗∗∗
−0.0492
−0.0471
(0.0247)
(0.0261)
(0.0112)
(0.0212)
(0.0215)

Table 5: IV Revenue Regressions for Advertised Drugs

Table 6: Revenue Effect Decomposition
Dependent Variable:
Model:
Own Ads
Rival Ads
Controls:
Market FEs
Drug FEs and Time Trends
N
R2

Log(Revenue per Insured),
Non-Advertised Drugs
OLS
IV
0.0018
(0.0037)

0.0233∗∗∗
(0.0089)

X
X
3, 146
0.875

X
X
3, 146
0.874

Log(Revenue per Insured),
Advertised Drugs
OLS
IV
0.0239∗∗∗
0.0764∗∗∗
(0.0021)
(0.0258)
0.0016
−0.0548∗∗∗
(0.0027)
(0.0212)
X
X
11, 500
0.843

X
X
11, 500
0.824

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month combination. Data (source: Truven) span 17
months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include all non-advertised drugs. “Own Ads” and
“Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates contemporaneous advertising,
while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent variables are constructed as
the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month before. First stage excluded
instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that takes on a one during April
2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of the political variables and
the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in Table 17. Statistical significant
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively. Standard errors are
clustered at the market-month level.

36

37
X
11, 551
0.819

X
X
X

11, 551
0.874

X
X
X
X

11, 551
0.878

X
X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.792

X
X
X

11, 550
0.866

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.872

Notes: Data created by collapsing Medicare Part D event data to the market-month-product level.
Data span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and
Zetia. “Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. First stage excluded instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy
that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions
of the political variables and the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in
Table 17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
Drug FE*Time Trend^2
Drug-Year FEs
N
R2

Rival Ads

Own Ads

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
This Month
Two Month Trailing Average
0.124∗∗∗
0.0317
0.0196
0.147∗∗∗
0.0543∗∗∗
0.0487∗∗
(0.0194)
(0.0121)
(0.0242) (0.0266)
(0.0180)
(0.0191)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
−0.0401
−0.0294∗
−0.0867
−0.0162 −0.00158 −0.119
(0.0140)
(0.0177) (0.0191)
(0.0101)
(0.0151)
(0.0156)

Table 7: IV Revenue Regressions for Advertised Drugs, Part D Data

38

X
X
X
X
10, 789
0.594

X
X
X
X
10, 789
0.291

X
X
X
X
10, 788
0.593

X
X
X
X
10, 788
0.421

Two Month Trailing Average
OLS
IV
∗∗∗
0.0469
0.288∗∗∗
(0.00418)
(0.0769)
∗∗∗
0.0511
−0.149∗∗
(0.00577)
(0.0667)

Notes: Data created by restricting Medicare Part D event data to first prescriptions only and
collapsing to the market-month-product level. Unit of observation is the market-month-product
combination. Data (source: Truven) span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and
include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia. “Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as
log(1+X). “This Month” indicates contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing
Average” indicates that the independent variables are constructed as the average of advertising
during the revenue month and the month before. First stage excluded instruments are political
advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008
(regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of the political variables and the regulatory action
dummy. First stage estimates can be found in Table 17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
market-month level.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
N
R2

Rival Ads

Model:
Own Ads

This Month
OLS
IV
∗∗∗
0.0496
0.361∗∗∗
(0.00408) (0.0973)
0.0528∗∗∗ −0.173∗∗
(0.00531) (0.0743)

Table 8: IV Revenue Regression for First Prescriptions Only, Part D Data

Table 9: Revenue Simulations
Panel A: Simulations for Advertised Drugs
% Change in Revenue:
Crestor
Lipitor
(1) Eliminating Business-Stealing
0.2107
0.2327
Confidence Interval
(0.0047, 0.5639) (0.0054, 0.6082)
(2) Eliminate Political Ads
0.0207
0.0163
Confidence Interval
(0.0039, 0.0689) (0.0038, 0.0484)
Panel B: Simulations for Non-Advertised Drugs
% Change in Revenue:
Unadvertised Drugs
(3) Eliminate Spillovers
−0.0974
Confidence Interval
(−0.1539, −0.0262)
Notes: Estimates from “Two Month Trailing Average” and drug-specific time trend specifications
are used in all simulations. Simulation (1) sets the coefficient on rival advertising in column 4 of
Table 5 equal to zero. Simulation (2) estimates the number of drug ads in the absence of political
ads, and then estimates sales at those levels of advertising. In Panel B, (3) sets the coefficient on
rival advertising in column 2 of Table 6 equal to zero. Simulation (4) estimates the number of drug
ads in the absence of political ads, and then estimates sales for non-advertised drugs at those levels
of advertising. Estimates are bootstrapped by re-sampling the data set, re-estimating the primary
specifications, and re-computing the counterfactual exercise on the observed data. We use 100
bootstrap replications and report the 2.5%-97.5% confidence interval as well as then mean.

Table 10: Quantity Simulations
% Change in Quantity
Ban All Advertising
Confidence Interval

Crestor
Lipitor
Unadvertised
−0.0094
−0.0255
−0.0491
(−0.0444, 0.0248) (−0.0614, 0.0070) (−0.1230, 0.0107)

Notes: Estimates from “Two Month Trailing Average” and drug-specific time trend specifications
are used in all simulations. The dependent variable is the log of the market share of a product. The
simulation sets the coefficient on own and rival advertising equal to zero. Estimates are
bootstrapped by re-sampling the data set, re-estimating the primary specifications, and
re-computing the counterfactual exercise on the observed data. We use 100 bootstrap replications
and report the 2.5%-97.5% confidence interval as well as then mean. Figure 9 shows the
distributions of the simulated outcomes.

39

Appendix
Supplemental Appendix For Online Publication
A

Model Assumptions and Simulation Details

Assumption 1. Function D j is smooth and continuous in all its arguments; first- and secondderivatives are defined everywhere. Function D j is concave in all arguments.
Note that Logit demand satisfies this assumption, as do many other standard demand formulations. Concavity gives the result that rival advertising lowers the return to own advertising under
spillovers, and raises it under business-stealing.
Assumption 2. The following conditions hold:

∂Dj
∂aj

> 0 and

∂Dj
∂ a j a =0
j

>

c
ρ

.

Assumption 2 guarantees there is an incentive to advertise. If a firm’s advertising creates
∂D
spillovers for rivals, that implies that ∂ a−jj > 0 in our notation, while business-stealing implies
∂Dj
∂ a− j

< 0. When we say that the effectiveness of advertising is diminishing in the level of drug

demand, we mean that

∂ D j²
∂ a j∂ ξ j

< 0, while if it is complementary to the level of drug demand we

∂D ²

∂D

have ∂ a ∂jξ > 0. A firm’s first-order condition for advertising is satisfied when ∂ a jj = ρc .
j
j
Parameters were set to the following values: α1 = α2 = −0.3, c = 1, ρ = 1000. Matlab’s
FSOLVE function was used to set a system of first-order conditions to zero. We use 200 markets
and we draw values of ξ for each firm in each market where ξ ∼ N(0, 0.25).
Analytic values of own and rival advertising elasticities are calculated as the mean over all
observations of

aj
β1 (1 − s j ) − β2 s− j
1+aj

a− j
=
β2 (1 − s j ) − β1 s− j
1 + a− j

ηown =
ηrival

We drop any simulations where Matlab’s FSOLVE function failed to converge to a solution
for firm first-order conditions for advertising levels. The full space of simulations covered β1 ∈
[0.01, 0.2] and β2 ∈ [−0.2, 0.1], both in increments of 0.005. We drop cases where β2 > β1 as
firms would choose negative advertising. The share of simulations where the bias in estimating
own advertising elasticity was less than 5%, was only 0.3% of simulations, and 1.5% for rival
advertising elasticity. tTable 11 shows for one particular set of parameter values the OLS bias in
estimating elasticities of own and rival ads.
40

For completeness, we also performed the same analysis where only a single firm chooses advertising. Figure 10 shows the bias from OLS estimation of the elasticity of revenue with respect
to own advertising. As is clear, the bias can be positive or negative.
Figure 10: OLS Bias with One Firm

Table 11: Sample Model Simulation Results
Dependent Variable:
Specification:
Log(1+Own Ads)
Log(1+Rival Ads)
Control: ξ
N
R2

Naive
(1)
0.0290∗∗∗
(0.0065)
−0.0770∗∗∗
(0.0059)
200
0.687

Log(Revenue)
With ξ
Analytic Values
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
0.0763
0.0796
(0.0006)
−0.1305∗∗∗
−0.1266
(0.0006)
X
200
0.998

Notes: Parameter values for these results were β1 = 0.06 and β2 = −0.15. Firm optimal
advertising levels were solved for using Matlab’s FSOLVE routine and first-order conditions for
profit maximization. Estimates are OLS results for equation 1, with ξ j and ξ− j as additional
controls in the second column. Analytic values are computed as the means of the expressions for
ηown and ηrival shown above. The controlled version does not perfectly match the analytic values
as the Logit model creates a non-linear error term when estimating equation1.

41

B

Additional Robustness Checks
Figure 11: Political Ad Levels, July-November 2008

Notes: The above maps show a dot for each DMA in the USA. The diameter of each dot is
proportional to the number of political ads aired in that market, in that month, for all races
(Presidential, Senatorial, House, Gubernatiorial). The first row are July and August; second row
are September and October, and third row is November.

42

Figure 12: Time Trends

Notes: The above graphic plots the share of Lipitor and Crestor from the Truven data as a
percentage of total category sales over the period of January 2007-November 2008. Note different
axes.

Figure 13: Instrument Effect Heterogeneity
Lipitor

Crestor, Vytorin, Zetia

All Months Except
Congressional Action

Congressional Action
Months
(April-August 2008)

Notes: The above graphic plots binned scatterplots to show that political ads displace drug ads, as
Figure 5, for different sub-samples of the data. “Congressional Action” months refer to the months
when Lipitor was banned from advertising by congress.

43

Figure 14: Effect of Placebo Primaries on Shares of Non-Advertised Sales

Note: The above plots estimated coefficients for timing dummies relative to a market’s primary
month, with the “timing” of the primary shifted 12 months forward. The dependent variable is the
(one-month) change in market share, defined as the percentage of the population taking a
non-advertised statin, Crestor, or Lipitor, respectively.

Table 12: Robustness: No Substitution to Other Media

Model:
Political Ads (1000s)
Local TV Drug Ads
National TV Drug Ads
Controls:
Market FEs
Year-Month FEs
Drug FEs
N
R2

Dependent Variable: Local Non-TV
Advertising Spending
OLS
OLS
OLS
∗
−0.3000
−0.1731
−0.1962
(0.1770) (0.1802)
(0.1804)
∗∗∗
0.8664
0.9515∗∗∗
(0.1366)
(0.1433)
−0.0724∗∗∗
(0.0138)
X
X
X
14, 867
0.074

X
X
X
14, 867
0.086

X
X
X
14, 867
0.087

Notes: Regressions combine the Wisconsin and Kantar data sets for the months of July
2007-November 2008. OLS standard errors clustered at the market-year-month level. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ .

44

Table 13: Robustness: No Substitution to Earlier/Later Months

Model:
Political Ads (1000s)
One Month Lag
One Month Lead
Controls:
Market FEs
Year-Month FEs
Drug FEs
Drug National Ads
N
R2

Dependent Variable: Local Drug Ads,
Product-Market-Year-Month Level
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
−0.0819∗∗∗
−0.0632∗∗
(0.0263)
(0.0304)
0.0265
0.0012
(0.0284)
(0.0299)
−0.0239
-0.0405
(0.0301) (0.0294)
X
X
X
X
8, 925
0.225

X
X
X
X
8, 925
0.225

X
X
X
X
8, 120
0.219

X
X
X
X
8, 120
0.218

Notes: Regressions combine the Wisconsin and Kantar data sets in 2008. OLS standard errors
clustered at the market-year-month level. Results differ from Table 3 as this is at the individual
drug level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ .

45

46

X
X
X
14, 280
0.244

X
14, 280
0.193

X

OLS
−0.2668∗∗∗
(0.0245)
X
X
X
X
14, 280
0.366
14, 280
0.140

X

X

14, 280
0.219

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
14, 280
0.312

Tobit
−0.7536∗∗∗
(0.0228)

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Wisonsin and
Kantar) span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and 210 markets and include Crestor,
Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia. OLS and Tobit standard errors clustered at the market-year-month
level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ . Reported
R2 is adjusted for OLS, pseudo for Tobit.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year-Month FEs
Drug FEs
Drug-Year-Month FEs
N
R2

Model:
Political Ads (1000s)

Dependent Variable: Statin Ads
Tobit
OLS
OLS
Tobit
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
−0.2102
−0.2102
−1.2548
−0.6824∗∗∗
(0.0263)
(0.0264)
(0.0992)
(0.1198)

Table 14: Political Ads Displace Drug Ads

Table 15: Reduced Form Impact of Advertising
Any Political Ads
Any Political Ads*Crestor
Regulatory Action Period
Regulatory Action Period*Lipitor
Controls:
Market FEs
Drug FEs
Sample Period
N
R2

Dependent Variable: Log(Days Supply)
−0.0291∗∗∗ −0.0267∗∗∗
0.0589∗∗∗
(0.0048)
(0.0045)
(0.0045)
(0.0185)
−0.0891∗∗∗
(0.0364)
0.0131
(0.0120)
−0.0560∗∗∗
(0.0202)

−0.0376∗∗∗

X
all months

X
X
all months

X
X
all months

5, 965
0.254

5, 965
0.833

5, 965
0.833

X
X
regulatory action
period
1, 172
0.845

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month combination. Data (source: Truven) span 17
months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor and Lipitor. “Any Political Ads” is
a dummy that takes on a one if political ads are aired during a market-month combination.
Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.
Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

47

48
X
11, 551
0.871

X
X
X

0.0229∗∗∗
(0.00215)
0.00457∗∗
(0.00200)

11, 551
0.877

X
X
X
X

11, 551
0.878

X
X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.871

X
X
X

11, 550
0.877

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
11, 550
0.878

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month combination. Data (source: Medicare Part D) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include all non-advertised drugs. “Own Ads”
and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates contemporaneous
advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent variables are
constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month before. First
stage excluded instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that takes on a
one during April 2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of the
political variables and the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in Table 17.
Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.
Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
Drug FE*Time Trend^2
Drug-Year FEs
N
R2

Rival Ads

Own Ads

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
This Month
Two-Month Trailing Average
0.00991∗∗∗ 0.0136∗∗∗ 0.0259∗∗∗ 0.00817∗∗∗ 0.00932∗∗∗
(0.00186) (0.00200) (0.00197) (0.00192) (0.00191)
0.00692∗∗∗ 0.00570∗∗∗ 0.000423
0.00206
0.000451
(0.00187) (0.00205) (0.00217) (0.00209) (0.00223)

Table 16: OLS Revenue Regressions for Advertised Drugs, Part D Data

Table 17: First Stage Specifications
Panel A: First Stage Estimates (Excluded Instruments)
Own
Rival
Own
Rival
∗∗∗
∗
Pol
−0.1937
0.0422
0.0564
0.0916∗∗∗
(0.0401)
(0.0236)
(0.0356)
(0.0264)
∗∗∗
2
0.0218
−0.0004
−0.0022
−0.0052
Pol
(0.0072)
(0.0044)
(0.0063)
(0.0049)
3
∗∗
Pol
−0.0007
−0.0001
−0.0000
0.0001
(0.0003)
(0.0002)
(0.0003)
(0.0002)
Reg. Action
−1.5981∗∗∗ −1.5553∗∗∗ −1.4336∗∗∗ −1.5279∗∗∗
(0.0458)
(0.0286)
(0.0412)
(0.0305)
∗∗∗
Reg. Action·
−0.0075
−0.5316
0.0216
−0.5253∗∗∗
.....Pol
(0.0912)
(0.0739)
(0.0995)
(0.0794)
∗∗∗
0.0419
0.1641
−0.0237
0.1506∗∗∗
Reg. Action·
2
.....Pol
(0.0390)
(0.0330)
(0.0443)
(0.0356)
∗∗∗
Reg. Action·
−0.0039
−0.0124
0.0022
−0.0111∗∗∗
.....Pol 3
(0.0037)
(0.0032)
(0.0043)
(0.0034)
Fixed Effects
product*year
product*time trend
Partial F-Stat
1658.56
3167.13
2102.8
2865.17
2
Partial R
0.2179
0.4921
0.2324
0.4744
Panel B: Second Stage Estimates
Own Ads
0.1252∗∗∗
0.0764∗∗∗
(0.0136)
(0.0258)
Rival Ads
−0.0966∗∗∗
−0.0548∗∗∗
(0.0112)
(0.0212)

Own
0.6814∗∗∗
(0.0350)
−0.0837∗∗∗
(0.0065)
0.0026∗∗∗
(0.0003)

Rival
0.7576∗∗∗
(0.0292)
−0.0921∗∗∗
(0.0057)
0.0029∗∗∗
(0.0002)

−1.7461∗∗∗ −2.4093∗∗∗
(0.0882)
(0.0723)
∗∗∗
0.6387∗∗∗
0.4342
(0.0437)
(0.0357)
∗∗∗
−0.0307
−0.0462∗∗∗
(0.0044)
(0.0035)
product*time trend
585.227
1013.8
0.1270
0.2987
0.1306∗∗∗
(0.0492)
−0.0958∗∗
(0.0383)

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). All specifications are a “Two Month
Trailing Average,” which indicates that the independent variables are constructed as the average of
advertising during the revenue month and the month before. “Pol” is the number of political ads in
a market-month, in thousands. “Regulatory Action” is a dummy variable for April-August 2008,
when congressional action forced Lipitor to stop advertising. Partial R^2 and F-statistics are for
excluded instruments only. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *,
**, and *** respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level. All
specifications include market, year, and drug fixed effects, as well as drug-specific time trends.

49

Table 18: Additional Instrument Robustness
Own Ads
Rival Ads
Controls:
Market, Year, Drug FEs
Drug FEs*Time Trend
Regulatory Action
Product*Regulatory Action
Excluded Instruments
N
R2

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
0.0764∗∗∗
0.1129∗
0.1332∗∗∗
(0.0258)
(0.0610)
(0.0677)
−0.0548∗∗∗
−0.0558∗∗∗ −0.0834∗∗∗
(0.0212)
(0.0216)
(00299)
X
X

X
X
X

political, regulatory,
interaction
11,550
0.824

political,
interaction
11,550
0.776

X
X
X
X
political,
interaction
11,550
0.805

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. First stage excluded instruments in the first column, our main specification, are political
advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008
(regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of the political variables and the regulatory action
dummy. Columns 2 and 3 present alternative specifications. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
market-month level.

50

Table 19: Effect of Business Stealing (IV Results)
Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
Log Own Ads
Log Rival Ads

...Controls:
Market, Year, Drug FEs
Drug FEs*Time Trend
N
R2

This Month
0.0146∗∗∗ 0.0808∗∗
(0.0032)
(0.0344)
−0.0492∗∗
(0.0247)

Two-Month Trailing Average
0.0121∗∗∗
0.0764∗∗∗
(0.0022)
(0.0258)
−0.0548∗∗∗
(0.0212)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

11, 551
0.847

11, 551
0.819

11, 550
0.847

11, 550
0.824

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. First stage excluded instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy
that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions
of the political variables and the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in
Table 17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the market-month level.

51

52

X
X
X
X
market-month
11, 551
0.877

market-month
11, 551
0.871

0.1444∗∗∗
(0.0466)
−0.1041∗∗∗
(0.0365)
X
X
X
X

0.0766∗∗∗
(0.0258)
−0.0550∗∗∗
(0.0212)
0.0699∗∗
(0.0322)

X
X
X
X
X
market-month
11, 550
0.941

market
11, 550
0.824

X
X
X
X

0.0764∗∗
(0.0333)
−0.0548∗
(0.0281)

market-month
11, 550
0.745

X
X
X
X

market-month
11, 550
0.822

X
X
X
X

Dependent Variable:
Log(Days Supply per Insured)
0.1495∗∗∗
0.0657∗∗∗
(0.0141)
(0.0255)
∗∗∗
−0.1202
−0.0488∗∗
(0.0116)
(0.0209)

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia.
“Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “One Month Lagged” indicates the
previous month’s advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. First stage excluded instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that
takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008 (regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of
the political variables and the regulatory action dummy. First stage estimates can be found in Table
17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively.

...Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FE*Time Trend
Drug-Market FEs
Clustering
N
R2

1-Month Lagged Rival Ads

1-Month Lagged Own Ads

Jan.-Jun. ’07 Ads

Rival Ads (2-Month Trailing)

Own Ads (2-Month Trailing)

Dependent Variable:
Log(Revenue per Insured)
0.0664∗∗∗
(0.0252)
−0.0460∗∗
(0.0206)

Table 20: Robustness Checks (IV Results)

Table 21: Subsample Analysis, IV Specifications
Own Ads
Rival Ads
Sample
Controls:
Market FEs
Year FEs
Drug FEs
Drug FEs*Time Trend
N
N Products
N Months
R2

Dependent Variable: Log(Revenue per Insured)
0.0917∗∗
0.0859∗∗∗
0.1879
(0.0258)
(0.0364)
(0.0298)
(0.1515)
−0.0548∗∗∗
−0.0303
−0.0719∗∗∗
(0.0212)
(0.0342)
(0.0247)
full
primaries only Crestor, Lipitor
Crestor only
only
regulatory action
0.0764∗∗∗

X
X
X
X
11, 550
5
17
0.824

X
X
X
X
9, 516
5
14
0.829

X
X
X
X
5, 965
2
17
0.773

X
X
X
841
1
5
0.964

Notes: Unit of observation is the market-month-product combination. Data (source: Truven) span
17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and Zetia,
though specifications use subsamples. “Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X).
“Primaries only” specification includes July 2007-August 2008. “Regulatory action” specification
includes April 2008-August 2008. “Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as Log(1+X). All
specifications use a “Two Month Trailing Average,” indicating that the independent variables are
constructed as the average of the revenue month and one month before. First stage excluded
instruments are political advertising, its square and cube, and interactions with a dummy that takes
on a one during April 2008-August 2008 unless otherwise specified. Statistical significant at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively. Standard errors are clustered
at the market-month level, unless otherwise specified.

53

Table 22: Additional Heterogeneity, Part D Data
OLS
IV
Beneficiaries in Initial Coverage Phase
Log Own Ads
0.0347∗∗∗
0.221∗∗∗
(0.00219)
(0.0177)
∗∗∗
Log Rival Ads
0.00883
−0.166∗∗∗
(0.00275)
(0.0148)
N
11, 550
11, 550
2
R
0.842
0.682
Beneficiaries in Donut Hole
Log Own Ads
0.0212***
0.203***
(0.00238)
(0.0181)
Log Rival Ads −0.00875***
−0.186***
(0.00287)
(0.0151)
N
11, 547
11, 547
R2
0.824
0.666
Beneficiaries in the Catastrophic Phase
Log Own Ads
0.0135***
−0.0128
(0.00260)
(0.0164)
Log Rival Ads
−0.00290
0.0100
(0.00323)
(0.0140)
N
11, 491
11, 491
2
R
0.795
0.793

OLS
IV
Beneficiaries in MA Plans
0.0203∗∗∗∗
0.106∗∗∗
(0.00345)
(0.0219)
∗∗
−0.00876
−0.0994∗∗∗
(0.00445)
(0.0191)
10, 996
10, 996
0.813
0.795
Beneficiaries in Stand-alone Part D Plans
0.0267∗∗∗
0.167∗∗∗
(0.00192)
(0.0128)
0.00295
−0.134∗∗∗
(0.00215)
(0.0107)
11, 550
11, 550
0.893
0.800
LIS-Eligible Beneficiaries Only
0.0207∗∗∗
0.0348∗∗∗
(0.00231)
(0.0121)
0.00252
−0.0223∗∗
(0.00260)
(0.0102)
11, 538
11, 538
0.858
0.856

Notes: Data created by collapsing Medicare Part D event data to the market-month-product level.
Data span 17 months from July 2007 to November 2008 and include Crestor, Lipitor, Vytorin, and
Zetia. “Own Ads” and “Rival Ads” are constructed as log(1+X). “This Month” indicates
contemporaneous advertising, while “Two Month Trailing Average” indicates that the independent
variables are constructed as the average of advertising during the revenue month and the month
before. We lost one observation between columns 1-3 and columns 4-6 due to a missing
observation for Zetia in the Paducah, KY DMA. First stage excluded instruments are political
advertising, its square and cube, a dummy that takes on a one during April 2008-August 2008
(regulatory action dummy), and the interactions of the political variables and the regulatory action
dummy. First stage estimates can be found in Table 17. Statistical significant at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels are denoted by *, **, and *** respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
market-month level. All specifications include market, year, and drug fixed effects, as well as
drug-specific time trends.

54

