NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME LIKE IT (LESS) HOT:
EXTRACTING TRADEOFF MEASURES FOR PHYSICALLY COUPLED AMENITIES
H. Allen Klaiber
Joshua Abbott
V. Kerry Smith
Working Paper 21051
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21051

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

Klaiber and Smith’s research was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants BCS-1026865
and DEB-0423704 CAP LTER while Klaiber was a post-doctoral fellow at Arizona State University.
Thanks are due Shauna Mortensen for assistance in preparing this manuscript. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by H. Allen Klaiber, Joshua Abbott, and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Some Like it (Less) Hot: Extracting Tradeoff Measures for Physically Coupled Amenities
H. Allen Klaiber, Joshua Abbott, and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 21051
March 2015
JEL No. H23,H44,Q51,Q57
ABSTRACT
The Urban Heat Island (UHI) provides direct evidence of how human activities contribute to a feedback
loop that can result in multiple changes in ecosystem services by creating localized warming as well
as differences in vegetated landscapes in areas surrounding the urban core. This paper develops a new
spatial-temporal panel estimator to recover consistent estimates of household valuation of coupled
landscape and temperature ecosystem services. Using data from Phoenix, AZ, we estimate a hedonic
price function using an extension of the Hausman-Taylor model. The framework adapts the earlier
Abbott Klaiber [2011] proposal to overcome challenges associated with the varying spatial scales of
capitalization of landscape and temperature variables and the likelihood of spatially and temporally
varying omitted variables. We find a positive and economically significant marginal willingness to
pay (MWTP) for measures of green landscaping at multiple spatial scales and a separate, MWTP for
a one degree (F) reduction in outdoor temperatures of $56 monthly.

H. Allen Klaiber
The Ohio State University
Department of Agricultural, Environmental
and Development Economics
332 Ag Admin Building
2120 Fyffe Rd
Columbus, OH 43210
klaiber.16@osu.edu
Joshua Abbott
Environmental & Resource Economics
School of Sustainability,
Arizona State University
Tempe, Az 85287
Joshua.K.Abbott@asu.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 879801
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu

Some Like it (Less) Hot:
Extracting Tradeoff Measures for Physically Coupled Amenities
I. Introduction
Hedonic models have been used to estimate measures for the economic tradeoffs people would
make, at the margin, to enhance (or avoid degradation in) a wide array of outdoor amenities. Some
examples directly related to land use decisions include forest lands (Cho, Poudyal and Roberts 2008;
Thorsnes 2002; Tyrvainen and Miettinen 2000), greenbelts (Lee and Linneman 1998), wetlands (Mahan,
Polasky and Adams 2000), lakes (Abbott and Klaiber 2013), open space (Abbott and Klaiber 2010;
Geoghegan 2002; Irwin and Bockstael 2001; Smith, Poulos and Kim 2002; Towe 2009), and aspects of
the surrounding landscape, including tree canopy cover (Cavailhes 2009; Geoghegan, Wainger and
Bockstael 1997; Luttik 2000; Netusil, Chattopadhyay and Kovacs 2010; Sander, Polasky and Haight 2010).
In contrast to these applications, the use of hedonic property value models for the case of landscape
related amenities presents dual challenges.
First, landscape amenities may convey multiple benefits of varying levels of excludability,
leading to complex, multi-scalar patterns of capitalization. For example, tree cover on one’s property
may convey excludable benefits due to its role in shading the house, providing privacy or enhancing the
recreational utility of the yard. Trees on the edge of a neighbor’s yard may provide valuable privacy
benefits, while the trees of still more distant neighbors may offer more diffused aesthetic benefits or
improvements to the neighborhood micro-climate. Tree cover, and landscaping more generally,
contributes to creating a multidimensional impure public good with implications that can have
confounding effects on what can be learned from models that rely on spatial differences in housing
prices.
Second, landscape amenities, by the nature of their interactions with the built and natural
environment may also serve as factor inputs to other valued amenities. For example, vegetation through

1

the effects of shade and evapotranspiration may act to moderate local temperatures. The urban heat
island (UHI) – the relative warming of built urban areas compared to surrounding non-urban areas – is
an intensively researched micro-climatic effect of people’s decisions to transform the landscape.
Extensive research in Phoenix, much of it funded under the National Science Foundation’s CAP-LTER
program, has demonstrated an urban heat island (UHI) effect from the urbanization of its landscape.1
For economists, efforts to understand how these changes feedback into household decision making, and
what these decisions, in turn, reveal about the value placed on these amenities are critical inputs for the
design of policies to mitigate heat island effects.
The hypothesis that people recognize the UHI and adapt their activities to mitigate its effects
within a given urban area has not been tested in the existing literature. We provide the first
unambiguous evidence of an important feedback loop between UHI, people’s behavior through the
location of their housing choice, and the resulting changes in landscape. We establish this finding by
jointly estimating the effects of temperature and the presence of water-intensive (“green”) landscaping
on housing prices for single-family residential properties in the Phoenix metropolitan area.2 This task is
accomplished while taking account of other location specific amenities and dis-amenities, including the
role of site elevation3.
Green landscaping provides both private and public benefits to residents at multiple spatial
scales. It serves to mitigate the UHI effects on local temperatures. Private benefits also include the
aesthetic value of a green yard as well as the opportunity for local outdoor recreation allowed by the

1

See Grimm and Redman [2004] for a summary of the multiple dimensions of this transformation.
Baker et al. [2002] suggest mechanisms that could lead to feedbacks but do not provide evidence that the
temperature effects and recognized choices lead to real resource commitments that can be associated with the
temperatures that vary with location and time of the housing sales.
3
A home’s elevation potentially influences both vistas and evening temperatures linked to the site.
2

2

grass. At a neighborhood scale, the quantity of green landscape may provide services through aesthetics
and recreational opportunities in public areas.
Landscape changes take place within a finely delineated spatial template. This setting combines
structures, roads, and other features of the built environment with the natural environment. The
landscaping decisions of homeowners in a given neighborhood collectively influence localized daily
maximum and nighttime minimum temperatures. By transforming landscape on their properties
homeowners produce local amenities for themselves and, indirectly, spillovers for their neighbors.
Homeowners’ associations also produce collective amenities in their respective local neighborhoods
through plantings, water features, maintenance programs for open space, and restrictions on what
homeowners can do – all of which can affect the microclimate (see Chow et al. [2012]). People’s
behavior, together with the natural processes, are thus jointly embedded in the hedonic price
equilibrium which is assumed to give rise to the relationship between housing prices, home attributes,
and spatially varying features of parcels and neighborhoods (as well as other local goods such as local
school quality, safety and other dimensions of environmental quality).
The implication of this logic for the measurement of the tradeoffs households would make to
enhance landscape amenities arises because the multiple induced outputs resulting from their choices
must be considered as joint outcomes. A strategy that does not adequately control for the roles that
landscape inputs play in the hedonic price function will provide inconsistent estimates of the marginal
value of temperature. It could easily confound the separate effects of the services provided by
landscape amenities with landscape effects on temperature mitigation. Even if concern lies only with
estimating the overall marginal value of landscape, inclusive of its induced effects on temperature, there
is still a need to account for both landscape and temperature due to the potential for reverse causation.
To address this challenge we modify Abbott and Klaiber’s [2011] extension to the Hausman-Taylor panel

3

data model for a hierarchical spatial context. Our strategy extends their logic by defining panels that
exploit two sources of variation in housing prices—the spatial and the temporal dimensions.
The next section describes the urban heat island and its link to landscaping choices. It then
discusses important differences between our approach and past efforts to measure the effect of
weather variables on housing prices, wages, or migration choices. Section 3 presents our econometric
model. Sections 4 and 5 describe the data used and estimation results, respectively. Section 6 discusses
the complementarities between the use of hedonic methods to estimate the effects of spatially
delineated amenities and the modeling of urban ecosystems.

II. The Urban Heat Island and Landscape
The urban heat island refers to the records documenting warmer temperatures at the core of a
built urban area compared to its surrounding, more rural, areas that fall within the same general
weather patterns. It is one of the best documented weather related phenomena that can be associated
with the increases in urbanization globally (see Oke [1982]). Grimm and Redman’s [2004] summary of
the first five years of research associated with the CAP-LTER notes that:
“The signal (for the UHI) in Phoenix is much more dramatic than other world city sites at 10
times the global change trend, owing to the stable air and clear days in this desert city. Minimum
temperatures in the Phoenix summertime have increased by 10°C over the last 50 years . . .” (P. 208,
parenthetical phrase added).
The UHI effect is typically greater at night when energy stored in impervious surfaces is released to the
atmosphere, dampening the typical pattern of nighttime cooling – so much so that the UHI is often
defined on the basis of nighttime temperatures.
There are multiple sets of research that have confirmed the general trends Grimm and Redman
highlight. For example, Brazel et al. [2007] examined the areas around surface weather stations
between 1990 and 2004. Using a pooled sample (over years and spatial zones) this study found that

4

monthly mean minimum temperatures for June in each of thirty-seven development zones were
significantly related to new housing units built in each zone after controlling for the land types used to
define their zones. Mean minimum temperatures increased by approximately 1.4°C (2.5°F) for each
1000 new homes constructed around the station in each year. While the authors are careful to qualify
their results as an approximate relationship that is supportive of UHI effects, they nonetheless reinforce
the conclusions based on other results tracking the general trends in temperature and urbanization for
the area as a whole.
The economic literature on the effects of temperature on housing prices is relatively small. For
the most part models considering temperature as influencing house prices or wages assume households
sort across multiple metropolitan areas and employment markets in response to spatially aggregated
measures of regional climate.4 This literature generally involves multiple metropolitan areas and jointly
considers changes in housing prices (rents) along with wages. The conceptual arguments for joint
consideration of wages and rents are usually attributed to Rosen [1979] and Roback [1982]. The first
empirical effort to evaluate the model’s implications was developed by Blomquist et al. [1988]. Their
findings clearly supported weather conditions as a factor in a model that assumed rents and wages were
determined cross metro areas as a result of a long-run sorting process. Most recently, two studies have
extended their analyses in somewhat different directions. Bieri, Kuminoff, and Pope [2014] consider the
effects of 75 amenities for over 3000 counties in the U.S. on wages and annualized housing prices. Their
analysis includes geographic features, environmental amenities (and dis-amenities), local public services,
infrastructure, and cultural and urban amenities. Humidity, heating and cooling degree days,
precipitation, and sunshine are their weather related variables. In their preferred model with all 75

4

See Albouy et al. [2013]; Biere et al.[ 2014]; Cragg and Kahn [1997]; Maddison and Bigano [2003]; Rehdanz and
Maddison [2009]; Sinha and Cropper [2013].

5

amenities, cooling degree days are a significant negative influence on rents and their measure for
sunshine is a significant positive influence.5
Plantinga et al. [2013] supplements the Blomquist et al. logic using a random utility model
(RUM) of location choices across metropolitan areas. The primary source for their data is the 2000 5%
Public Use Microdata Survey. They consider migration decisions between 1995 and 2000 for working age
(aged 25 to 64) adults for 291 metropolitan areas (MA). In a migration model they find that higher
January temperatures attract movers and higher July temperatures are a significant deterrent.6
Our analysis is different from these other efforts in that it requires that an economically
important choice, the housing decision, respond over relatively small variations in local weather
conditions within a single metropolitan area. It does have some advantages in that it can take advantage
of spatially stable gradients of temperature within the housing market provided they are known to a
significant share of homebuyers. There are several reasons to suggest this characterization is
reasonable. First, there is significant heterogeneity in heat exposure across Maricopa County. 63% of the
spatial-temporal variability in mean minimum temperatures at the Census tract level can be explained
by spatial heterogeneity in the means alone. Second, previous work has demonstrated a strong
correlation of income and lower summer surface temperatures that is suggestive of sorting behavior in
the market, with a marginal reduction of 0.28°C for every $10,000 in income (Jenerette et al. [2007]).
This same work has shown that much of the income-based heterogeneity of temperatures is driven by
differences of vegetative cover, buttressing the case for the joint consideration of these amenities.7
5

A small number of other studies have also considered weather’s role. See Albouy et al. [2013]; Cragg and Kahn
[1997]; Maddison and Bigano [2003]; Rehdanz and Maddison [2009]; Sinha and Cropper [2013].
6
A simpler migration analysis by Evans et al. [2014] using the 2004 and 2006 waves together with confidential
records identifying the census tract of respondents to evaluate residential choices in 2006 confirms the importance
of weather variables.
7
In unpublished research using stated preference questions, Smith et al. [2007] asked respondents from the
Phoenix, AZ area whether they would be willing to pay a higher mortgage or rental fee to reduce summer
nighttime temperatures. The analysis found that respondents were willing on average to pay nearly $40 a month
for a reduction of 5 degrees Fahrenheit.

6

Finally, a separate set of research has used the American time use survey to consider how people adapt
to short term variations in weather conditions. Graff-Zivin and Neidell document a robust link between
temperature and individuals’ daily time allocations to working outdoors for surveys between 2003 and
2006. Their analysis focuses on industries classified as likely to involve work outside. There are
monotonic declines in time allocated to work in these cases for temperatures above 85°F.8

III. Decoupling Natural and Produced Amenities
The use of water intensive landscaping for mitigation of the urban heat island physically couples
two features of a location. It is an example of how the production of one amenity can serve to create
joint outputs. Increased evapotranspiration and shading from green landscaping can reduce the storage
of heat and lessen the UHI. An anticipated byproduct of these types of mitigating responses is a
reduction in the expenditures on electricity for cooling. This linkage implies analysts are unlikely to be
able to construct a quasi-experiment that assigns temperatures in a way that is uncorrelated with
landscape. Since the physical mechanisms that generate the UHI depend on the landscape, the two
phenomena cannot be artificially separated. We also suggested reasons to believe that landscaping is
likely an impure public good. For this reason it may influence housing prices at both a highly localized
(parcel) level and a more diffuse (neighborhood) scale. This differential level for capitalization reflects
the landscaping decisions of many neighbors that aggregate to create both neighborhood level

8

Other studies have also offered support for their conclusions. For example, Connolly’s [2008] analysis of rainfall
and work and leisure is broadly consistent in the sense that labor in general is not affected by the weather. This
finding was also true for Graff-Zivin and Neidell. The effect was under high temperatures for individuals likely to be
working outside. Black et al.’s [2014] analysis of air pollution conditions on outdoor leisure activities using the
ATUS between 2003 and 2010 appears to be broadly consistent. These authors include controls for temperature
but do not report the specific estimates. Their findings suggest that controls for temperatures along with other
fixed effects influence the ability to detect extensive margin adjustments to air pollution conditions. Finally
Siikamaki [2009] used the ATUS as well as other time use surveys to consider trends in the time spent for outdoor
recreation from 1965 to 2007.

7

amenities and microclimate effects that are likely to be noticeable at the relatively coarse scale of
neighborhoods.9
Recovering a tradeoff measure for reducing nighttime temperatures requires that the analysis
be capable of using temperature differences at multiple spatial scales to capture the effects of both
spatially differentiated microclimates and any associated differences in landscaping. This task is
especially challenging because the variables used to measure temperature and landscaping are likely to
be correlated with other omitted variables at each spatial scale. Parcel-level benefits from green
landscape may be correlated with unobserved neighborhood characteristics while gains associated with
landscape features across broader spatial scales influencing neighborhood quality, such as access to
local jogging or walking paths, are also liked to be correlated. In addition it is also important to recognize
the possibility for temporal changes in unobservables due to urban expansion. Temperature, while
perhaps not significantly varying at parcel and neighborhood spatial scales, may be correlated with
evolving larger-scale features of an urbanizing landscape, particularly aspects of development density.
The potentially complex interplay between omitted unobservables and the multi-scalar nature
of the effects of landscape and UHI creates challenges to the spatial fixed effects approaches often
employed in hedonics. It particularly limits the ability to use relatively small-scale spatial fixed effects to
absorb temporally stable omitted variables at or above this scale as these would absorb the variation in
temperature needed for identification. Given this property, the analyst is faced with a tradeoff in
selecting the scale of fixed effects. Consistent estimation of fine-level effects (e.g. effects of landscaping
at or below the neighborhood level) might preclude identification of more widespread and slowlyvarying spatial phenomena such as the UHI.

9

There may also be some excludable benefits to the parcel-level microclimate of one’s own landscape, e.g. Stone
and Norman [2006]).

8

Abbott and Klaiber [2010; 2011] address this problem by recasting traditional cross-sectional
hedonic data as a panel, where the panel is defined as transactions within discrete spatial
“neighborhoods” (e.g., subdivisions, census units, etc.) and then proposing a spatial adaptation of the
Hausman-Taylor panel data estimator (Hausman and Taylor [1981]). The Hausman-Taylor model
combines elements of both random effects and fixed effects estimation for panel data using
instrumental variables to correct for correlation between explanatory variables and spatially-defined
random effects. To instrument for all variables that vary below the scale of the spatial effects, the model
utilizes the within-transformation of variables to form instruments. For endogenous variables that lack
“within” variation, these instruments are constructed using the within-panel means of a subset of the
within-varying variables that are hypothesized to be exogenous. Our presentation of this model here
closely parallels Abbott and Klaiber [2011] with a change that is especially relevant to our application.
We augment the purely spatial definition of panels used in their application to include a temporal
dimension, so that a panel is defined as the intersection of a given spatial zone with the sale year for the
houses in our sample. This change allows our new framework to address the effects arising from timevarying omitted variables and, as we explain below, facilitates the estimation of temperature effects.
As with most hedonic regression models, the (natural log) of housing price

is hypothesized

to be determined by a linear function of a series of home, neighborhood and area attributes
(1)
where the

subscript represents individual houses, spatial neighborhood, and time, respectively.

Variables denoted by

are

specific and classified as either endogenous (superscript=1) or exogenous

(superscript=2), while variables denoted by

do not vary within the

panel dimension and similarly

can be either endogenous or exogenous. Unobserved random effects which vary over location and time
are given by

and

particular form so that

is an idiosyncratic error. The endogeneity of
but

is assumed to be of a

is exogenous with respect to the idiosyncratic error

9

.10 As this specification suggests, the econometric challenge is to consistently estimate coefficients
for the endogenous variables,

and

, in the presence of omitted variables.

The process begins by first obtaining consistent estimates of

and

using the within

estimator and computing the residuals. The within panel means of these residuals correspond to
spatial/time fixed effects. Regressing these means on
as instruments, recovers initial estimates for

and

and

, using exogenous variables

and

. With estimates of all coefficients in hand, it is

then possible to estimate the variance of the error components. These variance estimates are used to
develop a random effects feasible GLS (FGLS) transformation on equation (1) as shown in equation (2)
(2)
where

is a FGLS transformed column vector of ones. The final step is to develop an instrumental

variables regression using the within-transformed variables,
varying exogenous variables,
. Note that exogenous
for the endogenous

and

; the transformed non-within-

; and the neighborhood means of within-varying exogenous variables

variables are instrumented by themselves while

provides instruments

variables. Identification rests on the ability to find a number of exogenous within-

varying variables that equal or exceed the number of endogenous non within-varying variables,

.

For a valid instrumental variable estimator for equation (2) the within-panel means of these
within-varying characteristics

must be correlated with

while also being uncorrelated with

. We

follow Abbott and Klaiber [2011] and construct a pseudo-Hausman test suggested by Wooldridge [2002]
to test this hypothesis. A Wald test for this hypothesis compares the coefficient estimates for

from

fixed and random effects estimates. It tests the null-hypothesis that the difference in the two sets of
coefficients estimated under different maintained hypotheses is zero. Failure to reject this condition

10

This is the standard assumption underlying the standard fixed effects estimation strategy in a spatial hedonic
setting.

10

indicates that random effects and fixed effects estimates cannot be distinguished on statistical criteria,
supporting the conclusion that the

are uncorrelated with

.11

While this description has assumed that the error correlations follow a random effects pattern,
so that the transformed error in the FGLS equation (2) is spherical, this is not necessary for consistency
of the coefficient estimates. To account for spatial and temporal correlation within panels as well as
heteroskedasticity, we calculate cluster-robust standard errors using a nonparametric cluster bootstrap
(Cameron, Gelbach and Miller [2008]), with clusters defined at the same scale as the random effects.

IV. Data
Our data consists of all single family residential transactions in Maricopa County (the county
containing Phoenix and most of its MSA) between 1999 and 2005. Phoenix experienced rapid growth
during this period. Our primary source of transactions data comes from the private data vendor,
Dataquick, and is supplemented with data from the Maricopa County Assessor. These data contain a
complete inventory of single family residential transactions as well as an extensive list of structural
characteristics and lot size. After removing outliers and observations with missing information, we are
left with a dataset containing 614,700 individual transactions. We further restrict the sample to areas
containing a minimum of 5 transactions in each tract/year combination. This removes an additional 236
transactions that were primarily located a considerable distance outside the urban area. Our resulting
dataset contains 614,464 individual transactions occurring over 630 Census 2000 tracts (Figure 1).
The Hausman-Taylor model requires a clear definition of the spatial and temporal scale of the
random effects. Census 2000 tracts are used to define the spatial dimension of the random effect (the
dimension). These spatial effects are interacted with the year of sale (the dimension) to define our
11

To ensure robustness of the test to errors that fail to follow the random effects assumptions, we follow
Wooldridge’s suggestion and use a cluster-robust estimate of the covariance matrix in the Wald test.

11

random effects, yielding an unbalanced panel of 4,341 unique tract/year combinations. While varying in
spatial size depending on population density, tracts provide a commonly used definition of a
“neighborhood” – knitting together areas with similar observed and unobserved public goods while also
allowing significant “between” variation across tracts to identify the coefficients of variables that vary at
or above the tract level. To take account of the rapid increases in housing prices in Phoenix during our
sample period, we normalize transactions prices to January 1998 dollars using the monthly Case-Shiller
price index for Phoenix. We further convert these normalized prices to an annual rental rate using a
value of 11% following Poterba [1991]. Summary statistics for prices as well as other structural
characteristics including square footage, lot acreage, number of stories, number of bathrooms, age of
house, number of rooms, and indicators for the presence of a garage and pool are shown in Table 1.
Overall, the mean annualized Case-Shiller adjusted sales price in our sample is slightly over $16,349 in
1998 dollars, with a nominal sales value of $221,416. The typical home contains approximately 1,900
square feet, slightly over 2.5 bathrooms, and is situated on 0.20 acres. These summary features are
consistent with the pattern of relatively dense (for detached housing) development of subdivisions in
the area. We calculate a further set of parcel specific GIS attributes which consist of distances to the
nearest highway and downtown Phoenix, as well as distances to and adjacency indicators for local parks,
city parks, and subdivision provided open space following Abbott and Klaiber [2010].
Information on landscape characteristics is obtained from remote sensing data (Stefanov,
Ramsey and Christensen 2001) which classified satellite imagery in the Phoenix area into 12 unique
categories. Their classification system analyzed differences in reflectivity to assign one of 12 land cover
types to 30x30 meter squares (rasters) covering our study area. The land cover types include cultivated
vegetation, cultivated grass, vegetation, fluvial and lacustrine sediments (canals), water, undisturbed,
disturbed soil with agricultural water rights, compacted soil, commercial/industrial, asphalt and
concrete, mesic residential, and xeric residential. By comparing the land cover classification to aerial

12

photography of residential lots, we chose to combine the categories cultivated vegetation, water, and
mesic residential to form an “irrigated” classification where the remaining categories are considered
“dry” or xeric. We overlaid classifications on GIS parcel maps, categorizing a parcel as irrigated based on
the intersection of parcel centroids. Figure 2 provides an example of the parcel level classification of
irrigated land cover. In addition to the parcel-level classification of landscaping, we created a
subdivision-level measure of green landscaping to capture aspects of neighborhood landscaping that
capitalize to all houses in the neighborhood.12 For a subdivision to be characterized as mesic or “wet”, at
least 75% of the parcels in the subdivision must be identified as irrigated. This characterization results in
a total of 261 wet subdivisions shown in Figure 3 with the remaining subdivisions containing a mix of
irrigated and xeric landscaping.
Our final parcel-specific variable is elevation which was obtained from USGS digital elevation
models. These provide precise measures of elevation as continuous raster files which are intersected
with parcel centroids using GIS. Summary statistics for this variable are shown in table 1 showing that
the mean elevation is 391 meters with a range from 259 meters to 969 meters. Phoenix is located in an
alluvial plain, with elevations increasing to the north and south of downtown. The majority of higher
elevation parcels are located at a considerable distance from downtown Phoenix and are associated
with mountain outcroppings on the desert plain. We hypothesize that elevation provides considerable
amenity value to households through improved views.
Tract-level temperature measures for July minimum temperatures are obtained from the PRISM
database maintained by Oregon State University (http://www.prism.oregonstate.edu). These data are
available monthly at a 4 kilometer resolution. We focus on July temperatures and nighttime minimum
temperatures consistent with the focus of most UHI research. Since temperatures are unlikely to vary
12

A subdivision is typically substantially smaller than either a Census block group or tract, with an average of 70
homes. Homes within a subdivision are often fairly homogenous, may share a number of local public goods and are
often governed by a single home ownership association.

13

substantially within tracts, several steps are used to estimate tract July minimum temperature specific
for each year of our transactions data. The first step is to obtain (using latitude and longitudes) the July
minimum temperature associated with each parcel in our database for each year. We then attach to
each parcel the nearest July low temperature to the year we observed a transaction for each house. For
houses transacting from January through June we attach the previous year’s July low temperature, and
for houses transacting between July and December we attach the current year’s temperature. Finally,
we average over all transactions in each tract/year combination to form a spatially and temporally
varying measure of temperature. Figure 4 shows the resulting temperature measures at the Census tract
level for the year 2005. We use this annually updated measure of temperature under the assumption
that current and potential renters will draw upon the most recent part of the historical record to form
their expectations of a year’s summer temperatures. We also assess the sensitivity of the model to this
assumption. Between 1999 and 2005, the average nighttime minimum temperature across all tracts
ranged from a low of 77.9 (F) degrees in 1999 to a high of 80.5 (F) degrees in 2003. This general increase
in temperature is what would be expected from urban heat island effects associated with increased
development. Our final set of within-panel invariant control variables includes Census 2000
demographics on age composition and race. Summary statistics for each of these variables are shown in
Table 1.

V. Results
The Hausman-Taylor estimator requires that the variables influencing housing prices be
partitioned into exogenous and (potentially) endogenous categories. Defining panels as Census
tract/year combinations, we treat all of the within-panel invariant variables, except temperature, as
exogenous. While all within-panel varying variables are instrumented using their “within”
transformations, the strategy used in the case of temperature requires at least one of these variables to

14

be assumed exogenous, allowing the within-panel means of these exogenous variables to provide the
identifying variation for the effect of temperature. To meet this need we assume that distance to
subdivision open space and elevation are exogenous, implying our estimation is over-identified by one
degree of freedom. For these variables to function as instruments, they must be uncorrelated with the
error and partially correlated with temperature. The relevance of proximity to subdivision open space
stems from the effects on neighborhood density from open space provision. Increased provision of open
space reduces development density, thereby reducing urban heat island effects. We follow Abbott and
Klaiber’s [2011] arguments for distance to subdivision open space as a valid instrument. Specifically,
subdivision open space often serves an important role as “retention basins” for urban storm water
runoff. It also meets mandates by zoning apart from endogenous market considerations. Thus, it
satisfies the needs for being correlated but not jointly determined with temperature. The relevance of
elevation as an instrument is well-established in the UHI literature. Elevation is likely to be exogenous
due to the geological nature of its “provision” as well as the specific structure of the Phoenix landscape.
Downtown Phoenix is located at the bottom of a “bowl”, with elevation slowly increasing (at different
rates depending on direction) with distance from the city center. This gradual elevation change is not
readily apparent and as such is likely to be uncorrelated with unobservable characteristics, particularly
after controlling for Census demographics.13
Before presenting our preferred estimates we first present three alternatives to the HausmanTaylor model in Table 2: naïve OLS, random effects (RE) with effects defined for tract/year combinations,
and fixed effects (FE) using tract effects. When these estimates are compared with those using our
adaptation of the Hausman-Taylor logic each set serves to highlight the importance of our identification
strategy and the influence of endogeneity in estimates developed with methods that do not take
13

There are a handful of developed mountainous outcroppings that offer exceptions to this story of gradual
elevation change. Homes located on these outcroppings represent a small fraction of sales, but do tend to possess
views and more luxurious amenities that are not captured in the available housing characteristics.

15

account of its role for several key determinants of housing prices in this market. The OLS estimator
exploits both within and between panel variation in the independent variables. However, it ignores the
potential for correlation between omitted spatial and temporal effects and the dependent variables and
may therefore exhibit omitted variables bias at all spatial scales. The random effects estimator
efficiently accounts for the contribution of within and between variation in its estimates, resulting in
estimates similar to those using the within estimator for datasets with long panels and with a relatively
high variance for the unobserved spatial and temporal heterogeneity in the random effects (Abbott and
Klaiber [2011]). However, like OLS, RE estimates are not consistent –particularly for variables with little
or no within-panel variation, such as tract-level attributes. The FE estimates utilize only within-panel
variation. Because our measure of July minimum temperature varies by tract and year, we are unable to
recover estimates of the marginal effect of temperature using tract/year fixed effects. Therefore, we
consolidate fixed effects to the tract level, utilizing only the inter-annual variation in temperature within
each tract for identification.
In general, the RE estimates are comparable to the FE estimates for variables with substantial
within-panel variation. The value of a green lot is consistent across all three specifications, yielding
approximately a 1% premium for conversion to green landscaping. However, moving from OLS to RE
reduces by about one-half the magnitude of the estimated effect of subdivision-wide green landscaping
– from a 22% premium in the OLS specification to about 12% under RE. Comparing the estimates for July
minimum temperature, we find that a 1(F) degree increase in tract level nighttime temperatures
decreases rental values by approximately 2% according to the OLS estimate and 3.2% according to RE.
The FE approach of discarding between-tract variation in temperatures and relying exclusively on
temporal variation in temperatures within tracts yields the counter intuitive finding that a 1(F) degree
rise in nighttime temperatures increases rental values by 3.9%. This clear difference in the implications
of temperature suggests that retaining between-tract variation in temperature is an important source of

16

variation. Nonetheless, the RE model may be biased if the tract/year effects are correlated with model
covariates. Temperature, in particular, varies across both spatial and temporal dimensions. As a result, it
is possible that it is correlated with the latent spatial and temporal features of the landscape, such as
development density.
To address the concerns about consistency at all scales, we turn to the Hausman-Taylor
estimator. This approach instruments for temperature using the within-tract annual means of elevation
and distance to subdivision open space. Table 3 presents information supporting the relevance of these
instruments. The correlations between temperature and the within-tract means of elevation and
distance to subdivision open space are -0.31 and 0.35 respectively .The two instruments are not
themselves highly correlated, with a correlation of -0.17. The pseudo-Hausman tests fail to reject the
null hypothesis that the instruments are individually and jointly exogenous.
The results for the Hausman-Taylor model are shown in Table 4. The variables are grouped
according to whether they are assumed to be endogenous or exogenous and whether they vary within
the tract/year panels or between them. Focusing on the estimates using PRISM temperature data, we
first examine the results for the within-varying exogenous variables, whose means serve as instruments
for temperature. The estimates correspond closely to those using both the naïve OLS and the random
effects models, suggesting the assumption of exogeneity is reasonable. They are also statistically
significant within p-values of 0.01 or lower. A 100m increase in elevation results in an estimated price
increase of 8.2% or about $112 more in monthly rents while a 1 mile reduction in distance to subdivision
open space increases rental values by 4.1%.
The second category of variables includes the endogenous, within-varying characteristics,
consisting of: structural housing characteristics, measures of distance and adjacency with respect to
parks, highways, and the central business district, as well as block group summary measures for land use
and landscape characterization. We find the expected signs for structural characteristics including

17

positive and significant signs on the coefficients for square footage, acreage, and baths. Similarly, the
coefficients for the distance measures exhibit signs consistent with expectations and previous work
(Abbott and Klaiber [2010]).14 Turning to landscape characteristics, we find a significant but small
premium of 1% for green landscaping at the parcel level but find a much larger premium of
approximately 11% for living in a green subdivision.
The third category of variables includes panel-invariant variables that do not require the
development of instruments. While these variables are treated as exogenous, they are primarily
included to control for observable features of the tract-level “neighborhoods”, reducing the scope for
omitted variables bias. We anticipated that including these variables would enhance the validity of the
instruments for tract-level temperature. Since they serve a role as controls we do not attempt to
interpret the estimated coefficients for these variables. Also included within this category are dummy
variables for each year, which show a trend of “real” price appreciation over our sample period even
after deflating prices using the Case-Shiller index.
The HT estimate for July minimum temperature yields a negative and statistically significant
coefficient of -0.041, indicating that households are willing to pay approximately 4.1% more to live in an
area with a 1°F reduction in nighttime temperatures. This estimate is appreciably larger than both the
OLS estimate and the RE estimate (Table 2). This aversion to heat island effects corresponds to a
monthly willingness to pay of approximately $56 to avoid a 1 degree increase in temperature using the
mean monthly rental price of $1,362.
These estimates provide direct confirmation of a feedback loop from UHI impacts associated
with urbanization. They imply that households recognize the relatively higher nighttime temperatures
and sort in neighborhoods to reduce the size of the UHI’s effects. These estimates take explicit account
14

Our model specifications were selected to be as close as feasible to this previous work. The focus of the earlier
work was subdivision open space in relation to other, more open access, open space areas. As a result the spatial
unit for the panel is different.

18

of green landscape as a mitigating factor. They exploit the spatial and temporal variation in prices,
landscape and temperature, as well as develop instruments to account for the endogenously
determined landscape and temperature values for specific parcels. To our knowledge, this analysis is the
first example of how market mechanisms can serve the role of signaling changes in urban climate and
ecosystems in response to urbanization and in turn confirming people’s responses to them.
We also evaluated the robustness of our results by considering a range of alternative
specification assumptions. To examine whether our estimates are sensitive to alternative measures of
summer minimum temperatures we replace the PRISM estimates of mean minimum July temperature
with inverse-distance weighted interpolations of the July mean minimum temperature from roughly 20
active NOAA weather stations located in Maricopa County (see the estimates in Table 4). The estimates
of the temperature marginal effect are very similar in magnitude regardless of how temperature is
measured – -.041 relative to -.045 – with the estimates of other parameters remaining essentially
unchanged.
As noted earlier, our temperature measure is based on the assumption that the relevant metric
is the minimum temperature in the most recent July. This specification assumes that the expectations of
renters update in a myopically adaptive way that discards information contained in previous years’
temperatures. It also implies that inter-annual variation within tracts, as well as differences in
temperature across tracts, play a role in the identification of the effects of the urban heat island. To
assess the sensitivity of our estimates to this aspect of our specification, we replaced the minimum July
temperature with averages of the minimum July temperature over the previous two years. The resulting
estimate is virtually indistinguishable in sign and significance from the original HT estimate (Table 5).
Alternative specifications, using an even larger smoothing window (and not reported here) show little
change in the estimated marginal effects of temperature. However, as the smoothing of the
temperature measure increases and approaches the tract level sample mean, the standard errors do

19

increase so that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no association. These analyses suggest that
while cross-sectional differences across tracts in temperature are ultimately capitalized into home
prices, retaining temporal variation is essential to the process of developing precise estimates.
Finally, we assessed whether our results were sensitive to the choice of statistical summary
measure for temperature. The urban heat island is often characterized in terms of a variation on an
order statistic, namely the nighttime minimum temperatures. This logic for this selection is likely
motivated by the assumption that weekday exposure to neighborhood microclimate for many working
homeowners will be in nighttime hours. In addition, while air conditioning is pervasive among private
homes, the ability to maintain cool sleeping temperatures depends on outside conditions and would
therefore be another reason for the focus on nighttime temperatures. Despite these arguments there is
no obvious, a priori metric that encompasses all the relevant dimensions of neighborhood microclimate.
Daytime maximum temperatures may be more salient for outdoor activities on weekends but would not
necessarily be confined to areas around the house. Furthermore, to the extent that centralized air
conditioning with a thermostat is used to avert the effects of extreme summertime heat, both minimum
and maximum temperature are potentially relevant. Table 5 reports estimates using the July maximum
(daytime) temperature and shows that the marginal effect is indistinguishable from when the minimum
temperature is used. When both minimum and maximum temperature are included as endogenous
regressors (not shown)15, both coefficients attenuate in absolute value and become insignificant.
Altogether, the evidence suggests that the estimated effects of maximum or minimum temperatures
relate to a shared common component of temperature reflected in both measures (the two measures
have a correlation of 0.45), rather than minimum or maximum temperature per se.
To provide some context for our estimated marginal willingness to pay for a reduction in
temperature, it is helpful to consider how it compares to estimates of the energy cost savings from
15

This leads to a just-identified model relative to the over-identified models using one temperature variable.

20

reduced air conditioning costs. Estimates for this saving depend on a wide array of factors such as the
albedo of building surfaces, the quality of insulation, the size and external surface area of the building,
the efficiency of air conditioning, thermostat settings, and the exact nature of the change in the daily
outside temperature profile. We abstract from these details and draw upon the simulation model of
Matsuura [1995] to provide an approximate gauge of the effect. His analysis considers a 1 degree (F)
increase in mean outside temperature. This would increase the average daily energy load for a twostory, 1640 ft2 townhouse (slightly smaller than the mean detached home in our sample) in Phoenix kept
at a constant comfortable temperature by approximately 7.5kWh/day or 232.5 kWh per month.
Translating this energy use into monthly utility costs depends on the pricing plan chosen (e.g., one that
charges for peak and off-peak usage vs. a flat rate) and the baseline usage (since many utilities use
increasing block rates). However, using 2014 summer16 seasonal rates from Arizona Public Service’s
“standard” plan for homes in the 801-3000 kWh monthly usage bracket, the marginal cost of a kWh is
$0.162. Using this composite of assumptions, this analysis results in increased utility costs from a 1
degree temperature increase of approximately $38/month, which converted to 1998 dollars using the
urban consumers CPI amounts to $26.17 This is about half of our estimate of the monthly willingness to
pay to avoid one degree temperature increase of $56. This lower value is reasonable since adjustments
to indoor conditions do not offer a perfect substitute for cooler outdoor conditions. The ability to use
outdoor space in the evening is affected by nighttime conditions whereas air conditioning addresses
only the indoor living environment.

VI. Discussion

16

Almost all energy usage from increased mean temperatures would occur in summer months, with negligible
energy savings from less heating in the (very mild) Phoenix winters (Matsuura [1995]).
17
The CPI component for energy in 1998 was 161.6 using a base of 1980-82. For January 2014 it was 233.9.

21

Ecologists have provided detailed evidence, due in large part to the national LTER research
program, of how urban ecosystems and the services they provide to people are affected by both
development density and its form. Ecologists have also argued that we should expect a feedback loop
whereby changes in these services affect people, causing them to adopt mitigation and adaptation
strategies which can in turn further alter urban ecosystems. This conjecture, while plausible, has not
been convincingly verified to date. The links from urbanization and increased development density to
the temperature outcomes of the UHI are well known. We provide the first evidence – using the
“fingerprints” revealed by market activity in a differentiated housing market – that there is a
corresponding response from people. Households’ choices of where to live and the types of landscape
to maintain provide a part of the hypothesized feedback loop. In metropolitan Phoenix one observes
neighborhoods where homeowners modify landscapes, water treatments, and design features of their
homes to adapt to and locally mitigate summer temperatures. Developers plan subdivisions to
incorporate landscape, open space, and building envelopes to reduce temperatures. The housing market
signals the importance of reduced urban nighttime temperatures and thereby provides incentives for
the adoption of means to achieve this end. The nature of this feedback loop also suggests why efforts to
reduce outdoor water use may not be as successful as hoped by local water providers. Landscape
amenities requiring water command premiums that are only partially replaced by attractive xeric
alternatives. While natural desert landscapes may provide many aesthetic benefits, their use of heatabsorbing rock and low evapotranspiration do not facilitate temperature reductions and may actually
increase nighttime temperatures.
Our results demonstrate that green landscaping generates substantial benefits to homeowners,
both for its direct benefits and its indirect effects as an input for the cooling of the surrounding
microclimate. As development in arid areas such as the U.S. Sun Belt continues and as climate change
and the urban heat island effects of development progress, one of the effects may well be that

22

quantities of water required to sustain mitigation through green landscaping are likely to increase even
as the social opportunity cost of the water rises contemporaneously.
A full analysis of the tradeoffs inherent in evaluating the importance of continued efforts at
conservation of outdoor water use requires a comparison of the value of water in its use as an input (i.e.
the value of its marginal product) to green vegetation and temperature moderation compared to the
value of water in alternative uses. This type of assessment requires the integration of valuation
techniques – such as the hedonic price regression estimated here – for the final valued “services” or
“outputs” with knowledge of the underlying production functions linking the use of water inputs to the
valued amenities.18 It also requires information on other strategies for mitigation to reduce the effects
of increases in outdoor temperatures. It is possible to develop the conceptual logic that links the
equilibrium first-stage hedonic approaches to biophysical production relations for green landscaping and
temperature. However, this approach is less suitable for considering the endogenous feedbacks
between water use, land cover, temperature, the patterns of development, and welfare that are likely
to result over long time scales or as a result of significant land use or water policy interventions.
Providing ex ante analysis of the tradeoffs likely to be associated with alternative policy
instruments for mitigation and adaptation requires the integration of biophysical “production functions”
with structural economic models of location choices by households and the spatial supply decisions of
developers.19 While complex and data intensive, we argue that this sort of structural, interdisciplinary
modeling is essential to making the transition from understanding present tradeoffs to anticipating the
effects of policy interventions in complex, dynamic urban environments that have embedded feedbacks
that arise from both ecological and economic processes.

18

Abbott and Klaiber [2013] provide an example of this approach where the linkage between the use of water
inputs and the valued amenity is relatively transparent.
19
See Kuminoff et al. [2013] for a review of this literature and Klaiber and Phaneuf [ 2010] for one of the first
efforts to consider the housing supply response with a spatially delineated context.

23

References
Abbott, J. K., and H. A. Klaiber. 2010. "Is All Space Created Equal? Uncovering the Relationship between
Competing Land Uses in Subdivisions." Ecological Economics 70(2):296-307.
Abbott, J. K., and H. A. Klaiber. 2011. "An Embarrassment of Riches: Confronting Omitted Variable Bias
and Multiscale Capitalization in Hedonic Price Models." Review of Economics and Statistics
93(4):1331-42.
Abbott, J. K., and H. A. Klaiber. 2013. "The Value of Water as an Urban Club Good: A Matching Approach
to Community-Provided Lakes." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
65(2):208-24.
Albouy, D., W. Graf, R. Kellogg, and H. Wolff. 2013. "Climate Amenities, Climate Change, and American
Quality of Life." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18925.
Bäck, Danielle, Nicolai V. Kuminoff, Eric Van Buren and Scott Van Buren. 2014. "National Evidence on Air
Pollution Avoidance Behavior." Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ. Working paper.
Baker, L.A., A.J. Brazel, N. Selover, C. Martin, N. McIntyre, F.R. Steiner, A. Nelson, and L. Musacchio.
2003. "Urbanization and warming of Phoenix (Arizona, USA): Impacts, feedbacks and
mitigation." Urban Ecosystems 6(3):183-203.
Bieri, David S., Nicolai V. Kuminoff, and Jaren C. Pope. 2014. "National Expenditures on Local Amenities."
Working paper.
Brazel, A., P. Gober, S. J. Lee, S. Grossman-Clarke, J. Zehnder, B. Hedquist, and E. Comparri. 2007.
"Determinants of Changes in the Regional Urban Heat Island in Metropolitan Phoenix (Arizona,
USA) between 1990 and 2004." Climate Research 33(2):171-82.
Brazel, A., N. Selover, R. Vose, and G. Heisler. 2000. "The Tale of Two Climates - Baltimore and Phoenix
Urban Lter Sites." Climate Research 15(2):123-35.

24

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3):414-27.
Cavailhes, Jean. 2009. "Gis-Based Hedonic Pricing of Landscape." Environmental and Resource Economics
44(4):571-90.
Cho, S. H., N. C. Poudyal, and R. K. Roberts. 2008. "Spatial Analysis of the Amenity Value of Green Open
Space." Ecological Economics 66(2-3):403-16.
Chow, W. T. L., D. Brennan, and A. J. Brazel. 2012. "Urban Heat Island Research in Phoenix, Arizona
Theoretical Contributions and Policy Applications." Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society 93(4):517-30.
Cohen, J. E. 2003. "Human Population: The Next Half Century." Science 302(5648):1172-75.
Connolly, Marie. 2008. "Here Comes the Rain Again: Weather and the Intertemporal Substitution of
Leisure." Journal of Labor Economics 26(1):73-100.
Cragg, M., and M. Kahn. 1997. "New Estimates of Climate Demand: Evidence from Location Choice."
Journal of Urban Economics 42(2):261-84.
Evans, Mary F., V. Kerry Smith, Jesse Snook and Carlos Valcarcel. 2014. "Air quality, caregiving needs,
and the location decisions of older adults." Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ. Working paper.
Geoghegan, Jacqueline. 2002. "The Value of Open Spaces in Residential Land Use." Land Use Policy
19(1):91-98.
Geoghegan, Jacqueline, Lisa A. Wainger, and Nancy E. Bockstael. 1997. "Spatial Landscape Indices in a
Hedonic Framework: An Ecological Economics Analysis Using Gis." Ecological Economics
23(3):251-64.
Grimm, Nancy, and Charles Redman. 2004. "Approaches to the study of urban ecosystems: The case of
Central Arizona--Phoenix." Urban Ecosystems 7(3):199-213.

25

Gober, P., A. Brazel, R. Quay, S. Myint, S. Grossman-Clarke, A. Miller, and S. Rossi. 2010. "Using Watered
Landscapes to Manipulate Urban Heat Island Effects: How Much Water Will It Take to Cool
Phoenix?" Journal of the American Planning Association 76(1):109-21.
Gober, P., A. Middel, A. Brazel, S. Myint, H. Chang, J. D. Duh, and L. House-Peters. 2012. "Tradeoffs
between Water Conservation and Temperature Amelioration in Phoenix and Portland:
Implications for Urban Sustainability." Urban Geography 33(7):1030-54.
Golden, J. S., D. Hartz, A. Brazel, G. Luber, and P. Phelan. 2008. "A Biometeorology Study of Climate and
Heat-Related Morbidity in Phoenix from 2001 to 2006." International Journal of Biometeorology
52(6):471-80.
Graff- Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2014. "Temperature and the Allocation of Time: Implications
for Climate Change." Journal of Labor Economics 32(1):1-26.
Guhathakurta, S., and P. Gober. 2007. "The Impact of the Phoenix Urban Heat Island on Residential
Water Use." Journal of the American Planning Association 73(3):317-29.
Guhathakurta, S., and P. Gober. 2010. "Residential Land Use, the Urban Heat Island, and Water Use in
Phoenix: A Path Analysis." Journal of Planning Education and Research 30(1):40-51.
Harlan, S. L., A. J. Brazel, L. Prashad, W. L. Stefanov, and L. Larsen. 2006. "Neighborhood Microclimates
and Vulnerability to Heat Stress." Social Science & Medicine 63(11):2847-63.
Hausman, Jerry A., and William E. Taylor. 1981. "Panel Data and Unobservable Individual Effects."
Econometrica 49(6):1377-98.
Irwin, Elena G., and Nancy E. Bockstael. 2001. "The Problem of Identifying Land Use Spillovers:
Measuring the Effects of Open Space on Residential Property Values." American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 83(3):698-704.

26

Jenerette, G. D., S. L. Harlan, A. Brazel, N. Jones, L. Larsen, and W. L. Stefanov. 2007. "Regional
Relationships between Surface Temperature, Vegetation, and Human Settlement in a Rapidly
Urbanizing Ecosystem." Landscape Ecology 22(3):353-65.
Klaiber, H. Allen, and Daniel J. Phaneuf. 2010. “Linking Developers and Homeowners in a Horizontal
Sorting Framework: Implications for General Equilibrium Welfare Management.” Unpublished.
Kuminoff, N. V., C. F. Parmeter, and J. C. Pope. 2010. "Which Hedonic Models Can We Trust to Recover
the Marginal Willingness to Pay for Environmental Amenities?" Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 60(3):145-60.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith and Christopher Timmins (2013).“The New Economics of Equilibrium
Sorting and its Transformational Role for Policy Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Literature,
51(4):1-57.
Lee, C. M., and P. Linneman. 1998. "Dynamics of the Greenbelt Amenity Effect on the Land Market - the
Case of Seoul's Greenbelt." Real Estate Economics 26(1):107-29.
Luttik, J. 2000. "The Value of Trees, Water and Open Space as Reflected by House Prices in the
Netherlands." Landscape and Urban Planning 48(3-4):161-67.
Maddison, D., and A. Bigano. 2003. "The Amenity Value of the Italian Climate." Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 45(2):319-32.
Mahan, B. L., S. Polasky, and R. M. Adams. 2000. "Valuing Urban Wetlands: A Property Price Approach."
Land Economics 76(1):100-13.
Martin, C. 2001. "Landscape Water Use in Phoenix, Arizona." Desert Plants 17:26-31.
Matsuura, K. 1995. "Effects of Climate Change on Building Energy Consumption in Cities." Theoretical
and Applied Climatology 51:105-17.
Netusil, N. R., S. Chattopadhyay, and K. F. Kovacs. 2010. "Estimating the Demand for Tree Canopy: A
Second-Stage Hedonic Price Analysis in Portland, Oregon." Land Economics 86(2):281-93.

27

Oke, T. R. 1982. "The Energetic Basis of the Urban Heat-Island." Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society 108(455):1-24.
Palmquist, Raymond B. 1992. "Valuing Localized Externalities." Journal of Urban Economics 31(1):59-68.
Plantinga, Andrew J., C. Détang-Dessendre, G.L. Hunt, and V. Piguet. 2013. "Housing prices and interurban migration." Regional Science and Urban Economics 43(2):296-306.
Poterba, J. M. 1991. "House Price Dynamics - the Role of Tax Policy and Demography." Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity (2):143-203.
Rehdanz, K., and D. Maddison. 2009. "The Amenity Value of Climate to Households in Germany." Oxford
Economic Papers-New Series 61(1):150-67.
Sander, H., S. Polasky, and R. G. Haight. 2010. "The Value of Urban Tree Cover: A Hedonic Property Price
Model in Ramsey and Dakota Counties, Minnesota, USA." Ecological Economics 69(8):1646-56.
Siikamäki, Juha. 2009. "Use of Time for Outdoor Recreation in the United States, 1965-2007." Resources
for the Future, Discussion Paper No. 09-18.
Sinha, P., and M.L. Cropper. 2013. "The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from Us Migration
Decisions." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18756.
Smith, V. Kerry, Christine Poulos, and Hyun Kim. 2002. "Treating Open Space as an Urban Amenity."
Resource and Energy Economics 24(1-2):107-29.
Stefanov, W. L., M. S. Ramsey, and P. R. Christensen. 2001. "Monitoring Urban Land Cover Change: An
Expert System Approach to Land Cover Classification of Semiarid to Arid Urban Centers."
Remote Sensing of Environment 77(2):173-85.
Stone, B. 2005. "Urban Heat and Air Pollution - an Emerging Role for Planners in the Climate Change
Debate." Journal of the American Planning Association 71(1):13-25.
Stone, B., and J. M. Norman. 2006. "Land Use Planning and Surface Heat Island Formation: A ParcelBased Radiation Flux Approach." Atmospheric Environment 40(19):3561-73.

28

Thorsnes, P. 2002. "The Value of a Suburban Forest Preserve: Estimates from Sales of Vacant Residential
Building Lots." Land Economics 78(3):426-41.
Towe, C. 2009. "A Valuation of Subdivision Open Space by Type." American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 91(5):1319-25.
Tyrvainen, Liisa, and Antti Miettinen. 2000. "Property Prices and Urban Forest Amenities." Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 39(2):205-23.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. M. . 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

29

Table 1: Summary statistics (N=614,464)

Sale Price (Annual, 1998 dollars)
Sale Price (Nominal)
Elevation (100s of meters)
Distance to subd. open space (miles)
Summer Min Temp (PRISM)
Summer Min Temp (Monitor)
Summer Max Temp (PRISM)
Green landscape (0/1)
Green subdivision (0/1)
Square feet (100s)
Acres
Stories
Bathrooms
Age
Garage (0/1)
Pool (0/1)
Rooms
Square feet sq
Acres sq
Age sq
Adjacent to rail (0/1)
Adjacent to canal (0/1)
Adjacent to school (0/1)
Distance to CBD (miles)
Distance to CBD sq

Mean
Std Dev
Min
Max
16349
18990
739
973384
221416
256130
17000 10000000
3.9163
0.7191
2.5893
9.6962
0.3639
0.4596
0.0059
7.0004
78.7513
1.3130 74.6330
83.4535
79.3953
1.2560 73.0608
84.9613
106.0373
1.5571 100.2242 110.3890
0.0933
0.2908
0.0937
0.1309
19.2619
7.3236
6.0000
60.0000
0.2086
0.1853
0.0500
13.9374
1.1963
0.3974
1.0000
4.0000
2.6214
0.8366
0.5000
6.0000
14.3327 15.6857
1.0000
86.0000
0.9578
0.2010
0.3301
0.4702
6.6369
1.5570
3.0000
19.0000
424.6561 364.6836 36.0000 3600.0000
0.0779
0.5839
0.0025 194.2523
451.4647 814.2542
1.0000 7396.0000
0.0021
0.0459
0.0098
0.0986
0.0047
0.0685
16.0656
6.2910
0.5029
38.8356
297.6804 204.9631
0.2530 1508.2010

Distance to highway (miles)
Distance to highway sq
Distance to local park (miles)
Distance to city park (miles)
Adjacent subd. open space (0/1)
Adjacent city park (0/1)
Adjacent local park (0/1)
Local park area (within 1500 ft)
Subd open space area (within 1500 ft)
% Residential (block group)
% Agricultural (block group)
% Vacant (block group)
% Commercial (block group)
% Hispanic
% Black
% Children
% Age 18-35
% Age 35-55
Year = 1999
Year = 2001
Year = 2002
Year = 2003
Year = 2004
Year = 2005

30

Mean
5.0607
42.1450
0.9368
5.2039
0.0521
0.0003
0.0024
1.5616
9.1060
0.5303
0.0501
0.2542
0.0724
0.1837
0.0254
0.2743
0.2275
0.2885
0.1249
0.1187
0.1252
0.1415
0.1854
0.1964

Std Dev
4.0662
59.6745
0.8255
3.8175
0.2221
0.0186
0.0486
5.9547
16.3581
0.2671
0.1003
0.2245
0.0914
0.1835
0.0429
0.0950
0.0949
0.0836

Min
Max
0.0003 24.4125
0.0000 595.9692
0.0031 14.4390
0.0286 29.8113

0.0000 127.5382
0.0000 284.4212
0.0010
1.0000
0.0000
0.6189
0.0000
0.9586
0.0000
0.8027
0.0000
0.9605
0.0000
0.6598
0.0000
0.4678
0.0000
0.6500
0.0174
0.4751

Table 2: Comparison of OLS, random effects and fixed effects estimators.
Elevation
Distance to subd. open space
Summer min temperature (PRISM)
Green landscape (0/1)
Green subdivision (0/1)
Square feet (100s)
Acres
Stories
Bathrooms
Age
Garage (0/1)
Pool (0/1)
Rooms
Square feet sq
Acres sq
Age sq
Adjacent to rail
Adjacent to canal
Adjacent to school
Distance to CBD
Distance to CBD sq
Distance to highway
Distance to highway sq
Distance to local park
Distance to city park
Adjacent subd. open space
Adjacent city park

OLS
0.114***
(0.00739)
-0.0200***
(0.00687)
-0.0208***
(0.00506)
0.0106***
(0.00157)
0.222***
(0.0166)
0.0560***
(0.00141)
0.299***
(0.0241)
-0.107***
(0.00544)
0.0736***
(0.00380)
-0.0120***
(0.000582)
0.0667***
(0.00431)
0.0593***
(0.00163)
-0.0215***
(0.00185)
-0.000424***
(2.09e-05)
-0.0311***
(0.00430)
0.000139***
(8.05e-06)
0.0379
(0.0280)
0.0108*
(0.00628)
-0.00505
(0.0101)
0.0587***
(0.0108)
-0.00160***
(0.000280)
0.00683
(0.00657)
-7.55e-05
(0.000690)
0.00296
(0.00995)
-0.00953**
(0.00426)
0.0322***
(0.00436)
-0.0207
(0.0300)
Tract-x-Year
614,464

RE
0.0877***
(0.0135)
-0.0342***
(0.00596)
-0.0323***
(0.00408)
0.0101***
(0.00142)
0.119***
(0.0100)
0.0523***
(0.00111)
0.333***
(0.0189)
-0.0826***
(0.00354)
0.0487***
(0.00317)
-0.00973***
(0.000423)
0.0539***
(0.00329)
0.0545***
(0.00129)
-0.0157***
(0.00139)
-0.000396***
(1.50e-05)
-0.0359***
(0.00466)
8.09e-05***
(6.64e-06)
-0.0110
(0.0227)
-0.00676
(0.00549)
-0.00627
(0.0110)
0.0615***
(0.0120)
-0.00158***
(0.000258)
0.00355
(0.00624)
-0.000367
(0.000600)
0.00581
(0.00959)
-0.0107***
(0.00385)
0.0375***
(0.00366)
-0.0225
(0.0269)
Tract-x-Year
614,464

Panel dimension
Observations
R-squared
Year by tract clustered robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

FE
0.0861*
(0.0457)
-0.0340***
(0.0109)
0.0394***
(0.0140)
0.0100***
(0.00167)
0.110***
(0.0154)
0.0517***
(0.00187)
0.325***
(0.0288)
-0.0813***
(0.00499)
0.0478***
(0.00441)
-0.00921***
(0.000665)
0.0495***
(0.00479)
0.0545***
(0.00195)
-0.0160***
(0.00233)
-0.000385***
(2.66e-05)
-0.0355***
(0.00678)
6.91e-05***
(1.02e-05)
-0.0148
(0.0244)
-0.00827
(0.00774)
-0.00194
(0.00774)
0.0655***
(0.0161)
-0.00167***
(0.000371)
0.00692
(0.0132)
-0.000372
(0.00113)
0.00861
(0.00876)
-0.0138**
(0.00617)
0.0373***
(0.00660)
-0.0256
(0.0335)
Tract
614,464

31

OLS
0.0207*
(0.0111)
Local park area (1500 ft)
-0.000344**
(0.000173)
Subd open space area (1500 ft)
0.000486***
(0.000132)
% Residential (block group) 0.0135
(0.0165)
% Agricultural (block group) -0.102*
(0.0557)
% Vacant (block group)
0.0372*
(0.0195)
% Commercial (block group) 0.0350
(0.0325)
Distance to CBD
-0.0752***
(0.0103)
Distance to CBD sq
0.00150***
(0.000278)
Distance to highway
-0.00385
(0.00800)
Distance to highway sq
0.000741
(0.000862)
Distance to regional park
-0.00386***
(0.00146)
Distance to city park
0.0201***
(0.00419)
Distance to local park
-0.0236*
(0.0121)
% Hispanic
-0.415***
(0.0338)
% Black
-0.413***
(0.0765)
% Children
-0.254***
(0.0433)
% Age 18-35
-0.0321
(0.0548)
% Age 35-55
0.355***
(0.0528)
Year = 1999
-0.00805
(0.00790)
Year = 2001
0.0377***
(0.0101)
Year = 2002
0.0328***
(0.0105)
Year = 2003
0.0801***
(0.0146)
Year = 2004
0.0543***
(0.0132)
Year = 2005
0.00966
(0.0116)

RE
0.0141*
(0.00853)
-0.000132
(0.000153)
0.000497***
(0.000115)
0.0614***
(0.0102)
-0.0314
(0.0391)
0.0900***
(0.0252)
0.0894***
(0.0172)
-0.0992***
(0.0123)
0.00194***
(0.000264)
0.0110
(0.00696)
0.000650
(0.000687)
-0.00357***
(0.00125)
0.0222***
(0.00402)
-0.0175
(0.0126)
-0.503***
(0.0249)
-0.827***
(0.0550)
-0.274***
(0.0454)
0.0621*
(0.0346)
0.483***
(0.0472)
-0.00999
(0.00771)
0.0514***
(0.00873)
0.0678***
(0.00914)
0.117***
(0.0121)
0.0767***
(0.00981)
0.0363***
(0.00850)

FE
0.0207**
(0.0104)
-0.000109
(0.000180)
0.000375*
(0.000204)
0.0545***
(0.0182)
0.00604
(0.0427)
0.0864***
(0.0290)
0.0764**
(0.0352)

Constant

11.23***
(0.355)

4.751***
(1.160)

Adjacent local park

10.10***
(0.438)

-0.000235
(0.00369)
-0.0106
(0.0122)
-0.0396**
(0.0200)
-0.0546*
(0.0318)
-0.0180
(0.0169)
-0.0164
(0.0110)

Table 3: Correlations between minimum July temperature and candidate instruments and pseudoHausman tests of instrument validity
Pseudo-Hasuman test for exogeneity
Variable
p value
Elevation
0.8176
Dist to subd open space
0.7454
Joint test
0.9254

Correlation w/
Temperature
-0.308
0.351

32

Table 4: Hausman-Taylor estimates
Temperature Specification
PRISM
Monitor (IDW)
Within Panel Exogenous
Elevation
Distance to subd. open space
Between Panel Endogenous
Summer min temperature

0.0817***
(0.0187)
-0.0359***
(0.00712)

0.0815***
(0.0188)
-0.0360***
(0.00707)

-0.0410**
(0.0179)

-0.0447**
(0.0196)

Temperature Specification
PRISM
Monitor (IDW)
Adjacent city park
-0.0237
-0.0237
(0.0273)
(0.0273)
Adjacent local park
0.0134
0.0134
(0.00851)
(0.00851)
Local park area (1500 ft)
-0.000131
-0.000131
(0.000157)
(0.000157)
Subd open space area (1500 ft) 0.000497*** 0.000496***
(0.000120)
(0.000120)
% Residential (block group)
0.0624***
0.0622***
(0.0103)
(0.0103)
% Agricultural (block group)
-0.0251
-0.0252
(0.0435)
(0.0436)
% Vacant (block group)
0.0935***
0.0934***
(0.0274)
(0.0274)
% Commercial (block group)
0.0895***
0.0896***
(0.0195)
(0.0195)
Between Panel Exogenous
Distance to CBD
-0.111***
-0.106***
(0.0123)
(0.0121)
Distance to CBD sq
0.00229***
0.00212***
(0.000266)
(0.000266)
Distance to highway
0.00597
0.00348
(0.00870)
(0.00824)
Distance to highway sq
0.000986
0.000960
(0.000790)
(0.000794)
Distance to regional park
-0.00384**
0.00106
(0.00177)
(0.00136)
Distance to city park
0.0205***
0.0225***
(0.00439)
(0.00407)
Distance to local park
-0.0277**
-0.0315**
(0.0135)
(0.0131)
% Hispanic
-0.566***
-0.583***
(0.0400)
(0.0449)
% Black
-0.802***
-0.877***
(0.0614)
(0.0813)
% Children
-0.225***
-0.257***
(0.0463)
(0.0520)
% Age 18-35
0.0101
0.0384
(0.0398)
(0.0476)
% Age 35-55
0.401***
0.379***
(0.0455)
(0.0487)
Year = 1999
-0.0210**
-0.0165**
(0.00826)
(0.00798)
Year = 2001
0.0436***
0.0460***
(0.0165)
(0.0175)
Year = 2002
0.0598**
0.0629**
(0.0243)
(0.0254)
Year = 2003
0.121***
0.124***
(0.0424)
(0.0438)
Year = 2004
0.0753***
0.108***
(0.0264)
(0.0400)
Year = 2005
0.0253*
0.0544**
(0.0149)
(0.0258)
Constant
12.10***
12.37***
(1.487)
(1.621)

Within-Panel Endogenous
Green landscape (0/1)

0.00999***
0.00999***
(0.00146)
(0.00146)
Green subdivision (0/1)
0.109***
0.109***
(0.01000)
(0.01000)
Square feet (100s)
0.0520***
0.0520***
(0.00111)
(0.00111)
Acres
0.338***
0.339***
(0.0215)
(0.0215)
Stories
-0.0811***
-0.0811***
(0.00367)
(0.00367)
Bathrooms
0.0475***
0.0475***
(0.00311)
(0.00311)
Age
-0.00955***
-0.00954***
(0.000440)
(0.000440)
Garage (0/1)
0.0513***
0.0513***
(0.00340)
(0.00340)
Pool (0/1)
0.0543***
0.0543***
(0.00130)
(0.00130)
Rooms
-0.0155***
-0.0155***
(0.00138)
(0.00138)
Square feet sq
-0.000394*** -0.000394***
(1.46e-05)
(1.46e-05)
Acres sq
-0.0366***
-0.0366***
(0.00610)
(0.00610)
Age sq
7.47e-05***
7.46e-05***
(7.01e-06)
(7.01e-06)
Adjacent to rail
-0.0139
-0.0139
(0.0238)
(0.0238)
Adjacent to canal
-0.00826
-0.00825
(0.00530)
(0.00530)
Adjacent to school
-0.00636
-0.00637
(0.0109)
(0.0109)
Distance to CBD
0.0617***
0.0617***
(0.0109)
(0.0109)
Distance to CBD sq
-0.00156***
-0.00156***
(0.000240)
(0.000240)
Distance to highway
0.00391
0.00392
(0.00707)
(0.00707)
Distance to highway sq
-0.000402
-0.000403
(0.000684)
(0.000684)
Distance to local park
0.00590
0.00591
(0.00976)
(0.00976)
Distance to city park
-0.0111***
-0.0111***
(0.00378)
(0.00378)
Adjacent subd. open space
0.0376***
0.0376***
(0.00364)
(0.00364)
Panel Dimension
Tract-x-Year Tract-x-Year
Observations
614,464
614,464
Number of year_spatial_id
4,341
4,341
Clustered bootstrap standard errors in parentheses (k=200)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

33

Table 5: Hausman-Taylor estimates using alternative specifications of tract-level temperatures
Temperature Specification
Two Year Avg Max Temperature
Within Panel Exogenous
Elevation
Distance to subd. open space
Between Panel Endogenous
Summer min temp (2 yr avg)
Summer max temp

0.0817***
(0.00233)
-0.0359***
(0.00208)

Temperature Specification
Two Year Avg Max Temperature
Adjacent city park
-0.0237
-0.0237
(0.0171)
(0.0273)
Adjacent local park
0.0134**
0.0134
(0.00659)
(0.00851)
Local park area (1500 ft)
-0.000131** -0.000131
(5.94e-05)
(0.000157)
Subd open space area (1500 ft)
0.000497*** 0.000497***
(2.93e-05)
(0.000120)
% Residential (block group) 0.0624***
0.0623***
(0.00469)
(0.0103)
% Agricultural (block group) -0.0251***
-0.0251
(0.00880)
(0.0436)
% Vacant (block group)
0.0935***
0.0934***
(0.00589)
(0.0274)
% Commercial (block group) 0.0895***
0.0896***
(0.00696)
(0.0195)
Between Panel Exogenous
Distance to CBD
-0.112***
-0.0886***
(0.00482)
(0.0141)
Distance to CBD sq
0.00232***
0.00176***
(0.000126)
(0.000324)
Distance to highway
0.00594
0.00508
(0.00401)
(0.00844)
Distance to highway sq
0.000981*** 0.000729
(0.000276)
(0.000827)
Distance to regional park
-0.00374**
-0.000384
(0.00154)
(0.00110)
Distance to city park
0.0205***
0.0252***
(0.00176)
(0.00393)
Distance to local park
-0.0278***
-0.0189
(0.00939)
(0.0140)
% Hispanic
-0.570***
-0.438***
(0.0374)
(0.0530)
% Black
-0.808***
-0.701***
(0.0740)
(0.0585)
% Children
-0.222***
-0.273***
(0.0634)
(0.0517)
% Age 18-35
0.0104
-0.0158
(0.0504)
(0.0356)
% Age 35-55
0.396***
0.483***
(0.0690)
(0.0509)
Year = 1999
-0.0374***
0.00361
(0.0142)
(0.0109)
Year = 2001
0.0278*
0.0682***
(0.0146)
(0.0261)
Year = 2002
0.0524***
0.0652**
(0.0193)
(0.0261)
Year = 2003
0.0997***
0.157***
(0.0268)
(0.0575)
Year = 2004
0.0958***
0.136***
(0.0276)
(0.0514)
Year = 2005
0.0460**
0.123**
(0.0199)
(0.0540)

0.0816***
(0.0187)
-0.0359***
(0.00709)

-0.0399***
(0.0120)
-0.0404**
(0.0176)

Within-Panel Endogenous
Green landscape (0/1)

0.00999***
0.00999***
(0.00122)
(0.00146)
Green subdivision (0/1)
0.109***
0.109***
(0.00384)
(0.01000)
Square feet (100s)
0.0520***
0.0520***
(0.000264)
(0.00111)
Acres
0.338***
0.339***
(0.00358)
(0.0215)
Stories
-0.0811***
-0.0811***
(0.00103)
(0.00367)
Bathrooms
0.0475***
0.0475***
(0.000875)
(0.00311)
Age
-0.00955***
-0.00954***
(0.000113)
(0.000440)
Garage (0/1)
0.0513***
0.0513***
(0.00173)
(0.00340)
Pool (0/1)
0.0543***
0.0543***
(0.000774)
(0.00130)
Rooms
-0.0155***
-0.0155***
(0.000419)
(0.00138)
Square feet sq
-0.000394*** -0.000394***
(4.34e-06)
(1.46e-05)
Acres sq
-0.0366***
-0.0366***
(0.000853)
(0.00610)
Age sq
7.47e-05***
7.46e-05***
(1.99e-06)
(7.01e-06)
Adjacent to rail
-0.0139*
-0.0139
(0.00712)
(0.0238)
Adjacent to canal
-0.00826**
-0.00826
(0.00330)
(0.00530)
Adjacent to school
-0.00636
-0.00636
(0.00465)
(0.0109)
Distance to CBD
0.0617***
0.0618***
(0.00157)
(0.0109)
Distance to CBD sq
-0.00156***
-0.00156***
(3.67e-05)
(0.000240)
Distance to highway
0.00391***
0.00392
(0.000973)
(0.00707)
Distance to highway sq
-0.000402*** -0.000403
(5.47e-05)
(0.000684)
Distance to local park
0.00590***
0.00590
(0.000807)
(0.00976)
Distance to city park
-0.0111***
-0.0111***
(0.000593)
(0.00378)
Adjacent subd. open space
0.0376***
0.0376***
(0.00154)
(0.00364)
Panel Dimension
Tract-x-Year
Tract-x-Year
Observations
614,464
614,464
Number of year_spatial_id
4,341
4,341
Clustered bootstrap standard errors in parentheses (k=200)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Constant

34

12.02***
(0.967)

12.84***
(1.809)

Figure 1. Transactions with 2000 Census tracts

35

Figure 2. Housing transactions with a green landscape classification

36

Figure 3. Subdivisions classified as “green”

37

79.8-81.2
79.4-79.8
79.2-79.8

79.0-79.2
78.8-79.0
78.3-78.8

Figure 4. Spatial variation for July 2005 PRISM minimum temperatures.

38

77.2-78.3
75.4-77.2
No transactions

