NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. FOOD AND NUTRITION PROGRAMS
Hilary W. Hoynes
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Working Paper 21057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21057
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015

We thank Dorian Carloni, Elora Ditton and Andrea Kwan for excellent research assistance. We appreciate
comments provided by Marianne Bitler, Jeffrey Liebman, Robert Moffitt, Zoe Neuberger, Dottie Rosenbaum,
and James Ziliak. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs
Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 21057
March 2015, Revised September 2015
JEL No. H53,I3
ABSTRACT
This chapter provides an overview of the patchwork of U.S. food and nutrition programs, with detailed
discussions of SNAP (formerly the Food Stamp Program), WIC, and the school breakfast and lunch
programs. Building on Currie’s (2003) review, we document the history and goals of the programs,
and describe the current program rules. We also provide program statistics and how participation and
costs have changed over time. The programs vary along how “in-kind” the benefits are, and we describe
economic frameworks through which each can be analyzed. We then review the recent research on
each program, focusing on studies that employ techniques that can isolate causal impacts. We conclude
by highlighting gaps in current knowledge and promising areas for future research.
Hilary W. Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

Concerns about adequate nutrition figure prominently in discussions of the health and
wellbeing of America’s disadvantaged populations. In 2014, 15.4 percent of persons and 20.9
percent of children lived in households reported as food insecure – meaning conditions such as
worrying about whether food would run out, food not lasting, not being able to afford balanced
meals, skipping meals, not eating enough (Coleman-Jensen et al. 2015). At the same time,
Americans’ diet quality has been persistently low and unchanging over time (Wang et al. 2014)
and more than a third of adults and 17 percent of children are obese (Ogden et al. 2014).
To address these problems, a range of U.S. food and nutrition programs are provided by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Spending on the top eight programs totaled $99 billion in
2014; by comparison the Earned Income Tax Credit cost $64 billion (in 2012). In this survey, we
focus on the four largest of these programs, including Supplemental Nutrition Access Program
(SNAP, previously known as Food Stamps), Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women Infants and Children (WIC), the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) and the School
Breakfast Program (SBP).
There are many features that are common to the four food and nutrition programs. The
programs are all means tested, that is they are limited to individuals living in households with
limited income (and sometimes limited assets). The programs share the goal of assuring adequate
nutrition. Notably, while much of the U.S. social safety net is provided at the state or local level,
food and nutrition programs are federal, thus providing a basic floor for protecting individuals
and families that is similar across all states.
However, there are also important ways in which the programs differ. First, the programs
vary in their targeted populations, from near-universal eligibility for SNAP to the narrowly
defined age groups eligible for WIC. Second, the income cutoffs for eligibility vary across the
programs with higher income limits (185 percent of the federal poverty line) for WIC compared
to SNAP (130 percent of the federal poverty line). Third, the programs also vary by the degree to
which the benefits are provided “in-kind,” from largely unrestricted vouchers in SNAP, to moretargeted vouchers in WIC, to direct provision of meals that are required to conform to nutrition
guidelines in the school feeding programs. Fourth, the programs vary by whether they phase out
gradually (SNAP) or abruptly as income increases (the others). Together, these factors affect
how the programs impact the family’s budget, and as we describe in section 3 below, how they
are to be modeled in the canonical means-tested program budget constraint framework. Notably,
the programs also layer on top of each other so that a family may be receiving benefits from
multiple programs at once, and also may lose access to one or more of them abruptly (e.g. during
school vacations, or when a child ages out of WIC).
We begin our survey with a description of these four central food and nutrition programs,
their history, the rules under which they operate, as well as providing program statistics. SNAP is
by far the largest program at a cost of $74.2 billion in 2014. Nearly 1 in 7 Americans participated
in SNAP in 2014, and the program lifted 4.7 million people including 2.1 million children out of
poverty in 2014 (Short 2015). SNAP is the most universal of the programs, in that is there is no
additional targeting to specific groups beyond income and asset eligibility criteria. Additionally,
SNAP is the most unrestricted as the program provides vouchers that can be used to purchase
most foods at grocery stores or other authorized retailers. Average monthly benefits in 2014
1

amounted to $257 per household, or $125 per person. This translates to benefits worth about
$4.11 per person per day.
WIC is more narrowly targeted in terms of both population served and types of goods
that can be purchased with benefits. $6.2 billion was spent on WIC in 2014. As the name
implies, benefits are targeted to infants, young children, and pregnant and postpartum women.
WIC benefits can be used to purchase infant formula and other specific food items such as milk,
cereal and juice as specified in the WIC bundle. Additionally WIC provides nutrition education
and referrals to health care and other social services. Over half of U.S. infants receive WIC
benefits.
The school breakfast and lunch programs (SBP and NSLP) provide free or low-cost
meals to low-income children. Students from higher-income families may also participate in the
program through the purchase of meals, and these meals receive subsidies (though much smaller
ones) as well. Forty percent of school children receive free or reduced price lunches and 56.6
percent of school children overall participate in the NSLP. The combined cost of these programs
in 2014 totaled 15 billion.
We go on, in section 3, to discuss the theoretical issues around these programs. Each of
the food and nutrition programs can be analyzed through standard economic frameworks to
explore predicted effects on food consumption and labor supply. The applicable frameworks and
predictions differ somewhat due to the design of the programs – such as how “in-kind” the
benefits are and whether they are phased out gradually or are all or nothing. We pay particular
attention to the difference in incentives for programs with “value vouchers” (as in SNAP) versus
those with “quantity vouchers” (as in WIC). An important distinction of programs with quantity
vouchers is the lack of sensitivity to price, leading to incentives for firm markup and increases in
program costs. More generally, as with other means-tested transfer programs, these programs
face the usual tradeoff in balancing the protective aspects of the programs to improve dietary
intake and reduce food insecurity against their distorting incentives such as reduced labor supply.
In Section 4 we provide a comprehensive summary of the research on these programs,
with particular emphasis on the work published since Currie (2003). We begin by discussing the
challenges for identification and an overview of the different empirical approaches taken in the
literature. A central challenge for evaluation of the effects of food and nutrition programs is that
commonly used quasi-experimental approaches, relying on variation across states and reforms
over time, are not easily applied. This stems from the federal structure of these programs and the
relatively limited changes over time. Further, a comparison of participants to nonparticipants is
problematic due to selection into the program and its relationship to poverty and disadvantage.
Additionally, with respect to the food stamp program, the universal nature of the program means
there are no ineligible groups to serve as controls, which is another common approach in the
quasi-experimental literature. Nonetheless, researchers have found sources of variation – such as
exploiting geographic variation in access, sharp differences in eligibility, and program rule
changes – to credibly identify program impacts in some cases. We provide a summary of the
literature on our four central food and nutrition programs, focusing on studies with credible,
design based approaches. Throughout our review, we pay particular attention to studies that
examine the impact and relevance of these programs for the nonelderly population.
2

Overall our review of SNAP studies shows that macroeconomic conditions are a key
determinant for tracking caseloads and expenditures over time, with less role for changes in
program policies. Additionally, studies have investigated the impacts of SNAP on a wide range
of economic and health outcomes, including their impacts on food insecurity, dietary quality,
consumption patterns, obesity, and labor market participation. In general, the studies with the
most credible designs have found results on take-up and consumption that are consistent with
economic theory predictions. SNAP increases family resources and studies show that the
program leads to increases in food and nonfood spending. Furthermore, the increases in food
spending from the relatively unrestricted SNAP benefit appear to be similar to if the program
was provided as cash. Studies consistently show that SNAP reduces food insecurity and
increases health at birth and greater exposure to SNAP in early life leads to improvements in
medium term and long term health. The evidence for effects of SNAP on contemporaneous
health for children and adults is more mixed, however.
The literature on WIC is primarily aimed at estimating the effects of the program on
health at birth. The most credible design-based studies show consistent evidence that WIC leads
to improvements in outcomes such as average birthweight, the incidence of low birth weight and
maternal weight gain. There is much less evidence about how the program affects outcomes for
children, who are eligible for benefits through age 5. Recent work on firm incentives explores
interesting and important issues arising due to the quantity voucher nature of the program.
Most research on the NSLP has focused on how the program impacts dietary intake, and
also obesity rates. The results have been somewhat mixed, with generally more positive impacts
for lower-income students. The research on the SBP has increased dramatically over the past 20
years, in part taking advantage of the expansion of the program during this time first to schools
that previously did not offer the program, and then by expanding access within schools to a
wider range of students. The former generally shows positive program impacts, while the latter
finds strong improvements in participation but more mixed effects on dietary quality and student
outcomes.
We conclude by discussing new developments and current policy discussions. We
identify areas that are unexplored and discuss areas that are ripe for future research.

1. History of the programs and rules
Table 1.1 provides a brief overview of the four food and nutrition programs that we study
in this chapter: SNAP (formerly the Food Stamp Program), Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants and Children (WIC), National School Lunch Program, and School Breakfast
Program. While all of the programs share the goal of assuring adequate nutritional intake among
at risk populations and each is means tested, the programs differ in terms of the population
served, and the nature of the program provided. SNAP is the largest program, reaching an
average of 46.5 million persons at a total annual cost of $74.2 billion in 2014. It is the most
unrestricted, providing a debit card to facilitate purchases of most food items in the grocery store
and extending benefits to the broadest population. WIC, on the other hand, is highly prescribed
3

benefit, largely consisting of “quantity” vouchers to purchase very specific bundles.
Additionally, the program is highly targeted, extending benefits only to pregnant and postpartum women, infants and children under age five. In 2014, WIC served just under 2 million
women and 6.3 million children at a cost of $6.3 billion. The school lunch and breakfast
programs provide free and reduced-price meals to eligible school-aged children. In 2014, the
lunch program served 21.7 million low-income children at a cost of $9.6 billion and the breakfast
program served 11.6 million low-income children at a total cost of $3.6 billion.1
1.1 Program History and Rules: SNAP
1.1.1 Overview of Program
SNAP has features consistent with traditional means-tested transfer programs. Eligible
households must satisfy income and asset tests. Maximum benefits are assigned based on
household size, and actual benefits received are reduced as income increases based on the benefit
reduction rate (or tax rate) calculated through the benefits formula. The similarities with other
U.S. means-tested programs end there.
Unlike virtually all means tested programs in the U.S., SNAP eligibility is not limited to
certain targeted groups such as families with children, aged, and the disabled.2 Second, SNAP is
a federal program with all funding (except 50 percent of administrative costs) provided by the
federal government, eligibility and benefit rules determined federally, and comparably few rules
set by the states (particularly prior to welfare reform).3 Third, the income eligibility threshold
and benefits are adjusted for changes in prices each year.4 Fourth, the benefit reduction rate is
30% of net income (lower than AFDC/TANF) and the program serves both the working and
nonworking poor. Its universal eligibility (i.e., eligibility depends only on need) combined with
the fact that benefits and caseloads rise freely with need (i.e., it expands during recessions, since
the program is an entitlement and expenditures are not capped) have elevated SNAP to its status
as the fundamental safety net program in the U.S.
Benefits take the form of “value vouchers” in that they provide a dollar amount that can
be used to purchase most foods from grocery stores that are foods designed to be taken home and
prepared. In other words, most grocery store foods can be purchased with the exceptions of
goods such as hot foods intended for immediate consumption, vitamins, paper products, pet
foods, alcohol and tobacco. Starting in the late 1980s and completed by 2004, states transitioned
to delivery of benefits by Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) cards, eliminating the use of paper
vouchers. In 2008, the program name was changed from the Food Stamp Program to the

1

These costs only include spending on free and reduced-price meals. Total spending, including paid meals, in 2014
was $11.4 and $3.7 billion for lunch and breakfast, respectively.
2
The program is not quite universal: notably undocumented immigrants are not eligible for SNAP. Additionally, as
discussed below, there are restrictions on receipt for able bodied adults 18-49 without dependents.
3
In other public assistance programs such as TANF and Medicaid, states determine fundamental parameters such as
the income eligibility cutoffs and (for TANF) benefit levels.
4
Benefits are tied to the cost of a “market basked of foods which if prepared and consumed at home, would provide
a complete, nutritious diet at minimal cost”, the so-called Thrifty Food Plan, and then indexed for increases in
prices.

4

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Some states have different names for the
program, such as California’s “CalFresh”.
1.1.2 Eligibility and Benefits
SNAP, like other safety net programs, is designed to insure a basic level of consumption
in low-income families. Consequently, a traditional income support program will feature a
“guarantee”—that is, a benefit level if the family has no income. As earnings or income
increases, benefits are reduced resulting in an implicit tax rate on earnings (called the benefit
reduction rate or BRR).
Unlike most means-tested benefit programs in the U.S., SNAP is broadly available to
almost all households with low incomes. The eligibility rules and benefit levels vary little within
the U.S., and are largely set at the federal level. Eligible households must meet three criteria:
gross monthly income does not exceed 130 percent of the poverty line, net income (income after
deductions) does not exceed the poverty line, and “countable” assets do not exceed $2,250 (or
$3,250 for elderly, disabled).5 Additionally, most non-working, non-disabled childless adults
aged 18 to 49 (referred to as able bodied adults without dependents or ABAWD) are limited to
three months of benefits within a three-year period. The eligibility unit is the “household unit”
and consists of people who purchase and prepare food together. After initial eligibility,
households must be recertified every 6 to 24 months.
A stylized version of the benefit formula is presented in Figure 1.1 for a family of a fixed
size. A key parameter of the formula is the cost of food under the USDA’s Thrifty Food Plan,
which we also term the “needs standard.” The maximum SNAP benefit amount (represented as
the horizontal line in the figure) is typically set equal to the needs standard.6 SNAP is designed to
fill the gap between the needs standard and the cash resources available to a family to purchase
food. A family with no income receives the maximum benefit amount, and is expected to
contribute nothing out-of-pocket to food purchases. Total food spending, depicted by the
upward-sloping line labeled “hypothetical food spending” increases with income since food is a
normal good.7 Total food spending thus equals the maximum benefit level for a family with no
other income source. As a family’s income increases, they are expected to be able to spend more
of their own cash on food purchases, and SNAP benefits are reduced accordingly. The slope of
the SNAP benefits line in Figure 1.1 is the BRR, which is currently set at 0.3. The benefit
formula is thus as follows:
(1)

Benefits = Max_Benefit – 0.3*(Net_Income).

5

As described below, the gross income test rules have recently been relaxed through expansions in categorical
eligibility. For SNAP, countable assets exclude homes and retirement plans, and the extent to which vehicles are
counted varies across states. SNAP recipients who receive SSI or TANF are excluded from the SNAP asset test.
6
Congress can set maximum benefits equal to some multiple of the needs standard. For example, the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 temporarily raised maximum benefits to be 113.6 percent of the needs
standard.
7
As drawn here, we assume the marginal propensity to consume food out of income is lower than the marginal tax
rate, and we assume that SNAP is valued the same as cash for food purchases.

5

The SNAP benefit level as a function of net family income is represented by the
downward-sloping line in the figure. Finally, the family’s out-of-pocket spending on food is the
vertical distance between the SNAP benefits line and the food spending line.
Net income is calculated as cash pre-tax income less the following deductions: a standard
deduction, a 20% deduction from earned income, an excess shelter cost deduction, a deduction
for childcare costs associated with working/training, and a medical cost deduction that is
available only to the elderly and disabled. Because of these deductions, in practice the benefit
reduction rate (the effective tax rate) out of gross income is lower than 0.3 (we present data on
this below). Notably, the income measures used for SNAP eligibility use a cash, pre-tax measure
and therefore do not include in-kind benefits (e.g. housing assistance) or tax credits including the
EITC or the Child Tax Credit. Net income does include cash transfers such as social security,
disability income, unemployment insurance and TANF.
Central policy issues include whether the needs standard is set at an appropriate level,
and whether the benefit reduction rate is appropriate (Institute of Medicine 2013). It is worth
pointing out that this 0.3 (statutory) benefit reduction rate is substantially lower than that
experienced by other safety net programs such as disability and TANF.
1.1.3 History, Reforms, and Policy Changes
Currie (2003) provides a detailed history of the Food Stamp Program. We briefly touch
on some of the important elements of the history and discuss more recent policy changes.
The modern Food Stamp Program began with President Kennedy's 1961 initiation of
pilot food stamp programs in eight impoverished counties.8 The pilot programs were later
expanded to 43 counties in 1962 and 1963. The success with these pilot programs led to the Food
Stamp Act of 1964, which gave local areas the authority to start up the Food Stamp Program in
their county. As it remains today, the program was federally funded and benefits were
redeemable at approved retail food stores. In the period following the passage of the Food Stamp
Act, there was a steady stream of counties initiating Food Stamp Programs and Federal spending
on the FSP more than doubled between 1967 and 1969. Support for requiring counties to
participate in FSP grew due to a national spotlight on hunger (Berry 1984). This interest
culminated in passage of 1973 Amendments to the Food Stamp Act, which mandated that all
counties offer FSP by 1975.9
Figure 1.2 plots the population weighted percent of counties with a FSP from 1960 to
1975. During the pilot phase (1961-1964), FSP coverage increased slowly. Beginning in 1964,
Program growth accelerated; coverage expanded at a steady pace until all counties were covered
10

8

A more detailed history timeline can be found here: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/timeline.pdf.
Prior to the Food Stamp program, some counties provided food aid through the Commodity Distribution Program
(CDP). The main goal of the CDP was to support farm prices and farm income by removing surplus commodities
from the market. The CDP was far from a universal program. It never reached all counties. The food basket
contained a limited range of products, the distribution was infrequent, and distribution centers were difficult to
reach.
10
Counties are weighted by their 1970 population. Note this is not the food stamp caseload, but represents the
percent of the U.S. population that lived in a county with a FSP.
9

6

in 1974. There was substantial heterogeneity in timing of adoption of the FSP, both within and
across states. The map in Figure 1.3 shades counties according to date of FSP adoption (with
darker shading denoting a later start-up date).
Compared to the dramatic reforms (AFDC) and expansions (EITC) of income support
programs that have characterized the last two decades, the programmatic aspects of Food Stamps
have remained fairly stable over time. A major change took place in the 1977 Food Stamp Act
reauthorization with the elimination of the purchase requirement. Prior to this law change,
families were required to make cash payment upfront (the “purchase requirement”) to receive
their food stamp benefits. The presence of (or elimination of) this feature did not change the net
value of the benefits a family received yet food stamp caseloads increased substantially after the
removal of the purchase requirement.11
The 1996 welfare-reform legislation left the core structure of the Food Stamp Program
relatively unaffected but did limit benefits for legal immigrants (who were deemed ineligible
until they accumulated 10 years of work history) and able-bodied adults without dependents 1849 (who were typically limited to 3 months of benefits in a 3 year period) and eliminated benefits
for convicted drug felons.12,13 The legislation included a temporary waiver of the time limits in
places with high unemployment rates or “insufficient jobs”. A 1998 agriculture bill restored food
stamp eligibility to some legal immigrant children, disabled persons, the blind, and the elderly
(those who had arrived in the U.S. prior to welfare reform). Later, the 2002 Farm Bill restored
food stamp eligibility to all legal immigrant children and disabled persons, regardless of their
time of residence in U.S., and to legal immigrant adults in the country for five or more years.
Additionally, welfare reform reduced the maximum benefit, froze many deductions used in
calculating net income, and mandated that states adopt Electronic Benefit Transfer.
Beginning with regulatory changes in 1999 and continuing with the 2002 Farm Bill, the
USDA has allowed states to implement policies aimed at improving access to benefits,
particularly for working families. This came from the observation that the process of signing up
for Food Stamps takes considerable time and, in particular for working families, getting to the
benefits office can be a significant barrier to access to the program. This has led to redesigning
income reporting requirements (increasing the time between re-certifications, reducing income
reporting between re-certifications), moving away from in-person meetings for determining
11

That is, if the family was deemed able to afford to spend $60 on food, but the cost of the thrifty food plan was
$80, the family could purchase $80 in food stamps for the cash price of $60. Under today’s program, a similar
family would receive simply receive $20 in food stamps and would not have to outlay any cash.
12
The CBO estimated that welfare reform’s changes to food stamps that did not address immigrants would reduce
spending on food stamps by $23 billion over 1997-2002. Most of the savings came from imposing the work
requirement, reducing maximum benefits across the board, and changing allowable deductions when calculating net
income. See http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/1996doc32.pdf.
13
As discussed in Bitler and Hoynes (2013), prior to welfare reform, there was a “bright line” that distinguished
between legal immigrants and unauthorized residents in determining eligibility for safety net programs. Legal
immigrants were eligible for most safety net programs on the same terms as citizens while unauthorized immigrants
were not. There were exceptions: unauthorized immigrants maintained eligibility for free and reduced price School
Lunch and Breakfast, WIC, emergency Medicaid, and state funded emergency programs. In addition, refugees and
asylum seekers also sometimes faced different rules than others. Finally, in response to the post-welfare reform
reductions in immigrant eligibility for food stamps, some states chose to maintain coverage for legal immigrants
with state-funded replacement coverage (known as “fill in” programs).

7

eligibility (instead using call centers and online applications) as well as relaxing of asset limits
(such as vehicle ownership). Additionally, during this time states also expanded “broad based
categorical eligibility” (U.S. GAO 2007) whereby states extend SNAP eligibility to households
whose gross income is above 130 percent of poverty (above gross income test) but with
disposable income is below the poverty line (meet the net income test). They also can relax the
asset limits. However, the benefit formula remained fixed (as the maximum benefit less 30% of
net income); this implies that any expanded eligibility would be for those with large deductions
to gross income (such as families with high child care and shelter costs).
In 2008, the Food Stamp Program was renamed the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP). Legislative reforms at that time also included excluding certain tax-preferred
education savings and retirement accounts from the calculation of the asset test, and indexing of
the asset limits to inflation.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (federal stimulus or ARRA) increased
the maximum SNAP benefit by 13.6 percent. Due to ordinary SNAP nominal benefit changes
and additional legislation, the benefit increase was sunset in October 2013. In addition, because
unemployment rates rose to high levels during the Great Recession, in most states the threemonth time limit on able-bodied childless adults was temporarily suspended as allowed at state
option during periods of high unemployment under the rules adopted with welfare reform.

1.2 Program History and Rules: WIC
1.2.1 Overview of Program
The goal of the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
(WIC) is to improve the nutritional well-being of low-income pregnant and postpartum women,
infants, and children under the age of five who are at nutritional risk by providing nutritious
foods to supplement diets, nutrition education, and referrals to health care and social services.
More specifically the program aims to improve birth outcomes, support the growth and
development of infants and children, and promote long-term health in all WIC participants. WIC
also provides nutritional services and education.
1.2.2 Eligibility and Benefits
Eligibility for WIC requires satisfying categorical eligibility and income eligibility
requirements. Five types of individuals are categorically eligible for WIC: pregnant women,
post-partum women for six months after birth, breastfeeding women with an infant under 12
months, infants, and children under age five. Benefits are assigned separately for each group, so
for example an income-eligible family consisting of a pregnant woman, infant and child under
age 5 would receive three WIC benefits. Income eligibility dictates that participants must live in
households with family incomes below 185 percent of the poverty line or become eligible
through participation in another welfare program (with income eligibility below 185 percent of
poverty) such as TANF or SNAP. Under the federal rules, immigrants are eligible for WIC under

8

the same circumstances as natives.14 Additionally, participants must be deemed to be at
nutritional risk; risk factors include low maternal weight gain, inadequate growth in children,
anemia, dietary deficiencies, heavy weight, and other nutrition-related medical conditions.15
However, virtually all financially eligible persons appear to satisfy this requirement (Ver Ploeg
and Betson 2003). After initial eligibility, recertification is generally required every 6 months.
Like SNAP, WIC benefits take the form of vouchers and many states currently use (or are in
planning stages to use) debit cards for distributing benefits. The vast majority of WIC
participants access the food packages by redeeming vouchers or using EBT at participating retail
outlets.16
WIC benefits differ from Food Stamp benefits in two key ways. First, the WIC benefit
does not vary with countable income, and thus there is no “benefit reduction rate” that reduces
the benefit as countable income rises. Instead, as with programs such as Medicaid, recipients
who are income and categorically eligible receive the full WIC benefit (an “all or nothing”
benefit package). Second, the WIC bundle is restricted to specific items; the WIC approved
foods are chosen because they contain substantial amounts of protein, calcium, iron, or Vitamins
A or C. The approved foods include juice, fortified cereal, eggs, cheese, milk, dried legumes or
peanut butter, and canned fish. Table 1.2 summarizes the current elements of the food package
and the specified maximum monthly allowance of WIC foods (separately for each eligibility
group). For example, children ages one to four receive vouchers for juice (128 fluid ounces),
milk (16 quarts), breakfast cereal (36 ounces), eggs (one dozen), whole wheat bread (2 pounds),
and legumes/peanut butter. Infants are eligible for formula (if not exclusively breast fed), infant
cereal and baby food. Post-partum women have access to breastfeeding services. In addition, in
2009 WIC added a “cash value voucher” (CVV) here shown as $8 ($10) for fruits and vegetables
for children (women).
This discussion makes clear that WIC then is primarily a “quantity” voucher and thus
households do not face price incentives for these goods (the exception is the CVV for fruits and
vegetables). In part to address this, an increasing number of states require participants to limit
purchases to the cheapest available items or store brands in the authorized grocery outlet. More
generally, WIC purchases may be limited by product type, product size, and brand. An important
special case of this is for infant formula, which is a large part of WIC food costs. In 2010,
spending on formula for WIC totaled almost $1 billion out of a total program food cost of $4.6
billion (FNS 2013). Under current regulations, state WIC agencies typically award a contract to a
single manufacturer of infant formula in exchange for a rebate for each can of infant formula
purchased by WIC participants. These rebates are very high, ranging from 77 to 98 percent of the
wholesale price. The formula market is highly concentrated—with only three firms—and more
than half of all formula sold in the U.S. goes to WIC participants (Oliveira et al. 2013).
In addition to the food benefits, WIC provides participants with health screenings,
nutrition education, and referrals to other social services.
14
States have the discretion to deny benefits to immigrants, though as of this writing none have implemented
explicit restrictions (http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/wic/WICRegulations-7CFR246.pdf).
15
Risk factors can also include homelessness and migrancy, drug abuse and alcoholism.
16
Alternatively, a few state agencies purchase the items in bulk and make available through distribution centers or
through home delivery.

9

Importantly WIC is not an entitlement program; SNAP on the other hand has been a fully
funded entitlement since the program went national in 1975. Congress makes appropriations for
WIC, which in principle could lead to shortfalls in the number of people that can be served. In
recent times (since 1997), these allocations have been sufficient to meet demand for the program
and thus in practice it has operated as an entitlement program.
WIC has an unusual administrative structure that operates at the Federal, State and local
levels. The program is federally funded and operated through the USDA. The USDA provides
grants to support food benefits, nutrition services, and administration to 90 WIC agencies
(covering the 50 states, Washington DC, U.S. territories, and Indian Tribal Organizations). The
State agencies then contract with local WIC sponsoring agencies located primarily in State and
county health departments. These local sponsoring agencies then provide benefits directly or
through local services sites at community health centers, hospitals, schools, mobile vans, and
other locations.
1.2.3 History, Reforms, and Policy Changes
Currie (2003) provides a detailed history of WIC. We briefly touch on some of the
important elements of the history and discuss more recent policy changes.17
The WIC program was first established as a pilot program in 1972 as an amendment to
the Child Nutrition Act of 1966. The program was developed in direct response to policy
recommendations highlighting health deficits among low-income individuals that might be
reduced by improving their access to food. It was further recognized that, by providing food at
“critical times of development” to pregnant and lactating women and young children, it might be
possible to prevent a variety of health problems (Oliveira et al. 2002). The program became
permanent in 1975. WIC was intended to provide targeted benefits to its eligible population, and
was not intended to replace food stamp benefits for them. The authorizing legislation specifically
did not preclude a person from WIC participation if they were already receiving food stamps.
WIC sites were established in different counties between 1972 and 1979, with legislation
requiring that the program be implemented first in “areas most in need of special supplemental
food” (Oliveira et al. 2002). The first WIC program office was established in January 1974 in
Kentucky, and had expanded to include counties in 45 states by the end of that year.18 Figure 1.4
shows the population weighted percent of counties with WIC programs in place. The graph
shows steady expansion in the program between the years of 1974-1978.
The Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act of 1989 established automatic
eligibility for WIC for families participating in Food Stamps, Medicaid or Aid to Families with
Dependent Children. At this time, the WIC income eligibility limits exceeded the limits in these
other programs. The policy change led to an expansion of WIC and in some ways turned it into a
17

Much of this section is drawn from Oliveira et al. (2002).
Participation in the commodity distribution program, however, disqualified individuals from WIC participation
(Oliveira et al. 2002). But the CDP was being phased out during the 1970s as the FSP expanded to a national
program.
18

10

“gateway program through which many low-income households enter the public health system”
(Macro International 1995). Additionally, the Act required WIC agencies to use competitive
bidding or other cost containment policies to reduce costs of infant formula. Finally, the Act
required USDA to promote breastfeeding.
For the first 30 plus years of the program, there was little change in the WIC food
package. The food packages throughout this period included a very limited number of items:
juice, infant cereal, milk, cheese, eggs, dried beans, and peanut butter. The only major change to
the food package in this period was in 1992 with the addition of an enhanced WIC food package
including canned tuna and carrots for fully breastfeeding mothers, which was part of a growing
desire to encourage breastfeeding among the WIC population.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s there was a growing view that this very narrow food
package did not adequately meet current dietary guidelines (which are updated every 5 years).
Additionally, concerns grew about significant changes in the food supply at grocery outlets (such
as the increased availability of low-cost, energy-dense foods), the growing prevalence of obesity,
and whether WIC foods were culturally appropriate for all participants. The USDA’s Food and
Nutrition Service set a goal to determine cost-neutral changes to WIC food packages based on
information about the nutrition needs of WIC participants. This led to a report by the Institute of
Medicine (IOM 2005), with new food packages introduced in 2009 and adopted in 2014. The
IOM report identified that WIC packages should increase their coverage of nutrients such as
iron, vitamin E, potassium, and fiber, and also provide more access to fruits and vegetables.
Particular attention was aimed at encouraging breastfeeding through expanding the food package
for breastfeeding mothers. The modified rules added flexible vouchers for fruit and vegetables
(e.g. $8.00 per month for a child, $10.00 for pregnant and breastfeeding women), decreased juice
and milk allotments, and added milk alternatives (cheese, yogurt, tofu) and whole grains. Table
1.2, as presented above, describes this recently adopted WIC food bundle. The Institute of
Medicine is now reviewing the WIC food package to update it to reflect the latest nutrition
science and Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
1.3 Program History and Rules: National School Lunch Program
1.3.1 Overview of Program
The school lunch program provides Federal cash and commodity support for meals
served to children at public and private schools, and other qualifying institutions. There is a
three-tiered system based on a child’s household income that determines the level of Federal
payments made to schools. Unless the school has adopted a universal free meals plan, this
system also typically determines the student’s price category (free, reduced-price, or paid).
Schools receive both cash and in-kind payments for meals served. In 2014-15, schools
received Federal cash subsidies equal to $2.98 per free lunch, $2.58 per reduced-price lunch, and
$0.28 per paid lunch.19 If the share of free or reduced-price lunches served at the school exceeds
60 percent (in a base year two years prior to the current year), then per-meal cash subsidies are

19

Payment levels are higher in Alaska and Hawaii.

11

increased by 2 cents per meal.20 As described below, schools are eligible for additional payments
of 6 cents per meal if they document that their lunches meet nutritional guidelines. In addition,
schools receive commodity foods worth $0.2475 for each lunch served, regardless of the price
category. Schools may also receive bonus commodities from USDA’s purchase of surplus
commodities if they are available.
1.3.2 Benefits and Eligibility
Under traditional eligibility, children from households with incomes less than 130 percent
of the federal poverty line receive lunches free of charge, while those from households with
incomes between 130 percent and 185 percent of the federal poverty line are eligible for
reduced-price meals, which have a maximum allowable price charged to students of $0.40.
Children from households with incomes above 185 percent of the federal poverty line may
purchase so-called “paid meals.” Individual school districts have discretion to set their own
prices for paid lunches, which are priced on average less than $2.50 per meal. Some children are
additionally eligible for free meals based on categorical eligibility criteria, or if their school has
adopted a universal free meal program. Regardless of household income, children are deemed to
be categorically eligible for free meals if their family receives benefits through SNAP or the
Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR), TANF, if the child is a foster,
homeless, runaway or migrant, or if the child is in Head Start. Students are offered the same
components of school lunch regardless of their price category, and are allowed some choice to
refuse components they are offered.
In recent years, there has been expansion in the use of direct certification of students for
free meals using other data sources instead of requiring families to fill out application forms at
schools. Direct certification can take the form of data matching or, in the case of homeless,
migrant, runaway or foster children, using a list provided to the school meals program by an
appropriate official. States are required to conduct direct certification using SNAP data, but are
not required to conduct direct certification using other sources (e.g. TANF or FDPIR rolls).21
The 2010 Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act provides incentives to states that show “outstanding
performance” or “substantial improvement” in directly certifying students for free meals through
these methods. In addition, as described below, students who are not income-eligible or
categorically eligible for free meals may receive them for free if their school has adopted a
universal free lunch program.
1.3.3 History, Reforms, and Policy Changes
Predecessors to the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) date back to the Great
Depression, when the government began to distribute surplus farm commodities to schools with
large populations of malnourished students. In 1946 Congress passed the National School Lunch
Act (Gunderson 1971, see also Table 1.3). The act’s statement of purpose indicates that a
nonprofit school lunch program should be established “as a measure of national security” with
the dual purposes “to safeguard the health and well-being of the Nation’s children and to
20

Some states provide additional supplementary funding.
Under USDA demonstration projects, a few states are allowed to use Medicaid data for direct certification, but
only if the household’s income is at or below 133% of the federal poverty line (Levin and Neuberger, 2014).
21

12

encourage the domestic consumption of nutritious agricultural commodities and other food…”
Under the Act, commodities were distributed and cash payments were made to states according
to a formula that was a function of per-capita income and population. The NSLP was
significantly amended in 1962 to adjust the funding formula to become a function of both the
program participation rate and the “assistance need rate” that was a function of the state’s
average per capita income (Hinrichs 2010).
In recent years there have been legislative changes both regarding payment formulas and
nutrition standards. In terms of payment formulas, there have been several recent efforts to
reduce administrative costs for the payment process. Under the typical approach to eligibility,
families are required to apply for the lunch subsidy, and then schools must track daily meal
participation by price category. The alternative reimbursement provisions save schools the
administrative costs of both processing applications and also daily tracking of meals served by
price category. One such provision available to schools is the Community Eligibility Provision
(CEP), which was phased-in starting in 2011 and became available nationally in the 2014-15
school year. This policy allows schools to provide free meals to all of its students if they can
document that at least 40 percent of their students are categorically eligible for free meals. If a
school opts for the CEP, the Federal government reimburses X percent of school meals at the
free rate, where X equals 1.6 times the share of students who are categorically eligible at the
school. Remaining meals served are reimbursed at the paid-lunch rate, and schools must cover
any shortfall between costs and reimbursements with non-federal funds. Under the CEP, a school
must provide both breakfast and lunch free to all students.
Two alternatives (referred to as “Provision 2” and “Provision 3”) allow schools to serve
free meals to all students enrolled at the school, while only requiring the collection of
applications for free or reduced-price eligibility every four years. Provision 2 allows a school to
determine the fraction of meals it serves at each price tier during one base year, then applies the
same ratio of reimbursement rates to all meals served for the following three years. Under the
Provision 3 option, a school counts meals served by type during the base year, and then may
receive the same level of cash payments and commodities in the subsequent three years
regardless of the number of meals served. Under these provisions, a school may decide to
provide lunch, breakfast, or both meals for free to all students. Likely in part due to these
administrative alternatives, the share of schools offering universal free lunches has increased.
The 2010 Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act made major changes to nutrition standards for
school lunches, as shown in Table 1.4. Under prior nutrient standards, schools were required to
serve at least a minimum number of calories per meal, and the standard varied by student age
from 633 calories in grades K-3 to 785 calories in grades 4-12. Schools were also required to
insure that no more than 10 percent of calories came from saturated fats. There were also
requirements for minimum levels of daily fruits and vegetables, meats, grains, and milk. Updated
program rules have imposed new calorie guidelines, imposing both minimum and maximum
calorie rules. For many grades, the new maximum allowable calories were set below the previous
calorie floor (see Table 1.5). The new rules also include stronger requirements for daily and
weekly food group servings, including weekly requirements for a variety of vegetables (such as
dark green, red/orange, and starchy), restrictions on the fat content of milk, and a phased-in
requirement to use only whole grain rich grains. Schools that meet these enhanced nutrition
13

requirements receive an additional 6-cent payment per meal. In addition, the Act gave the USDA
authority to set nutritional standards for all foods sold in school during the school day, including
in vending machines, school stores, and a la carte lunch items. The research literature evaluating
the impacts of the policy changes on participation in the program at the individual or school level
is sparse to date.
1.4 Program History and Rules: School Breakfast Program
1.4.1 Overview of Program
The school breakfast operates in a similar manner to the lunch program, though
participation is lower. The SBP provides Federal cash support (but, unlike the NSLP, no
additional commodity support) for meals served to children at public and private schools, and
other qualifying institutions. The same approach is employed as in the NSLP, in which a threetiered system based on a child’s household income determines the level of Federal payments
made to schools, and typically also determines the student’s price category.
In 2014-15, schools received Federal cash subsidies equal to $1.62 per free breakfast,
$1.32 per reduced-price breakfast, and $0.28 per paid breakfast.22 If the share of free or reducedprice breakfasts served at the school exceeds 40 percent (in a base year two years prior to the
current year), then the school is eligibility for “severe need” payments, which increase the permeal cash subsidies by 31 cents per meal for free and reduced-price meals. About three-quarters
of breakfasts served in the SBP receive this “severe need” payment.
1.4.2 Benefits and Eligibility
The eligibility rules are the same for breakfast and lunch, and a single eligibility
determination is made for each child that covers both meals. The current maximum allowable
price for reduced-price breakfast is $0.30. Children from households with incomes above 185
percent of the federal poverty line may purchase so-called “paid meals.” The categorical
eligibility criteria (whereby participation in selected means tested transfers automatically confer
eligibility for SBP) are the same as they are for the school lunch program.
1.4.3 History, Reforms, and Policy Changes
The SBP was established in 1966 as a two-year pilot program. It originally provided
categorical grants to provide payments to schools that served breakfast to “nutritionally needy”
students. In 1973, the program was amended to replace the categorical grant with the per-meal
payment system used today. It was permanently authorized in 1975.
New program rules adopted after the 2010 Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act made
substantial changes to breakfast standards. Under prior nutrient standards, schools were required
to serve at least at least 554 calories at breakfast. Under the new standards, breakfast calories
were required to fall within a specified range, from 350-500 for grades K-5 to 450-600 for high
school students. Similar to the changes made to the lunch nutrient standards, new rules required
22

Reimbursements are higher in Alaska and Hawaii.

14

more fruits and vegetables, a switch to whole grains, and imposed restrictions on the fat content
of milk. The Act also authorized grants that can be used to establish or expand school breakfast
programs.
1.5 Other Food and Nutrition Programs
There are four other child nutrition programs (see Table 1.1), and together they comprise
about 4 percent of spending on food and nutrition programs overall or about one quarter of the
total Federal spending on child nutrition programs). These programs provide meals for children
and other vulnerable groups outside of school and during the summer, or provide additional food
items to children.
The Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) provides meals and snacks to children
in day care facilities, as well as to functionally impaired adults receiving care in non-residential
adult day care centers and to the elderly (e.g. through Meals on Wheels). Participation in 2014
totaled 3.9 million children and adults, and total Federal spending was $3.1 billion. The Summer
Food Service Program (SFSP) supports meals and snacks served to children at schools, camps
and other organizations during the summer when school is not in session. In 2014 the program
served 160 million meals to 2.7 million children (measured in July, the peak participation month)
at a cost of $465.6 million. The Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program (FFVP) provides resources
for elementary schools to serve fresh fruits and vegetables as snacks outside of regular lunch and
breakfast times. Schools apply to participate in the program, which is targeted to schools with
high enrollments of free- and reduced-price meal eligible students. Participating schools receive
an annual allotment of $50 to $75 per student. In 2014-15, the FFVP had $153 million in
spending. The Special Milk Program (SMP) provides subsidized milk, primarily to schools,
childcare institutions, and camps that do not participate in other federally subsidized child
nutrition programs. The cost in 2014 was $10.5 million.

2. Program Statistics and Recipient Characteristics
2.1 Program Statistics: SNAP
In 2014, SNAP expenditures totaled $74.2 billion and served 46.5 million persons (or
22.7 million households). This translates to participation by more than one out of seven
Americans. The average monthly benefit in 2014 amounted to $257 per household, $125 per
person, or $4.11 per person per day. Overall, SNAP is the largest cash or near-cash means-tested,
safety net program in the United States.
Table 2.1 presents data on SNAP participation and expenditures over time. Total
expenditures (in real 2014 dollars) increased from $28.0 billion in 1990 to $74.2 billion in 2014.
Average monthly participation follows a similar path, moving from 20 million persons in 1990 to
46.5 million in 2014. The bottom of the table presents SNAP participants as a percent of the total
U.S. population—it has ranged from 8.1 percent in 1990 down to 6.2 percent in 2000, to 14.8
percent in 2014.

15

The take-up rate of SNAP, calculated as the fraction of the eligible population that is
participating in the program, is fairly high at 79 percent in 2011 (Cunnyngham 2014). The takeup rates vary significantly across groups, with elderly individuals having considerably lower
take-up rates than other groups. The take-up rates also vary substantially across states in the U.S.
with higher rates in New England, the upper Midwest and the Pacific Northwest and lower rates
in the Mountain Plains, the Far West and Texas (Cunnyngham 2014). Take-up rates have varied
substantially over time: from 75 percent in 1994, down to 59 percent after federal welfare reform
(in 2000), to 54 percent in 2002, then increasing to 67 percent in 2006 and 79 percent in 2011
(Cunnyngham 2002, 2010, Cunnyngham et al. 2014).
Figure 2.1 plots annual SNAP expenditures from 1980 to 2014, in real 2014 dollars. We
normalize by the total U.S. population in each year, thereby generating real per capita (not per
recipient) expenditures. The figure also includes the annual U.S. unemployment rate. During this
period, per capita real spending on SNAP was relatively flat in the 1980s, increased in the early
1990s and then fell dramatically through the late 1990s. Since that time, spending has increased
steadily. Overall the program shows a countercyclical pattern, increasing in the recessions in the
early 1990s, early 2000s, and especially notable, in the Great Recession.
Table 2.2 presents summary characteristics for SNAP recipient units and how they vary
over time. The top panel of the table relates to all SNAP recipients and the bottom panel limits to
SNAP recipient units without any elderly (age 60 or more) individuals. These tabulations are
based on administrative data from the USDA, the Quality Control (QC) files. In 2012, about 45
percent of SNAP recipient units included children, down from about 60 percent in 1996. Femaleheaded households with children as a share of the total caseload are also falling over time, from
39 percent in 1996 to 24 percent in 2012. About 17 percent contain an elderly individual, and
that share has not changed much over time. The share with no children, elderly or disabled
persons (a proxy for the able bodied adults without dependents) has increased from 15 percent in
1996 to 25 percent in 2012. An increasing share of the caseload combines benefit receipt with
employment. About 31 percent of households currently have earned income, a rate that is up 8
percentage points since 1996. On the other hand, some 20 percent have no cash income, up from
10 percent in 1996 (for an in-depth analysis of this issue see Peterson et al. 2014). 38 percent of
households have no net income (income after allowable deductions) up from 25 percent in 1996.
At the bottom of the bottom panel of Table 2.2, we present the effective tax rates faced
by (non-elderly) SNAP recipients. These are calculated using the QC data and follow the
methods used in Ziliak (2008). The effective tax rate is the average of the marginal tax rates
faced by SNAP households—marginal because it is calculated on their observed income
amounts, and average because it is averaged over households. Table 2.2 shows that effective tax
rate on earned income is 15 percent in 2012, down slightly from 18 percent in 1996. The tax rate
on unearned income is somewhat higher at 16 percent in 2012. In light of the discussion above, it
is important to point out that this is the tax rate within SNAP only (as opposed to the cumulative
tax rate experienced across multiple programs). To the extent that SNAP recipients have children
and very low earnings, then the negative marginal tax rates in the EITC will reduce the
cumulative tax rates below the SNAP effective tax rate. On the other hand, those with higher
earnings (e.g., perhaps in the phase-out of the EITC) would experience cumulative tax rates in

16

excess of the SNAP effective tax rate. See Moffitt (2014) for further discussion of multiple
participation rates.
Given the patchwork of U.S. means-tested programs, it is of interest to examine the
propensity to participate in multiple programs, especially in light of concerns about cumulative
work disincentives (Congressional Budget Office 2012, Mulligan 2012).23 It is also interesting to
examine this over time given welfare reform and the many changes in the safety net. The food
stamp quality control data (Table 2.2) track all resources that count as income for determining
SNAP benefits, practically this translates to cash income programs. In 2012, only 7 percent of
SNAP recipients have income from TANF, down from 37 percent in 1996 on the eve of welfare
reform. The share with income from SSI and social security has stayed relatively steady; in 2012
20 and 23 percent of SNAP units received SSI and social security, respectively. If you limit to
recipient units without elderly individuals, the share with “social security” (which we interpret as
likely including SSDI) has increased, from 9 percent in 1996 to 14 percent in 2012. Few food
stamp recipients have income from UI (5 percent), general assistance (3 percent) or veteran’s
payments (1 percent). Although receipt of UI among SNAP recipients units is low, the data show
a notable increase in the Great Recession (from 2 percent in 2005 to 7 percent in 2010). While
the QC data are valuable, they are limited because they only track sources of income relevant for
determining SNAP benefits. Moffitt (2014) uses the Survey of Income and Program Participation
and studies multiple program participation across a wider range of programs. He finds that (in
2008) 30 percent of non-disabled, non-elderly SNAP families receive WIC, more than half
receive the EITC and 21 percent receive subsidized housing.
Table 2.3 presents maximum monthly SNAP benefits by household size for 2014. A
household of four has a maximum monthly benefit of $649 while a household of size two has a
maximum benefit of $357. Annualizing these amounts, maximum benefits correspond to
between 27 and 33 percent of the federal poverty line.
As discussed above in section 1.1, the SNAP benefit formula has changed little over time,
other than adjusting for annual changes in the price of food. Interest in the adequacy of the
SNAP benefit has increased over time and led to a recent Institute of Medicine report (IOM
2013). Hoynes, McGranahan and Schanzenbach (2015) explore SNAP benefit adequacy by
examining the food spending patterns across families of differing income and composition. They
argue that the maximum benefit level is inappropriate on at least two fronts: the Thrifty Food
Plan (TFP) is based on outdated assumptions, and the family size adjustment does not reflect
differences in spending patterns. First, consider the TFP, which is set at $632 per month for a
typical family of 4 in 2013. Recall that maximum benefits are set based on the TFP, and the
program aims to ensure that households have adequate resources to purchase this “target”
spending level. Based on an analysis of the Consumer Expenditure Survey, they show that over
the past 20 years, the majority of families with incomes below 200% poverty spent more than the
TFP amount. They argue this is in part due to the fact that the TFP is based on assumptions
regarding how much cooking is done from scratch that are increasingly unrealistic and out of line
with time use data. Second, they show that differences in actual spending patterns across family
23

As discussed in Moffitt (2014), Parrott and Greenstein (2014) and elsewhere, in many analyses citing high
cumulative marginal tax rates, the calculations assume that families are participating in all programs. This, as we
discuss below, it not consistent with the data.

17

size are much steeper than are accounted for by the benefit multipliers. Since the average SNAP
household size is 2.3, this suggests that many families are receiving benefits based on a formula
that under-states their needs.
2.2 Program Statistics: WIC
In 2014, WIC expenditures totaled $6.2 billion and served 8.3 million persons. The costs
break down into $4.3 billion for food and $1.9 billion for nutrition services and administration.24
Average monthly federal food cost per person in 2014 amounted to $43.65, or $1.44 per person
per day. The WIC caseload breaks down to be 10 percent pregnant women, 13 percent
postpartum or breastfeeding women, 24 percent infants and 53 percent children (USDA 2014).
The average cost per recipient varies little across groups, from $49.36 per infant, to $49.16 per
breastfeeding woman, to $36.94 per child (USDA 2014). A given family may have multiple
members with WIC benefits (for example a pregnant mother, her infant and her child age 3
would have three WIC packages) and the total value of the WIC package to a family accumulates
across individuals.
Table 2.1 presents data on WIC participation and expenditures over time. The WIC
program has increased over this period from 4.5 million recipients in 1990 to 8.3 million in 2014.
The total cost increased from 3.8 billion (2014$) in 1990 to 6.2 billion in 2014. The growth
seems to be fairly similar across the subgroups of women, infants and children. The bottom of
Table 2.1 presents program participation rates, where we express the number of participants as a
percent of the relevant demographic group. So for example, the WIC infant (child) caseload is a
percent of all persons less than 1 (between 1 and 4).25 We express the women caseload as a share
of women ages 18-44. Both infant and child caseloads have increased over this period. Fully 26.9
percent of children aged 1-4 receive WIC in 2014, up from 13.5 percent in 1990. Participation is
higher for infants, likely due to the high cost of infant formula, more than half of infants in the
U.S. in 2014 received WIC benefits. In 2014, 3.5 percent of women aged 18-44 received WIC,
though this figure is an underestimate of potential participation since we do not condition on
pregnant, postpartum or breastfeeding women in the denominator.
Figure 2.2 plots the real spending on WIC annually from 1980 to 2013. Again, we
normalize by the total U.S. population to create a per capita (not per participant) measure. WIC
expenditures exhibit a fairly steady rise in the 1990s consistent with the expansions in the 1989
WIC reauthorization act. Costs slowed in the late 1990s perhaps due to welfare reform (and the
overall “chilling” effect that followed) as well as the strong labor market. After a relatively flat
period, a countercyclical pattern with the Great Recession and recovery is evident at the end of
the period.
Table 2.4 presents summary characteristics for WIC recipient units in 2012 (the most
recent year available) and, for comparison, 1994. Despite the income-threshold of 185 percent of
poverty (higher than SNAP for example), fully 37 percent of WIC recipients have income below
50 percent of poverty (“extreme poverty”). 73 percent have incomes below 100 percent poverty
24

We omit additional WIC spending on items other than food and nutrition services, including program evaluation,
special projects and infrastructure.
25
These are participation rates not takeup rates because they do not condition on income eligibility.

18

and 92 have income below 150 percent poverty. The distribution of recipients by income has not
changed much between 1994 and 2012. One notable change in the caseloads is the rise of
breastfeeding women as a share of all women on the program, which has increased from 17
percent in 1994 to 29 percent in 2012. We also explore the extent of multiple program
participation among WIC recipients. In 2012, only 9 percent of WIC recipients have income
from TANF, down from 29 percent in 1992 (prior to welfare reform). The share with income
from SNAP has been relatively steady; in 2012, 37 percent of WIC units received SNAP
compared to 40 percent in 1992. Participation in Medicaid among WIC recipients was very high
at 72 percent in 2012, up from 58 percent in 1992, reflecting the substantial expansions in
Medicaid for pregnant women and children.
2.3 Program Statistics: NSLP
The National School Lunch Program (NSLP) serves lunch to almost 30 million students –
56 percent of the total student population (see Table 2.1). Almost all public schools offer the
NSLP, which in 2014 cost $11.4 billion with average participation of 19.2 million children in
free, 2.5 children in reduced-price, and 8.8 million in paid lunch. Overall, including the free,
reduced-price and paid categories, over 5 billion lunches were served. As shown in the bottom of
table 2.1, 40 percent of all school aged children received free or reduced price lunch in 2014, up
from 25 percent in 1990. The share of students receiving school lunch for free (among those
eating school lunch) has grown over time from 41 percent in 1990 to 63.6 percent in 2014.
Overall, participation (free, reduced-price or paid as share of all school aged children) has edged
down somewhat in the last few years from its historic peak of 59 percent in 2010.
After adjusting for inflation, spending on NSLP has almost doubled since 1990. This
reflects an increase in the number of school-aged children, an increase in spending per lunch, and
a trend toward increased participation rates. The increased spending per lunch has been driven by
a combination of increased costs and policy changes. Per-meal spending on child nutrition
programs increases annually because payment levels are indexed according to the Food Away
from Home series of the CPI-U. Commodity payments are inflated according to the Price Index
of Foods used in Schools and Institutions. (Payments are legislated not to decrease, so if food
prices decline in a year, there is no adjustment to these costs). In recent years, the price index for
food away from home has grown more quickly than overall inflation (measured by the price
index for Personal Consumption Expenditures). In addition, the 2010 Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids
Act increased cash payments by 6 cents per meal for schools that meet the new, more stringent
nutrition requirements.
2.4 Program Statistics: SBP
There have been recent – and highly successful – attempts to expand access to the SBP.
As shown in Table 2.1, between 1990 and 2014 the total number of students receiving the SBP
more than tripled (compared to a 27 percent increase in the number of NSLP participants). At the
same time, the share of school-aged children receiving free or reduced-price breakfast also
increased sharply, from 7.6 percent in 1990 to 21.3 percent of children in 2014. Some of this has
been driven by increases in participation rates of schools in the program in 2014. Schanzenbach
and Zaki (2014) calculate from the NHANES that in 2009-10 almost three-quarters of children
19

attended a school that offered the SBP, up from approximately half of students in the 1988-94
wave. An additional portion has been driven by policies to expand take-up by students, including
providing breakfast for free to all students before school or introducing Breakfast in the
Classroom programs. In 2014, 85 percent of participants received the SBP either for free or at
reduced price.
2.5 Summary measures across programs
Figure 2.3 summarizes the programs, presenting the total program costs and total
program recipients in 2014. Considering our four central food and nutrition programs (SNAP,
WIC, NSLP, and SBP) as well as the other smaller programs in Table 1.1, total spending
amounted to about 100 billion dollars in 2014 and about 95 million total participants benefited
from these programs. (Given multiple program participation, the total unique recipients would be
less than 95 million.) Considering the programs together, Figure 2.3 shows that SNAP is clearly
the largest program—in terms of both people reached and program cost. In 2014, expenditures
on SNAP were over 6 times as large as the NSLP and almost 12 times as large as WIC. The
number of SNAP recipients was about 2 times those receiving free or reduced-price NSLP and
over 5 times WIC. However, these comparisons ignore the fact that SNAP is universal, while
NSLP and WIC are targeted on specific demographic groups. Using this lens, the figures in the
bottom of Table 2.1 show that SNAP has the smallest reach among the programs. Half of all
infants and almost 30 percent of children 1-4 receive WIC, over 20 percent of school-aged
children receive free or reduced-price breakfast and 40 percent receive free or reduced-price
lunch. SNAP, by contrast, is received by 15 percent of the population.
Figure 2.4 shows how program participation for the food and nutrition programs varies
by income level. In particular, the figure plots household participation in SNAP, NSLP and WIC
(alongside EITC as a comparison) as a function of household private income to poverty level
(truncating at eight times income to poverty).26 The figure is based on tabulations of the 2014
Current Population Survey corresponding to data for calendar year 2013, and is limited to
households with children headed by a nonelderly person. Overall, SNAP and NSLP have the
highest household participation rates, with lower household participation rates for WIC. Of
course, this lower WIC participation rate reflects the fact that eligibility is limited to pregnant
women and children through age 4. SNAP participation is most concentrated at the lower income
levels, reflecting its lower income eligibility limits. WIC has a much flatter profile with respect
to income, reflecting the higher income eligibility limits.
Figure 2.5 compares anti-poverty effects of the programs. The calculations are based on
the Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM), first released by the Census in 2011 (Short 2011).
The SPM provides an alternative to the official poverty measure and is based on a
comprehensive after tax and transfer income resource measure that includes the value of noncash
government transfers. Here we use the 2014 SPM (Short 2015) and plot the number of children
removed from poverty for all government tax and transfer programs tracked in the SPM. This is
a static calculation, essentially zeroing out the income source and recalculating family income
and poverty status assuming all else (e.g. earnings, other income sources) remain constant.
26

The figure is adopted using the approach in Bitler and Hoynes (2015). See that paper for details on the sample and
measurement.

20

SNAP removes 2.1 million children from poverty, second only to the combined effects of the
EITC and Child Tax Credit that together remove 5.2 million children from poverty. By
comparison, the NSLP removes 0.8 million children from poverty and WIC removes 0.2 million
children from poverty.27 Although not shown here, calculations for the entire population show
that SNAP removes a total of 4.7 million people from poverty, making SNAP the third largest
U.S. anti-poverty program after Social Security and the Earned Income Tax Credit.

3. Review of the issues surrounding the programs
Each of the food and nutrition programs can be analyzed through standard economic
frameworks. The applicable frameworks differ somewhat, though, because the programs differ in
terms of the degree to which the benefits are provided in-kind. Closest to cash, SNAP takes the
form of a “value voucher” and can be used to purchase most foods, while the more targeted WIC
takes the form of a “quantity voucher” limited to specific foods and the school meals programs
offer meals directly. As with other means-tested transfer programs, these programs face the usual
tradeoff in balancing the protective aspects of the programs to improve dietary intake and reduce
hunger and food insecurity against their distorting incentives such as reduced labor supply. We
start by discussing SNAP, because it is the largest program and has been most researched, and
follow with discussions of the other programs and how the basic economic framework can be
adapted to analyze them.
3.1 Effects of in-kind benefits on food consumption
We begin by presenting the neoclassical model of consumer choice and use this to
discuss predictions for the effects of SNAP on family spending patterns.28 Figure 3.1A presents
the standard Southworth (1945) model, in which a consumer chooses to allocate a fixed budget
between food and all other goods. The slope of the budget line is the relative price of food to
other goods. In the absence of SNAP, the budget constraint is represented by the line AB. When
SNAP is introduced, it shifts the budget constraint out by the food stamp benefit (divided by
food price) BF/PF to the new budget line labeled ACD. The first, and most important, prediction
of the neoclassical model is that the presence of, or increase in the generosity of, the SNAP
transfer leads to a shift out in the budget constraint. The transfer does not alter the relative prices
of different goods, so can be analyzed as a pure income effect, and predicts an increase in the
consumption level of all normal goods. Thus, the central prediction is that food stamps, like an
increase in disposable income or a cash transfer, will increase both food spending and non-food
spending.
However, SNAP benefits are provided as a voucher that only can be used toward food
purchases. Canonical economic theory predicts that in-kind transfers like SNAP are treated as if
they are cash as long as their value is no larger than the amount that a consumer would spend on
the good if she had the same total income in cash. Returning to Figure 3.1A, there is a portion of
the budget set that is not attainable with SNAP that would be attainable with the cash-equivalent
27

With underreporting of SNAP and other food and nutrition programs, these are underestimates of the total
antipoverty effects (Tiehen, Jolliffe, Smeeding 2013)
28
See also Currie and Gahvari (2008) for an excellent overview of the economics of in-kind transfer programs.

21

value income transfer. (We are assuming that the resale of these vouchers is not possible.) In
other words, because the benefits BF are provided in the form of a food voucher, this amount is
not available to purchase other goods, and thus we would expect a consumer to purchase at least
BF amount of food. Thus paying benefits in the form of a food voucher leads to a budget
constraint with a kink point.
Figure 3.1B illustrates how consumption responds to the receipt of SNAP benefits. In the
absence of SNAP, a typical consumer purchases some mix of food and non-food goods, choosing
the bundle that maximizes her utility and exhausts her budget constraint. This is represented as
point A0*, with the consumer purchasing food in the amount F0. After SNAP is introduced, the
budget constraint shifts outwards and the consumer chooses the consumption bundle represented
by point A1*. Note that consumption of both goods increases, and food consumption goes up by
less than the full SNAP benefit amount. Such a consumer is termed “infra-marginal” and the
canonical model predicts that SNAP will increase food spending the same amount as if the
SNAP benefits were paid in cash. As discussed further below, the predicted impacts of proposed
policy changes, such as calls to restrict purchases of certain goods with SNAP benefits, hinges
on what proportion of recipients are inframarginal.
There are two important exceptions to the SNAP-as-cash model, though. The first is for
consumers that prefer relatively little food consumption. In the absence of SNAP, such a
consumer may choose the consumption bundle labeled B0* in Panel B. When SNAP is
introduced, this consumer spends only his benefit amount on food, preferring to use all available
cash resources to purchase other goods as represented at point B1*. If benefits were paid in cash
instead of as a food voucher, the consumer would opt to purchase less food and could obtain a
higher level of utility. As a result, for this type of consumer, the canonical model predicts that
SNAP will increase food spending by more than an equivalent cash transfer would. Another
exception to the standard model comes from behavioral economics and predicts that SNAP may
not be equivalent to cash if households use a mental accounting framework that puts the benefits
in a separate “category”.29
We can extend this approach to consider the effects of the WIC program. There are two
important distinctions. First, WIC is a “quantity” voucher, not a “value” voucher. So while
SNAP would award, for example, $100 to purchase food, WIC instead gives a voucher for 16
quarts of milk (and other items). Second, there are specified goods that are provided by the
voucher (this can also include a restriction on the allowable “package sizes” in the WIC
package). We present the WIC budget constraint in Figure 3.2 and adapt the SNAP graph by
putting “targeted subsidized goods” (e.g. items in table 1.2) on the x axis and all other goods
(which also includes much of the food budget as well as non-food goods) on the y axis. The no
program budget constraint again is AB, and the budget set shifts out by the WIC quantity
29

There are other reasons that may explain why SNAP leads to different effects on food consumption compared to
ordinary case income. It is possible that the family member with control over food stamp benefits may be different
from the person that controls earnings and other cash income. If the person with control over food stamps has
greater preferences for food, then we may find that food stamps leads to larger increases in food consumption
compared to cash income. Alternatively, families may perceive that food stamp benefits are a more permanent
source of income compared to earnings. Finally, Shapiro (2005) finds evidence of a “food stamp cycle” whereby
daily caloric and nutritional intake declines with weeks since their food stamp payment suggests a significant
preference for immediate consumption.

22

voucher QW. Note the contrast to SNAP where the value voucher shifts out the budget constraint
by BF/PF. Thus, for SNAP, the recipient faces price incentives: choosing lower priced goods
increases the value of the SNAP benefit. In contrast, with WIC recipients are price insensitive;
their budget constraint (and potential increase in utility due to the program) is affected only by
the quantity QW, regardless of the price of those goods PW.
As with SNAP, there is a region that would be attainable with a cash transfer that is not
attainable with WIC, and there are inframarginal consumers and constrained consumers.
However, because WIC is such a specified bundle, we expect that a larger share of WIC
participants (compared to SNAP recipients) will be constrained and at point C.
Additionally, as discussed in Meckel (2014), vendors face incentives to charge WIC
recipients a mark-up on the WIC packages (because of recipients’ price inelasticity). This would
amount to fraud and could be sanctioned if caught. Vendors may also choose to compete on
products (quantity and diversity) to gain market share given that price competition is not
available (McLaughlin 2014).
School lunch and breakfast programs are even more specified. We model these as “take it
or leave it” benefits – if you are eligible for a free lunch then you have the choice to consume the
lunch or use private resources for lunch.30 This is illustrated in Figure 3.3 with the targeted
subsidized good (e.g. school lunch) on the x axis and all other goods on the y axis. We represent
the school lunch option as a single point, and as the quality of the lunch increases the point shifts
out. Some consumers will chose the private option, others will chose the public option. As the
quality of the public option increases, more will switch into the lunch program.
Unlike SNAP, the WIC and school feeding programs are explicitly targeted at certain
groups (pregnant women, infants, children age 1-4, school aged children). In the context of
families, it is possible – perhaps likely – that the program will have spillover benefits to other
family members who are not explicit recipients. This could happen with WIC because the goods
purchased with the vouchers could be shared with the family. Additionally, since the programs
shift out the family’s total budget constraint, this “income effect” could lead to an increase in
consumption of other foods or other goods that benefit the family more broadly. Additionally,
WIC’s nutrition education component may lead to changes in the composition of food
consumption for the entire family.
3.2 Effects of FNP on food insecurity, diet and health
As discussed above, SNAP and the other food and nutrition programs increase household
resources. If health is a normal good, then increases in resources due to food and nutrition
programs should increase health. With this framing, an increase in resources could lead to
changes in health through many channels. One obvious channel is through improvements in
nutrition. The income effect, in principle, could also encourage behaviors that could harm health,
30

In their chapter on housing programs in this volume, Ellen and Ludwig discuss the possibility that a take-it-orleave-it benefit will reduce consumption of the targeted good. While theoretically possible in the case of food
consumption, we think this is not likely. Food consumption is more straightforward to top up (e.g. snacks,
supplemental lunch foods brought from home or purchased) than housing is.

23

such as smoking or drinking.31 Health improvements may work through other channels as well,
for instance improving nutrition education, increasing services (for WIC) and reducing stress
(e.g., financial stress).
There also may be linkages between access to food and nutrition programs in utero and in
childhood and later life health and human capital outcomes. Causal mechanisms by which early
childhood events affect later-life are best understood for nutrition. For example, undernourished
children may suffer from anemia and listlessness. This may reduce their ability to invest in
learning during childhood and may harm their long-run earnings and other outcomes. Poor early
life nutrition may also directly harm long-run outcomes through altering the body’s
developmental trajectory. There is an emerging scientific consensus that describes critical
periods of development during early life that “program” the body’s long-term survival outcomes
(Barker, 1992; Gluckman and Hanson 2004). During development, the fetus (and post-natally the
child) may take cues from the current environment to predict the type of environment it is
expected to face in the long run and in some cases adapts its formation to better thrive in the
expected environment (Gluckman and Hanson 2004). A problem arises, however, when the
realized environment differs substantially from the predicted environment. For example, if
nutrients are scarce during the pre-natal (or early post-natal) period, the developing body
therefore predicts that the future will also be nutritionally deprived. The body may then invoke
(difficult-to-reverse) biological mechanisms to adapt to the predicted future environment. For
example, the metabolic system may adapt in a manner that will allow the individual to survive in
an environment with chronic food shortages. This pattern is termed the “thrifty phenotype” and
is sometimes referred to as the Barker hypothesis. The “problem” arises if in fact there is not a
long-run food shortage, and nutrition is plentiful. In that case, the early-life metabolic
adaptations are a bad match to the actual environment and will increase the likelihood that the
individual develops a metabolic disorder, which can include high blood pressure (hypertension),
type II diabetes, obesity and cardiovascular disease. To summarize, a lack of nutrition in early
life leads to higher incidence of metabolic syndrome, thus greater access to food and nutrition
programs in early life and childhood may reduce metabolic syndrome in adulthood.
3.3 Effects on Labor Supply
We begin by considering the effect of SNAP on labor supply. As discussed above, SNAP
benefits have the structure of a traditional income support program, with a guaranteed income
benefit that is reduced with family income at the legislated benefit reduction rate. Recipients are
allotted a benefit amount B equal to the difference between the federally defined maximum
benefit level for a given family size (i.e. G, the guarantee amount) and the amount that the family
is deemed to be able to afford to pay for food on its own according to the benefits formula (30
percent of cash income, less deductions). We illustrate the labor-leisure tradeoff with and
without food stamps in Figure 3.4. Like other means-tested programs, SNAP alters the
household’s labor-leisure tradeoff increasing after tax and transfer income at earnings up to the
breakeven point. SNAP benefits are largest at zero hours of work, and benefits are reduced as
income and earnings are increased leading to an implicit tax rate on earned income. The benefit
reduction rate in the food stamp program is 30 percent.
31

Even though recipients cannot purchase cigarettes directly with FSP benefits, the increase in resources to the
household may increase cigarette consumption.

24

In Figure 3.4, the x axis measures the amount of leisure consumed, and the y axis
measures total income including the SNAP benefit.32 The “no benefit” budget constraint is a
straight line with a slope equal to the individual’s wage w. The individual has a certain amount of
unearned income (U), and the budget constraint is represented by the line CAL. The simple static
labor supply model states that an individual maximizes her utility subject to this budget
constraint, and assuming a positive labor supply choice, chooses some combination of
consumption of goods and leisure at points illustrated for consumers with different preferences
by A~ and A^. If her offer wage is below her reservation wage (the slope of the indifference curve
at zero hours of work) then it will be optimal to remain out of the labor force, as illustrated by
point A (at maximum leisure choice L, or hours=0).
Adding SNAP alters the budget constraint to line CA’L by adding non-labor income G
(the maximum benefit level or the “guarantee”), and rotating the slope of the budget constraint to
w(1-t) where t is the benefit reduction rate (that is, the tax rate on benefits) as income increases
(t=0.3). For the individual supplying zero hours of work and consuming only leisure,
consumption opportunities increase by the SNAP “guarantee” amount G. At the income
eligibility threshold (labeled on the y axis) you earn enough such that benefits have been fully
taxed away.
As is well known, this combination of a guaranteed income and benefit reduction rate
leads unambiguously to predictions of reductions in the intensive and extensive margins of labor
supply. In this case, both the income effect of the benefit as well as the income and substitution
effect from the benefit reduction rate leads, unambiguously, to a predicted decline in
employment (extensive margin), hours worked (intensive margin), and (if wages are fixed)
earnings. In addition, family cash income (which as measured does not include food stamp
benefits) would also be predicted to fall. Of course, family total after transfer income including
food stamps is likely to increase.
Referring back to Figure 3.4, our representative individual who was, prior to the
introduction of the food stamp program, in the labor force and consuming at point A~, is
predicted to increase their leisure (reduce their hours worked) choosing a consumption bundle
A~’. Alternatively, it is possible that the combination of the negative income and substitution
effects can push them out of labor market to point A’.
Figure 3.5 adapts the labor-leisure diagram to model WIC and the school feeding
programs. For these programs a household receives a fixed benefit B for all income levels up to
the eligibility limit (e.g., 185% poverty for WIC). Thus the budget set shifts out by a constant
amount and creates a “notch” or cliff where the household reaches the eligibility limit. The
qualitative predictions for labor supply are the same as for SNAP -- reductions in the intensive
and extensive margins of labor supply. In this case, many households face a pure income effect
while higher income households face the incentive to reduce their labor supply to obtain
eligibility.

32

By shifting out the budget constraint by the full SNAP benefit we assume households treat the benefit as cash. We
also assume, for simplicity, that there are no other welfare programs in place.

25

Additionally, as discussed in Currie and Ghavari (2008), in-kind programs such as SNAP
or WIC might increase labor supply, depending on the degree of complementarity between the
subsidized good (here food and nutrition) and labor supply. This has had limited testing in the
empirical literature.

4. Review of Results of Research on the Programs
4.1 Challenges for identification and overview of empirical approaches
A central challenge for evaluation of the effects of food and nutrition programs is that
commonly used quasi-experimental approaches are not easily applied. First, food and nutrition
programs are federal and exhibit little variation across states such as been used in the analysis of
AFDC and TANF. Second, the programs have not seen repeated reform or expansions such as
has been used in analysis of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Finally, with respect to the food
stamp program, the universal nature of the program means there are no ineligible groups to serve
as controls, which is another common approach in the quasi-experimental literature.
Early studies use comparisons between participants and non-participants to estimate the
effect of food and nutrition programs. Many researchers (Bitler 2015; Currie, 2003; Bitler and
Currie, 2005; Ludwig and Miller 2005) have drawn attention to the fact that selection into
participation in these programs is non-random. If program recipients are healthier, more
motivated, or generally positively selected, then comparisons between the participants and nonparticipants could produce positive program estimates even if the true effect is zero. Conversely,
if program participants are more disadvantaged, or generally negatively selected, than
nonrecipients, such comparisons may understate the program’s impact.
Bitler (2015) provides a recent analysis to examine the selectivity of SNAP recipients.
She examines detailed health data from NHANES and NHIS and shows that SNAP recipients
have worse diets and nutritional intake, higher levels of obesity and underweight, worse child
health and adult health when compared to all non-recipients or income eligible non-recipients.
Thus, it seems clear that SNAP recipients are negatively selected. Bitler and Currie (2005)
provide evidence that WIC recipients are negatively selected among a sample of Medicaid
recipients, in terms of their education, marital status, smoking behavior, obesity, labor market,
and program participation.
There are several approaches to solving this fundamental identification problem. First,
some studies make use of the limited policy variation across areas. For SNAP, this includes
variation due to welfare reform (especially for examining immigrants versus natives) and state
SNAP policies (length of recertification periods, fingerprinting, vehicle asset exemptions and
broad based categorical eligibility). In some cases, these state policy rules may not change much
from year to year, which limits their suitability as instruments. This approach is used in
instrumental variable settings, essentially providing instrument-driven variation in program
participation. Policy variation is also used in reduced form approaches.

26

Second, other studies take an historical approach and use program introduction, relying
on variation across areas during the rollout years of the program. As discussed above, both the
Food Stamp Program and WIC were introduced at different points across counties in the U.S.
This allows for an event study or difference in difference approach to evaluate the programs,
essentially using untreated counties as controls for treated counties. The validity of this approach
relies on the exogeneity of the timing of the rollout across areas.33
A third approach is to use longitudinal data and control for family, person, or sibling
fixed effects. This approach nets out time-invariant effects. For example, in an analysis of
siblings, family fixed effects generate estimates by comparing outcomes among siblings who
participated in the program compared to outcomes among those who did not. There are
drawbacks to this approach. Between-birth changes in economic or health conditions of other
family members may be correlated with between sibling differences in program participation.
Additionally within-family comparisons are likely to exacerbate measurement-error problems
that bias estimates towards zero (Griliches 1979). There also may be spillover effects from the
participating sibling to the non-participating sibling, which will lead to underestimates of the
program’s true effect. In such cases, selection biases will not be eliminated. Another longitudinal
differencing approach uses an individual fixed effects estimator, which compares outcomes for
those who switch (into or out of) program participation. Of course, there could be some third
factor that affects both transitions into (or out of) program participation and outcomes.
Fourth, some studies use regression discontinuity approaches, comparing those in a small
band above the eligibility threshold to those in a small band below the eligibility threshold. The
validity of the approach requires a sharp change in participation at the discontinuity that is not
correlated with other changing variables. This approach can be applied to income eligibility for
WIC and school feeding programs where a recipient is either eligible or not eligible for the entire
bundle of benefits. This approach would not be generally be appropriate for SNAP because,
empirically, participation smoothly falls as income rises (the benefit falls as income rises). It also
can be applied to age discontinuities in eligibility for the other food and nutrition programs. In
practice, regression discontinuity studies based on differences across income-based eligibility
criteria may not be valid given that income can be manipulated, which invalidates the RD
approach (one no longer has randomness across the threshold).
Fifth, randomized experiments could in principle capture the effect of food and nutrition
programs (or more likely, changes in program policies). In practice, in the past decades there is
not much such evidence, with notable exceptions in the Healthy Incentives Pilot (Bartlett et al.
2014) and School Breakfast Program Pilot Project (Bernstein et al. 2004), both further described
below. Finally, another approach uses matching methods to control for selection, essentially
relying on “selection on observables”.
In order to focus our review of the literature on the studies with the most credible
evidence, we limit our discussion below to papers that use of the “design based” approaches

33

This approach has also been used to analyze many other aspects of the Great Society and Civil Rights era (Ludwig
and Miller, 2007; Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008; Bailey 2012; Cascio, Gordon, Lewis and Reber 2010; Almond,
Chay and Greenstone 2006; Goodman-Bacon 2014).

27

discussed above. The most common study that would not pass this criterion would be simple
comparisons, either with or without regression controls, of FNP recipients and nonrecipients.
4.2 Research on Food Stamp Program
4.2.1 SNAP Participation
As we showed in Table 2.1 and Figure 2.1, participation in and expenditures on SNAP
have varied significantly over time. One consistent strand in the literature seeks to understand the
determinants of these changes in the program (Table 4.1 provides a catalog of the papers we
review.) The literature has explored the role of the macroeconomy, changes in SNAP policies,
changes in related program policies (especially welfare reform), and changes in demographics.
The papers in this area typically leverage variation across states and over time in labor market
conditions (e.g. unemployment rates, employment-to-population ratios) and program polices. As
outlined above, SNAP is primarily a federal program and has less variation across states than
other parts of the U.S. means tested safety net (such as Medicaid or TANF). The available state
varying policies for SNAP include length between required recertification, immigrant eligibility
following welfare reform, presence or absence of restrictions for ABAWD, and the broad based
categorical eligibility expansions of the 2000s.
Overall, the macroeconomy consistently ranks as the largest contributor to changes in
SNAP caseloads. However, SNAP and welfare policies have also played a role. Welfare reform
and reductions in SNAP certification periods led to reductions in SNAP caseloads in the 1990s
(Currie and Grogger 2001, Kabbani and Wilde 2003, Ziliak et al. 2003, Figlio et al. 2000).
Additionally, changes in immigrant access to safety net during the welfare reform period also led
to reductions in SNAP participation (Borjas 2004, Haider et al. 2004, Kaestner and Kaushal
2005, Bitler and Hoynes 2013).
Ganong and Liebman (2013) examine the large increase in SNAP caseloads in the Great
Recession and find that local economic conditions explain about two-thirds of the increase in
SNAP with a much smaller role for SNAP policy changes (e.g., expansions for broad based
categorical eligibility).34 Ziliak (2015) finds a larger role for policy, perhaps accounting for 30%
of the caseload change. Bitler and Hoynes (2015) find that the countercyclical effect of SNAP as
measured by the effect of the unemployment rate on the SNAP caseload was larger in the Great
Recession compared to the early 1980s recession (although the difference was not statistically
significant).
4.2.2 SNAP and Consumption
The first order prediction is that SNAP, by shifting out the budget set, should lead to an
increase in food (and nonfood) spending. This is confirmed in the empirical literature. The model
also predicts that for inframarginal households, SNAP should lead to a similar increase in food
spending compared to equal sized cash transfer. There was significant attention to this question
in the 1980s and 1990s, typically using observational approaches (comparing recipients to
34

When examining the earlier period, especially the Bush expansions in the early 2000s, Ganong and Liebman
(2013) find more of a role for policy changes in explaining the growth of food stamp caseloads.

28

nonrecipients) and suffering from the biases due to selection discussed above. Overall, many of
these early papers found that SNAP recipients consume more food out of SNAP than they would
with an equivalent cash transfer (Currie 2003).
More recent papers, however, based on research designs that are able to isolate causality
have found evidence more consistent with the canonical model. As reviewed in Currie, RCTs on
“cashout” experiments in the 1990s found little difference in food spending between the group
receiving benefits in cash versus in food vouchers. The reanalysis by Schanzenbach (2007) finds
that the mean treatment effect is a combination of no difference in food spending among inframarginal recipients, and a substantial shift in consumption toward food for the relatively small
group of stamp recipients who are constrained. Overall, these experiments provide evidence on
the difference between cash and vouchers, but do not provide estimates for the broader question
of how providing SNAP benefits (by increasing family disposable income) affects food spending
or consumption more broadly.
Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) use the initial rollout of the food stamp program to
quasi-experimentally examine the effects on food spending. As discussed above, the program’s
introduction took place across the approximately 3,000 U.S. counties between 1961 and 1975.
Consistent with the theoretical predictions discussed in 3.1, they find that the introduction of FSP
leads to a decrease in out-of-pocket food spending and an increase in overall food expenditures.
They estimate a marginal propensity to consume food out of food stamps of 0.16 for all nonelderly and 0.30 for female-headed households. The estimated marginal propensity to consume
food out of food stamp income is close to the marginal propensity to consume out of cash
income. In addition, consistent with economy theory those predicted to be constrained (at the
kink in the food/nonfood budget set) experience larger increases in food spending with the
introduction of food stamps.
Several recent studies have used the changes in SNAP benefits from the economic
stimulus (ARRA) whereby benefits were temporarily increased between April 2009 and October
2013. Beatty and Tuttle (2012) use a difference-in-difference approach and using non-recipients
as controls (with matching methods), they find using the Consumer Expenditure Survey that the
13.6 percent increase in benefits leads to a 6 percent increase in food at home. Kim (2014) uses
the same approach and data and finds that, consistent with the theoretical predictions, the
increase in SNAP benefits leads to increases in food spending and increases in spending on nonfood (housing, transportation, entertainment). Bruich (2014) uses grocery store level scanner data
and a difference-indifference model (using variation in SNAP share at the stores) to examine the
expiration of the ARRA increase in SNAP benefits. On average, SNAP households lost $17
dollars in benefits (per month) and Bruich’s estimates imply a marginal propensity to consume
food out of food stamps of 0.30.
A second set of studies examines the effects of food stamps on consumption, with the
focus on estimating the insurance effects of the program. Blundell and Pistaferri (2003) use
longitudinal data from the PSID to examine how SNAP mitigates the effect of shocks to
permanent income on consumption and income volatility. Gundersen and Ziliak (2003) use an IV
approach to examine how log income changes affect log consumption. Both studies show that
SNAP provides important consumption protection. Gundersen and Ziliak find that SNAP receipt
29

reduced income volatility by 12% and food consumption volatility by 14%. Blundell and
Pistaferri find that the effect of permanent income shocks decline by about one-third with SNAP.
4.2.3 SNAP and Food Insecurity
Food hardship measures were developed by the USDA in response to the National
Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act of 1990 with an interest in “access at all times to
enough food for an active, healthy life” (Coleman-Jensen et al. 2012). The first measures were
released in 1995 and currently a household’s “food security” (or insecurity) status is determined
through a battery of questions asked during the December CPS as part of the Food Security
Supplement (CPS-FSS). There are 10 questions asked of all households, and an additional 8
questions asked of households with children. There are four kinds of questions: those that
capture anxiety or perception that the food budget or supply is inadequate in quantity. There are
also questions that capture whether food is perceived to be inadequate in quality. A group of
questions are more quantitative in nature, asking about instances where food intake was reduced
or weight loss occurred associated with reduced food intake. One set of these questions pertains
to adults and the other to children in the household. Answering more of these questions
affirmatively indicates a more severe degree of food insecurity. For example, a household is
considered to have “very low food security among children” if 5 or more of the 8 child-centered
food security questions are answered affirmatively (Nord 2009).
There are several existing reviews of the literature of SNAP and food insecurity [FI]
(e.g., Currie 2003, Gregory, Rabbitt and Ribar 2015). Here we focus on the research since
Currie’s review that meets our research design criteria.
One set of studies use instrumental variable approaches, typically using state SNAP
policies as instruments (Yen et al. 2008, Mykerezi and Mills 2010, Shaefer and Gutierrez 2013,
Ratcliffe et al. 2011). A commonly employed instrument is the state’s SNAP certification length,
and while it is not a very strong instrument it may be valid on excludability grounds. A second
instrument leverages variation in state policies towards immigrant SNAP coverage or overall
immigrant participation in the program. This is more powerful but less likely to be excludable.
The results vary across studies, typically finding that SNAP participation leads to decreases in FI
(that is, they improve outcomes) but many are not statistically significant.
Two studies use IV approaches but broaden the analysis to examine effects of public
assistance (rather than only SNAP). Borjas (2004) uses welfare reform and the relatively large
reduction in program participation among immigrants in a triple difference IV, essentially using
state by year by citizenship status as the instrument. Schmidt, Shore-Sheppard and Watson
(2013) use a simulated program benefit (using detailed benefit calculators) as an instrument for
actual benefits to identify the effects of benefit income on FI. Both studies find that program
participation (or benefits) leads to reductions in FI.
A second approach uses a household fixed effects and longitudinal data, essentially
identifying the effects of SNAP on FI using switchers into and out of SNAP (Depolt et al. 2009,
Wilde and Nord 2005). This approach may not be credible, given that transitions into SNAP may
be correlated with other factors that negatively affect FI. Compared to the IV approach, these
30

studies are more likely to find a positive association between SNAP and FI. A final approach
uses propensity score matching (e.g., Gibson-Davis and Foster 2006) often finding a positive
association between SNAP and FI.
Overall, the literature on SNAP and FI finds a wide range of results, some finding
positive association, some negative and some insignificant. This range is well illustrated in the
recent review and replication work in Gregory et al. (2015) showing a range of estimates for
propensity score matching, longitudinal and IV approaches in one sample. The range of
estimates illustrates well the challenge for causal identification in evaluating the effects of food
and nutrition programs.
4.2.4 SNAP and Child and Adult Health
The literature on child and adult health takes a similar path to the literature on food
insecurity. Studies use family and child fixed effects, instrumental variables, and propensity
score matching. In this setting there are also studies that leverage the historical rollout of SNAP.
As above, we review the studies since Currie (2003) that meet our research design criteria. The
recent review by Meyerhoefer and Yang (2011) is also a useful reference.
Studies of the effect of SNAP on child BMI find varying effects, depending to some
degree on the estimation approach. Gibson (2004) uses child and family fixed effects and finds
SNAP leads to a reduction in overweight for boys but an increase for girls. Vartanian and Houser
(2012) use a similar approach but relate childhood exposure to adult BMI, finding a beneficial
effect of SNAP. Schmeiser (2012) uses an IV approach, with state SNAP policies (recertification
period, fingerprinting, vehicle asset exemptions) as instruments, and finds that SNAP reduces
BMI for most gender-age groups. Kreider et al. (2012) address selection into and measurement
error of SNAP using a bounding approach and find quite substantial bounds that generally cannot
rule out positive or negative effects of SNAP on BMI.
Similar approaches are used to examine effects on adult health. Gibson (2003) uses an
individual fixed effects approach and finds SNAP participation increased obesity among women,
though as noted above the fixed effects approach may not be credible if transitions into SNAP
are correlated with other factors that directly affect health. Fan (2010) extends this approach and
adds propensity score matching and finds no significant effect of SNAP on obesity, overweight
or BMI. Meyerhoefer and Pylypchuk (2008) combine individual fixed effects and IV and find
SNAP leads to increases in obesity for women but no significant effects for men. Their
instruments—state SNAP policies—do not vary over time so these effects could be capturing
state cross sectional correlations. Kaushal (2007) extends Borjas’s (2004) study and uses welfare
reform as an instrument for SNAP; she finds insignificant effects of SNAP on obesity of
immigrants.
There is a small set of studies that examine the effect of SNAP on birth outcomes;
thereby examining the effects of SNAP on pregnant women. Currie and Moretti (2008) use the
county roll out of FSP in California and find that FSP introduction was associated with a
reduction in birth weight, driven particularly by first births among teens and by changes for Los
Angeles County. Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2011) extend that work and examine the
31

effects of the program rollout across all counties in the U.S., finding that infant outcomes
improve with FSP introduction. Changes in mean birth weight were small, but impacts were
larger at the bottom of the birth weight distribution, reducing the incidence of low birth weight
among the treated by 7 percent for whites and between 3 percent for blacks. They also find that
the FSP introduction leads to a reduction in neonatal infant mortality, although these results
rarely reach statistical significance. East (2015a) utilizes changes in immigrants' eligibility across
states and over time as the result beginning with 1996 welfare reform and extending through
subsequent legislation in the early 2000s. She finds that parental access to SNAP in utero
improves health at birth. Additionally, she finds that increases in SNAP access between
conception and age five improves parent-reported health at ages 6-16 (with suggestive evidence
of reductions in school days missed, doctor visits and hospitalizations at ages 6-16).
Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2015) extend their SNAP rollout design and
estimation approach to estimate the relationship between childhood access to the Food Stamp
Program and adult health and human capital outcomes. They find that access to the FSP in utero
and in early childhood leads to a large and statistically significant reduction in the incidence of
“metabolic syndrome” (obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes) as well as an
increase in reporting to be in good health. The results show little additional protection beyond the
age of 4, consistent with the importance of early life in the development of metabolic system.
They also find for women, but not men, that access to food stamps in early childhood leads to an
increase in economic self-sufficiency.
Overall, we have more confidence in the approaches using instruments based on state
policies and the quasi-experimental estimates from program rollouts, and these studies tend to
find positive or null impacts of SNAP on health. The estimates relying on within-family or
within-individual variation in SNAP participation are more likely to find harmful estimates, and
are subject to the concern that changes in unobservables are simultaneously driving SNAP
participation and negative health outcomes.
4.2.5 SNAP and Labor Supply
Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) use county variation in the rollout of food stamps to
identify the impact of food stamps on labor supply. Using the PSID, they use a difference in
difference approach (using counties without food stamps as controls) and find no significant
impacts on the overall sample but among single-parent households with a female head – a group
much more likely to participate in the program – they find a significant intent-to-treat estimate of
a reduction of 183 annual hours (treatment-on-the-treated reduction of 505 annual hours). They
find no significant impacts of the FSP on earnings or family income, though the estimates are
imprecise.
Using variation across states and over time in immigrants' eligibility for SNAP, East
(2015b) studies the effect on the labor supply of foreign-born single women and married couples,
who both participate in the program at high rates. She finds individuals reduce labor supply when
eligible: the largest effects are among married and single women who reduce employment,
whereas the effects for married men are smaller and are concentrated along the intensive margin
(hours of work). Other than East (2015b), to our knowledge, there is no other study that meets
32

our research design criteria that estimates the impact of SNAP on labor supply in the era after
welfare reform and the expansion of EITC.
4.3 Research on WIC
Given the targeted nature of WIC, the literature naturally focuses on the impact of WIC
on birth outcomes, breastfeeding, and nutritional intake. (See Table 4.2 for the catalog of the
WIC studies we review.) There is also attention on the health of pregnant women and children
less than 5. In the earlier volume, Currie (2003) reviews the literature and it generally concludes
that women who participate in WIC give birth to healthier infants than non-participants. Here,
we update the literature since the Currie review, again limiting to studies that meet our research
design criteria.
4.3.1 WIC Participation
We begin our review with studies on the determinants of WIC participation. As with the
early SNAP literature, the early WIC literature often relied on comparisons of the birth outcomes
of women participating in WIC versus not participating. To explore the validity of this approach,
several studies explore the characteristics of WIC participants. Bitler and Currie (2005) found
that WIC participants (among women with Medicaid funded births) are negatively selected
revealed through measures of education, age, marital status, presence of father, smoking, obesity,
employment, and housing characteristics.35 Currie and Rajani (2014) extend this analysis and
examine the characteristics of WIC participation among mothers who switched WIC
participation status between births. They found that women receive WIC when they are younger,
unemployed or unmarried. Identifying these changes are important for evaluating the validity of
the maternal fixed effects design. Rossin-Slater (2013), examining variation due to the openings
and closings of WIC clinics, finds evidence that participation increases with proximity to a
clinic. Two studies examine the cyclicality of WIC participation, finding little relationship
between state unemployment and poverty and state WIC caseloads (Bitler et al. 2003, Corsetto
2012).
4.3.2 WIC and Health Outcomes
The next panel reviews the literature on pregnancy and birth outcomes. Recent studies
have used several different approaches to address the fundamental selection problem. One
approach taken is to compare outcomes among more narrowly defined treatment and control
groups (e.g., Bitler and Currie 2005, Joyce et al. 2005, 2008, and Figlio et al. 2009). Bitler and
Currie (2005) create a control group based on Medicaid funded births and find that WIC leads to
higher average birth weight and reduction in small for gestational age. Figlio, Hamersma, and
Roth (2009) identify groups marginally eligible versus marginally ineligible for WIC (obtained
by matching birth records to older sibling free and reduced price lunch records). They find WIC
reduces the incidence of low birth weight but has no effect on average birth weight, gestational
age, or premature birth.

35

Women eligible for Medicaid are categorically eligible for WIC. Limiting to Medicaid funded births identifies a
sample where all women are eligible for WIC.

33

Another approach employs maternal fixed effects models, controlling for unobserved
family background characteristics by comparing outcomes among siblings who participated in
WIC to outcomes among those who did not. Currie and Rajani (2014) use a maternal fixed
effects model applied to administrative data from NYC from 1994-2004 and find that WIC leads
to reductions in low birth weight and being small for gestational age, but an increase in medical
care use.
Joyce et al. (2008) discuss the possibility of a gestational age bias in this literature. They
point out that women whose pregnancies last longer have more opportunity to enroll in WIC. If
this is true (which they demonstrate using administrative data) then it leads to a mechanical
relationship between WIC participation and longer gestation, biasing the results toward a
positive effect of WIC. Currie and Rajani (2014) address this concern by estimating results on
the subsample of full term births; they find smaller effects but still conclude that WIC improves
birth outcomes.
An alternative approach is to use the introduction of WIC in the 1970s. Hoynes, Page and
Stevens (2011) use differences in the timing of roll out by county to examine impacts of WIC on
infant health. Using a difference-in-differences analysis, where the control counties have not yet
adopted WIC, they find that roll out of the WIC program led to an increase birth weight and a
decline in low birth weight. Rossin-Slater (2013) extends this analysis by combining geographic
access with a maternal fixed effects approach. In particular, she uses administrative data from
Texas combined with detailed information about the opening and closing of WIC clinics over
2005-2009; her approach is identified across mothers who had varying access to WIC clinics
across births. She finds WIC improves pregnancy weight gain, birth weight, and breastfeeding
initiation.
There are few studies that leverage variation in WIC policy changes. This is in large part
due to the minimal variation across states and over time in the program rules. Bitler and Currie
(2005) find lower takeup for states in which proof of income is required (prior to the federal
mandate) and higher takeup for states with higher WIC package prices. However, they find these
to be relatively weak instruments. With the more recent changes to WIC, it might be reasonable
to reexamine the potential for using state policy variation to identify the effects of WIC.
The studies above are all focused on pregnant women and outcomes at birth. Yet
pregnant women account for less than a quarter of WIC participants (Table 2.4), half are children
1-4 and another quarter are infants. There are many outcomes of interest here, notably rates of
breastfeeding, nutritional intake, food security, child weight gain, and general health. However,
there is a dearth of studies that use credible designs to evaluate WIC on children. Reflecting on
the designs used in the analysis of birth outcomes (e.g., maternal fixed effects, geographic and
time variation in presence of WIC clinics), it appears possible to apply similar approaches to
examine child health. However, this would likely require rich administrative data, combining
child health records, linked across siblings, and family WIC participation. The birth records data,
with fine geographic identifiers, and WIC participation data, with the ability to link births across
mothers, provide this information. But it is much less common to have these linkages for child
health data. Any analysis of the effects of WIC on child health would have to grapple with the
interesting question as to the possibility of spillovers to other non-covered family members. This
34

could occur either though the sharing of WIC bundle or an income effect of WIC benefit. It
could also possibly work through the nutritional education component of the program.
4.3.3 WIC and Market Factors
The supply side of the WIC market is less developed in the literature. There is a small
literature on the infant formula market that starts with the stunning fact that over half of all U.S.
infant formula is purchased through the WIC program (Oliveira, Frazao, and Smallwood 2010).
Further, because WIC is a “quantity-voucher” benefit, recipients are not sensitive to price. This
creates clear incentives for producers to price above marginal cost, especially in this highly
concentrated market. Amid concerns about the rising costs of formula, the WIC program moved
to a system whereby manufacturers bid on the contract to be the formula provider for the state. In
exchange for the right, manufacturers pay a rebate on the formula; in practice the rebates are
large, averaging 85-90% of wholesale price. Recent studies find that market shares increase
substantially for firms that land the state contract (Huang and Perloff 2014, Oliveira, Franzao and
Smallwood 2011), and Davis (2012) finds that the winning firm sees its share of the sales to nonWIC customers increase by 50%-60%.
Meckel (2014) examines the incentives for vendor fraud with WIC. Because WIC
recipients are price insensitive, vendors face incentives to price discriminate by charging higher
prices to WIC recipients. She uses the rollout of EBT in WIC across Texas counties and finds
that with EBT (which makes it harder to engage in fraud), prices charged to non-WIC recipients
increase. Additionally, EBT sparks a decline in both vendor participation and individual
participation in WIC. McLaughlin (2014) explores vendor competition given that they cannot
compete on price (due to price insensitivity of WIC participants). Using a sample of WIC
vendors in California, he finds that vendors compete on products (brand profile, range and
diversity of products) as well as choosing locations consistent with Hotelling-like incentives.
Another aspect to the supply side has to do with the nature of foods available in stores
where WIC recipients shop. Andreyava (2012) provides an interesting case study analysis of how
product stock changed in WIC-authorized grocery and convenience stores after the recent
alteration of the WIC packages. There was a substantial increase in stocking of healthy foods; for
example 8% of WIC-authorized convenience and grocery stores had any whole wheat/whole
grain bread at baseline, while 81% did so after the revisions took effect (over the same time, nonWIC stores increased whole wheat/whole grain bread from 25% to 35%).
4.4 Research on NSLP
Most research on the National School Lunch Program has focused on how the program
impacts dietary intake, and also obesity rates. Because the NSLP is virtually universally
available, and most policy changes are implemented at the Federal level, there are relatively few
examples of credible quasi-experiments in the literature. Most of the research employs
differences-in-differences between siblings, or across periods when the NSLP is or is not
available. It is worth noting that none of the studies reviewed in this section have used data
collected after the 2012-13 implementation of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act which

35

dramatically overhauled nutrition standards for school meals. Table 4.3 catalogs the studies we
review.
4.4.1 NSLP and Dietary Quality
Gleason and Suitor (2003) compare observations of dietary intake for an individual
across multiple days that vary by whether the student does or does not receive a school lunch,
and find mixed evidence on nutrition intake. They find that NSLP increases the consumption of
fat, protein, and six types of vitamins and minerals, but that it has no overall impact on total
calories eaten at lunch or over a 24-hour period. Nord and Romig (2006) compare intake during
the summer vs. the school year for families with school-age vs. preschool-age children, and find
that NSLP availability significantly reduces the rate of food insecurity.
4.4.2 NLSP and Child Health and Education Outcomes
Several papers have investigated the relationship between NSLP participation and
childhood obesity. The results are estimated at different ages and at different points on the
income distribution, and find mixed results. Schanzenbach (2009) finds that children ineligible
for a free or reduced-price lunch who go on to consume school lunch enter kindergarten with
similar body weights when compared to children who do not consume school lunch, but that
NSLP participants become comparatively heavier as their exposure to school lunch increases. In
addition, she uses the income cutoff for receipt of reduced-price lunch and finds that both NSLP
participation and body weight discretely increase at the cutoff. Millimet, Tchernis, and Husain
(2010) find similar results using the same data.
On the other hand, Gundersen, Kreider and Pepper (2012) use a Manski-style partial
identification approach and find that receipt of free or reduced-price lunch improves child health
and substantially reduces obesity rates. Mirtcheva and Powell (2013) use children who change
their participation in NSLP between waves in the PSID, and find that NSLP has no effect on
body weight in either direction.
Dunifon and Kowaleski-Jones (2003) compare siblings who differ in their NSLP
participation decisions. In the OLS, NSLP participation predicts more behavioral problems,
increased health limitations, and lower math test scores. When sibling comparisons are
employed, the coefficients decline in magnitude and are no longer statistically significant,
suggesting the OLS correlations in part reflect unobserved family characteristics.
In the spirit of the program rollout literature described in the SNAP section above,
Hinrichs (2010) leverages changes in NSLP funding formulas during the early years of the
program to estimate the long-run impacts of the expansion of the program. He finds that
increasing NSLP exposure in a state by 10 percentage points increases completed education by
nearly 1 year for males, and one-third of a year for females. On the other hand, NSLP did not
appear to have long-term health impacts.
4.5 Research on SBP

36

As shown in Table 2.1, participation in the SBP has increased dramatically over the past
20 years. In particular, many more schools have adopted the program during this time period, or
have adopted policies aimed at increasing availability and take-up of the program. The literature
has been active in recent years, and Table 4.4 lists the studies we review.
Bhattacharya, Currie and Haider (2006) use variation in school participation in the SBP
prior to the recent increase in participation to identify the impacts of the program on children and
their families. Using a difference-in-differences setup, they compare students observed during
the school year vs. when they are on school vacation, by whether or not their school offered the
SBP. They find that SBP does not impact the number of calories consumed nor the likelihood
that a student eats breakfast, but it does improve dietary quality as measured by the Healthy
Eating Index and in blood serum. The income transfer implied by the SBP does not appear to
spill over and improve dietary quality for other household members, however. Modeling school
selection into the SBP and bounding the potential for individual-level unobservables to confound
the effect, Millimet, Tchernis and Husain (2010) find that the SBP reduces childhood obesity.
Some states have statutes requiring participation in the SBP for schools that meet at least
some threshold (which varies across states, typically between 10 and 40 percent) of eligibility for
free or reduced-price meals. Frisvold (2012) uses these thresholds to construct difference-indifferences and RD estimates of the impact of SBP for schools near the thresholds. He finds that
SBP improves achievement in math and reading, and that participation improves the nutritional
content of breakfast.
Evidence on the SBP has increased recently as researchers have used policy changes
aimed at expanding the program to identify its impacts. In particular, to address (perceived)
stigma associated with participation in the school breakfast program and in response to
incentives from the USDA, some districts have begun (or stopped) offering universal free school
breakfast instead of the standard program that provides free breakfast only to students who are
income-eligible for a subsidy. There is substantial evidence that universal free breakfast (UFB)
has increased participation rates. Leos-Urbel, Schwartz, Weinstein and Corcoran (2013) find that
expansion of the UFB program in New York City schools increased participation rates for those
previously ineligible for breakfast subsidies, and also for free-breakfast students. This suggests
that the UFB program may also reduce stigma associated with participation. They find small
positive impacts of the program on attendance rates, but no impact on test scores. Ribar and
Haldeman (2013) use the termination of UFB in some schools but not others in a North Carolina
district, and find a decline in participation that was largest for students who were not incomeeligible for free breakfasts.
The USDA sponsored a large randomized-controlled trial of UFB, and collected
information on impacts on participation, dietary intake, health, behavior and achievement.
Crepinsek et al. (2006) analyze the experimental data and find that students who attend a school
randomly assigned to receive UFB are more likely to consume a nutritionally substantive
breakfast, the program has no impact on 24-hour dietary intakes or on the rate of breakfast
skipping.

37

While UFB increases take-up rates, the limitation remains that in order to participate in
the breakfast program a student generally has to arrive at school prior to the start of classes. To
remove this barrier, another recent policy innovation has been to serve breakfast in the classroom
(BIC) during the first few minutes of the school day. BIC eliminates the need for students to
arrive to school early to participate in the school breakfast program, and dramatically increases
participation in the SBP. This program has recently gained momentum, with major expansions in
cities such as Washington, D.C., Houston, New York City, Chicago, San Diego and Memphis,
and a flurry of research studies on the impacts of the program.
Imberman and Kugler (2014) investigate the very short-term impacts of the introduction
of a BIC program in a large urban school district in the southwestern United States. The program
was introduced on a rolling basis across schools, and the earliest-adopting schools had the
program in place for up to 9 weeks before the state’s annual standardized test was administered.
They find increases in reading and math test scores on the order of 0.06 and 0.09 standard
deviations, respectively, but no impact on grades or attendance. Additionally, there was no
difference in impact on test scores between those schools that had adopted the program for only
one week vs. those that had the program for a longer time. The pattern in the results led the
authors to speculate that the test score impacts were driven by short-term cognitive gains on the
day of the test due to eating breakfast and not underlying learning gains.
Schanzenbach and Zaki (2014) re-analyze the USDA’s experimental data described
above to separately investigate the impact of the BIC program. They find few positive impacts
on measures of dietary quality, and no positive impacts on behavior, health or achievement
measured after 1 to 3 years of treatment. They find some evidence of health and behavior
improvements among specific subpopulations. Dotter (2012), on the other hand, finds stronger
impacts of the staggered introduction of a BIC program in elementary schools in San Diego.
Using a difference-in-differences approach based on the introduction of the program, he finds
that BIC increases test scores in math and reading by 0.15 and 0.10 standard deviations,
respectively. He finds no test score impacts on schools that previously had universal free
breakfast, and no impacts on attendance rates.

5. Conclusions and Future Directions
A pressing concern for policy makers is whether food and nutrition programs are doing
an adequate job enhancing and protecting the nutrition status of Americans. Despite the
patchwork of nutrition programs available, many recipients either suffer food insecurity,
consume diets that fall short of dietary guidelines, or both. There are many holes in the research
literature, and better answers to these unresolved questions could give policy makers guidance on
ways to potentially improve the programs. We conclude this chapter with our thoughts on open
research questions. We organize these comments into three categories: programs and policy
(basic program impacts), the role of market incentives, and potential insights from behavioral
economics to enhance the effectiveness of the programs.
5.1 Programs and Policy

38

As described in the sections above, while there have been recent strides in our
understanding of the causal impacts of food and nutrition programs, there are many holes to be
filled in terms of our knowledge about what food and nutrition programs do. For example,
although over three quarters of WIC participants are infants and children, little is known about
the health impacts of WIC these populations. In addition, little is known about the effects of the
$388 million in nutrition education or $100 million in employment and training programs in
SNAP (figures from CBO, 2012). Recent policy changes also need evaluation, for example the
impacts of stricter nutrition standards for school meals adopted under the Healthy, Hunger-Free
Kids Act on participation and outcomes are yet to be understood. The Act also imposed
restrictions on “competitive foods” sold in schools that could have important impacts on
participation, child health, and educational outcomes. Similarly, the impacts of the recent change
in the WIC food basket on take-up and participant outcomes need study. In addition, the impacts
of the relaxation of the gross income test in SNAP – which expanded eligibility to households
with earnings above 130 percent of the poverty line that have high deductions for shelter costs,
child care and medical costs – are in need of study.
In addition, the interactions between these and other safety net programs are not well
understood. Bitler and Hoynes (2015) show that in the post-welfare reform world, SNAP played
a large and important role in protecting families from falling into poverty in the Great Recession.
Further, they find that TANF is providing much less protection in response to economic
downturns than it did prior to welfare reform (when the program was called AFDC). As a result,
SNAP’s role in insuring consumption in the face of economic downturns appears to be evolving
and growing. Have the responses to the work disincentives of SNAP changed in the era after
welfare reform, in which TANF’s role in the safety net has been displaced by the EITC? How
have the time limits on ABAWD participants in SNAP changed work incentives? Does SNAP
play a more important role in alleviating food insecurity and other measures of material hardship
because it is paid out monthly instead of the EITC’s annual lump-sum payment? In a broader
sense, is it optimal to have the current patchwork of programs, or would it be better to combine
or streamline the programs somehow?
There is a recent and growing literature on the medium- and long-run effects of providing
food and nutrition programs in utero and in early childhood. We have much more to learn about
the potential benefits of these programs on health and wellbeing in the long run, and when in the
life cycle is the most important time to provide these benefits.
A few recent papers focus on understanding the recent SNAP caseload dynamics, as
motivated by the increase in SNAP in the Great Recession. Studies by Bitler and Hoynes (2015)
and Ganong and Liebman (2014) show that a significant share of the increase in SNAP in the
Great Recession can be explained by the severity of the labor market contraction. As of this
writing, as the labor market is recovering, SNAP caseloads are declining. It will be of interest to
understand whether these dynamics continue. Relatively little is understood about the duration
and frequency of participation spells. What are the income dynamics that correlate with
households’ entry to and exit from the program? Given the trade-offs between incentives,
protection, and the administrative costs of enrolling a household in SNAP, are the program rules
set optimally?

39

In addition, the Institute of Medicine (2013) set out a variety of research questions on the
adequacy of SNAP benefits that have not been answered. Since a high proportion of SNAP
recipients experience food insecurity at some point during the year, are there changes that could
enhance the program’s effectiveness in this regard? For example, are the funding formula’s
parameters set appropriately? Important areas of study include whether the earnings disregard is
adequate, the impact of the cap on the shelter cost deduction to net income, and whether the
assumptions of the amount of home production of meals implicit in the Thrifty Food Plan are
reasonable in an era with higher shares of the caseload employed.
5.2 The role of market incentives (for participants and firms)
More work is also needed in understanding the price elasticity of demand for various
goods (e.g. healthy foods). There is some recent evidence on this question from the Healthy
Incentives Pilot conducted in Massachusetts (Bartlett et al. 2014). This small scale randomized
controlled trial gave the treatment group a $0.30 rebate for each dollar of SNAP benefits spent
on fruits and vegetables (subject to a maximum subsidy). The evaluation shows that the price
subsidy led to a 25% increase in consumption of fruits and vegetables. It would be useful to
know how consumption would respond to different levels of price subsidies, and whether the
results are different if they are offered at all participating retailers or limited to farmers markets
only. It would also be useful to know how and for whom consumption patterns would change
under targeted price subsidies compared to other policy changes with equivalent cost, such as an
increase in the maximum benefit levels or an increase in the earnings disregard. Along a similar
line, Just and Price (2013) find that children are more likely to eat fruits or vegetables at lunch in
school if they are given a cash incentive, and impacts are more than twice as large if they are
offered a quarter as a nickel.
More work is needed to understand how to design programs that are efficient and
incentive-compatible for vendors. For example, SNAP and WIC benefits make use of normal
channels of trade, and can be redeemed at a large number of retail stores. What are ways to
promote lowest-price redemption of WIC vouchers given that WIC is a quantity voucher? How
would the efficiency and effectiveness of the program be changed if the benefits were altered
such that recipients could respond to the price of the goods (e.g. by turning the program into a
dollar-value voucher that could be used for targeted goods)? For school meals, how have
revenues responded to the new nutrition standards, and if meals are losing revenue from what
sources are schools making up the shortfall? What combination of incentives and regulations
improve the provision of healthy school meals, and does that vary by whether the meals service
is run by the district or contracted to a private vendor?
5.3 Insights from behavioral economics
Another direction for research is testing whether existing economic models accurately
capture participant behavior, or if models that incorporate behavioral economics insights are
more appropriate. The USDA is interested in pursuing these avenues, and recently funded a
Center for Behavioral Economics and Healthy Food Choice Research.

40

For example, some policy advocates have suggested altering the types of goods that can
be purchased with SNAP benefits, such as excluding sugar sweetened beverages or allowing
purchase of hot foods. Under the canonical model, inframarginal consumers would not be
predicted to alter their consumption of these goods regardless of whether SNAP benefits can be
used to purchase the items. Does actual behavior adhere to the canonical model prediction, or
would recipients alter their consumption of the targeted goods in response to these potential
“nudges”? In 2010, New York City requested a waiver from USDA to ban the purchase of a
wide range of sugar-sweetened beverages with SNAP benefits. While the waiver was rejected, a
well-designed demonstration project would provide useful evidence on the matter. Even if such
policies do not alter behavior, there may be scope for other well-targeted nudges to encourage
healthier food consumption.
There is more to learn about the importance of the “food stamp cycle” first documented
by Shapiro (2005). In particular, the data show that as the number of days pass since a family
receives their (monthly) food stamp payment, food consumption, calories, nutritional intake, and
food expenses decline. The decline is especially notable in the last week of the food stamp cycle.
Hastings and Washington (2010) find results consistent with this using grocery store scanner
data. These findings have caused some policy interest in paying out benefits more frequently,
e.g. twice per month. Using a population shopping at commissaries on military bases, though,
Zaki (2014) documents a similar decline in daily food purchasing patterns late in the pay period
when paychecks are distributed twice per month. This suggests that more frequent payments of
benefits may not be more effective at encouraging consumption smoothing. A better
understanding of the interactions between the frequency of payments, self-control, and
consumption smoothing would give us important insights into the economic decision-making
among low-income populations that could be incorporated in our food and nutrition programs
and policies.
5.4 Final conclusions
It is encouraging that in recent years there has been an increase in the study of food and
nutrition programs using designs that attempt to isolate causal impacts of the programs.
Nonetheless, many important questions remain that are unlikely to be answered by quasiexperimental analyses. To provide compelling answers on the impacts of these important
programs, the USDA should be open to expanding access to administrative data and
implementing well-designed social experiments.

41

References
Almond, D., K. Y. Chay, and M. Greenstone. 2006. Civil rights, the war on poverty, and blackwhite convergence in infant mortality in the rural South and Mississippi. Working Paper No.
07*04. Cambridge, MA: MIT Department of Economics, December.
Almond, D., H. W. Hoynes, and D. W. Schanzenbach, D. W. 2011. Inside the war on poverty:
the impact of food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2):
387-403.
Andreyeva, T. 2012. Effects of the revised food packages for Women, Infants, and Children
(WIC) in Connecticut. Choices 27 (3).
Bailey, M. J. 2012. Reexamining the impact of family planning programs on US fertility:
evidence from the War on Poverty and the early years of Title X. American Economic Journal
Applied economics 4 (2): 62.
Barker, D. J. (1997). Maternal nutrition, fetal nutrition, and disease in later life. Nutrition, 13(9),
807-813.
Bartlett, S., J. Klerman, P. Wilde, L. Olsho, C. Logan, M. Blocklin, M. Beauregard, and A.
Enver. 2014. Evaluation of the Healthy Incentives Pilot (HIP): Final Report. Food and Nutrition
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, September.
Beatty, T. K., and C. Tuttle. 2012. Expenditure response to increases in in-kind transfers:
Evidence from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. In AAEA/EAAE Food
Environment Symposium, Boston, MA, May: 30-31.
Bernstein, L. S., J. E. McLaughlin, M. K. Crepinsek, and L. M. Daft. 2004. Evaluation of the
School Breakfast Program Pilot Project: Final Report (Nutrition Assistance Program Report
Series, No. CN-04-SBP). Alexandria, VA: Office of Analysis, Nutrition, and Evaluation, Food
and Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, December.
Berry, J. M. 1984. Feeding hungry people: Rulemaking in the food stamp program. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Bhattacharya, J., J. Currie, and S. J. Haider. 2006. Breakfast of champions? The School
Breakfast Program and the nutrition of children and families. Journal of Human Resources 41
(3): 445-466.
Bitler, M., and J. Currie. 2005. Does WIC Work? The effects of WIC on pregnancy and birth
outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24 (1): 73–91.
Bitler, M., and H. W. Hoynes. 2013. Immigrants, welfare and the U.S. safety net. In Card, David
and Steven Raphael (eds.), Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality, New York,
NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
42

Bitler, M., and H. W. Hoynes. 2015. The more things change, the more they stay the same: The
safety net, living arrangements, and poverty in the great recession. Forthcoming, Journal of
Labor Economics.
Bitler, M. P., J. Currie, and J. K. Scholz. 2003. WIC eligibility and participation. Journal of
Human Resources 1139-1179.
Blundell, R., and L Pistaferri. 2003. Income volatility and household consumption: The impact
of food assistance programs. Journal of Human resources 1032-1050.
Borjas, G. J. 2004. Food insecurity and public assistance. Journal of Public Economics 88 (7):
1421-1443
Bruich, G. 2014. The effect of SNAP benefits on expenditures: New evidence from scanner data
and the November 2013 benefit cuts. Harvard University. Mimeograph, September.
Cascio, E., N. Gordon, E. Lewis, S. Reber, 2010. Paying for progress: Conditional grants and the
desegregation of southern schools. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 445–482
Coleman-Jensen, A., M. Nord, M. Andrews, and S. Carlson. 2012. Household food security in
the United States in 2011. Economic Research Report no.141. Washington, D.C.: Economic
Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Coleman-Jensen, A., M. Rabbitt, C. Gregory and A. Singh. 2015. Statistical Supplement to
Household Food Security in the United States in 2014. Administrative Publication Number 069.
Washington, D.C.: Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. Effective marginal tax rates for low- and moderate-income
workers. Washington, D.C., November.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
Washington, D.C., April.
Corsetto, L. 2012. Food and nutrition program cyclicality. University of California-Davis.
Mimeograph.
Crepinsek, M. K., A. Singh, L. S. Bernstein, and J. E. McLaughlin. 2006. Dietary effects of
universal-free school breakfast: findings from the evaluation of the school breakfast program
pilot project. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 106 (11): 1796-1803.
Cunnyngham, K. 2002. Trends in Food Stamp Program participation rates: 1994 to 2000.
Contract no. 53-3198-9-008. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research.

43

Cunnyngham, K. 2010. State trends in Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program eligibility
and participation among elderly individuals. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research,
September.
Cunnyngham, K. 2014. State Supplemental Nutrition Program participation rates in 2011.
Contract no. AG-3198-K-13-0006. Washington, D.C.: Food and Nutrition Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, February.
Cunnyngham, K, A. Sukasih, and L. Castner. 2014. Empirical Bayes shrinkage estimates of state
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program participation rates in 2009-2011 for all eligible
people and the working poor. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research, March.
Currie, J. 2003. U.S. food and nutrition programs. In Means-tested transfer programs in the
United States, Moffitt, R. A., & Moffitt, R. (Eds.), 291-363, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Currie, J., and F. Gahvari. 2008. Transfers in cash and in-kind: Theory meets the data. Journal of
Economic Literature 46 (2): 333-383.
Currie, J., and J. Grogger. 2001. Explaining recent declines in food stamp program participation
[with comments]. Brookings-Wharton papers on urban affairs: 203-244.
Currie, J., and E. Moretti. 2008. Did the introduction of food stamps affect birth
outcomes in California? In Making Americans Healthier: Social and Economic Policy as Health
Policy, R. Schoeni, J. House, G. Kaplan, and H. Pollack, editors, New York, NY: Russell Sage
Press.
Currie, J., and I. Rajani. 2014. Within-mother estimates of the effects of WIC on birth outcomes
in New York City. Working Paper no. w20400. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research, August.
Davis, D. 2012. Bidding for WIC infant formula contracts: Do Non-WIC customers subsidize
WIC customers? American Journal of Agricultural Economics 94 (1):80-96.
DePolt, R. A., R. A. Moffitt, and D. C. Ribar. 2009. Food stamps, temporary assistance for needy
families and food hardships in three American cities. Pacific Economic Review14 (4): 445-473.
Dotter, D. 2012. Breakfast at the desk: The impact of universal breakfast programs on academic
performance. Mimeograph. La Jolla, CA: University of California, San Diego.
Dunifon, R., and L. Kowaleski-Jones. 2003. The influences of participation in the national
school lunch program and food insecurity on child well-being. Social Service Review 77 (1): 7292.
East, Chloe (2015a). The effect of Food Stamps on children’s health: Evidence from immigrants’
changing eligibility. Mimeograph. Davis, CA: University of California, Davis.
44

East, Chloe (2015b). The labor supply response to Food Stamp access. Mimeograph. Davis, CA:
University of California, Davis.
Fan, M. 2010. Do food stamps contribute to obesity in low-income women? Evidence from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 92
(4): 1165-1180.
Figlio, D. N., C. Gundersen, and J. P. Ziliak. 2000. The effects of the macroeconomy and welfare
reform on food stamp caseloads. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (3): 635-641.
Figlio, D., S. Hamersma, and J. Roth. 2009. Does prenatal WIC participation improve birth
outcomes? New evidence from Florida. Journal of Public Economics 93 (1): 235-245.
Finkelstein, A., and R. McKnight. 2008. What did Medicare do? The initial impact of Medicare
on mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of Public Economics 92 (7): 16441668.
Frisvold, D. E. 2012. Nutrition and cognitive achievement: An evaluation of the School
Breakfast Program. Discussion Paper no. 1402-12. Madison, WI: Institute for Research on
Poverty, August.
Ganong, P., and J. B. Liebman. 2013. The decline, rebound, and further rise in SNAP
enrollment: Disentangling business cycle fluctuations and policy changes. Working paper no.
19363. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gibson, D. 2003. Food Stamp Program participation is positively related to obesity in lowincome women. The Journal of Nutrition 133 (7): 2225-2231.
Gibson, D. 2004. Long-term Food Stamp Program participation is differentially related to
overweight in young girls and boys. The Journal of Nutrition 134 (2): 372-379.
Gibson-Davis, C. M., and E. M. Foster. 2006. A cautionary tale: Using propensity scores to
estimate the effect of food stamps on food insecurity. Social Service Review 80 (1): 93-126.
Gleason, P. M., and C. W. Suitor. 2003. Eating at school: How the National School Lunch
Program affects children's diets. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 85 (4): 1047-1061.
Gluckman, P. D., and M. A. Hanson. 2004. The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development and
Disease. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goodman-Bacon, A. J. 2014. Public insurance and mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
implementation. Working paper, University of Michigan.
Gregory, C., M. Rabbitt, and D. C. Ribar. 2015. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
and food insecurity. In SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being. J.
45

Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J. Ziliak, (eds.), Redwood City, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Griliches, Z. 1979. Sibling models and data in economics: Beginnings of a survey. The Journal
of Political Economy: S37-S64.
Gundersen, C., B. Kreider, and J. Pepper. 2012. The impact of the National School Lunch
Program on child health: A nonparametric bounds analysis. Journal of Econometrics 166 (1): 7991.
Gundersen, C., and J. P. Ziliak. 2003. The role of food stamps in consumption stabilization.
Journal of Human Resources: 1051-1079.
Haider, S. J., R. F. Schoeni, Y. Bao, and C. Danielson. 2004. Immigrants, welfare reform, and
the economy. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23 (4): 745-64.
Hastings, J., and E. Washington. 2010. The first of the month effect: Consumer behavior and
store responses. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (2): 142-62.
Hinrichs, P. 2010. The effects of the National School Lunch Program on education and
health. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29 (3): 479-505.
Hoynes, H. W., L. McGranahan, and D.W. Schanzenbach. 2015. SNAP and food
consumption. In SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being. J. Bartfeld, C.
Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J. Ziliak, (eds.), Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.
2015.
Hoynes, H., M. Page, and A.H. Stevens. 2011. Can targeted transfers improve birth outcomes?
Evidence from the introduction of the WIC program. Journal of Public Economics 95 (7): 813827.
Hoynes, H. W., and D. W. Schanzenbach. 2009. Consumption responses to in-kind transfers:
Evidence from the introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 1 (4): 109-139.
Hoynes, H. W., and D. W. Schanzenbach. 2012. Work incentives and the Food Stamp
Program. Journal of Public Economics 96 (1): 151-162.
Hoynes, H. W., D. W. Schanzenbach and D. Almond. 2015. Long run impacts of childhood
access to the safety net. Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Huang, R., and J.M. Perloff. 2014. WIC contract spillover effects. Review of Industrial
Organization 44 (1): 49-71.
Imberman, S. A., and A.D. Kugler,. 2014. The effect of providing breakfast in class on student
performance. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 33 (3): 669-699.
46

Institute of Medicine. 2005. WIC food packages: Time for a change. Washington, D.C.: The
National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. 2013. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: Examining the
evidence to define benefit adequacy. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Joyce, T., D. Gibson, and S. Colman. 2005. The changing association between prenatal
participation in WIC and birth outcomes in New York City. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 24 (4): 661-685.
Joyce, T., A. Racine, and C. Yunzal-Butler. 2008. Reassessing the WIC effect: Evidence from
the pregnancy nutrition surveillance system. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27 (2):
277-303.
Just, D. R., and J. Price. 2013. Using incentives to encourage healthy eating in children. Journal
of Human Resources 48 (4): 855-872.
Kabbani, N. S., and P. E. Wilde. 2003. Short recertification periods in the U.S. Food Stamp
Program. Journal of Human Resources 38:1112-1138.
Kaestner, R., and N. Kaushal. 2005. Immigrant and native responses to welfare reform. Journal
of Population Economics 18 (1): 69–92.
Kaushal, N. 2007. Do food stamps cause obesity? Evidence from immigrant experience. Journal
of Health Economics 26 (5): 968-991.
Kim, J. 2014. Changes in Low-income Household’s Spending Pattern in Response to the 2009
SNAP Benefit Increase. University of Michigan, MI.
Kreider, B., J. V. Pepper, C. Gundersen, and D. Jolliffe 2012. Identifying the effects of SNAP
(Food Stamps) on child health outcomes when participation is endogenous and misreported.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 107 (499): 958-975.
Leos-Urbel, J., A.E. Schwartz, M. Weinstein, and S. Corcoran. 2013. Not just for poor kids: The
impact of universal free school breakfast on meal participation and student outcomes. Economics
of Education Review 36: 88-107.
Levin, M., and Z. Neuberger. 2014. Improving direct certification will help more low-income
children receive school meals. Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, July.
Ludwig, J., and M. Miller. 2005. Interpreting the WIC debate. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 24 (3): 691-701.
Ludwig, J., and D.L. Miller. 2007. Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence
from a regression discontinuity approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1): 159-208.
47

Macro International. 1995. The WIC dynamics study, Volume 1, Final report. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, February.
McLaughlin, P. 2014. Incentives for non-price competition in the California WIC program.
University of California-Davis. Mimeograph, May.
Meckel, K. 2014. Is the cure worse than the disease? Unintended consequences of fraud
reduction in transfer programs. Columbia University. Mimeograph, November.
Meyerhoefer, C. D., and Y. Pylypchuk. 2008. Does participation in the Food Stamp Program
increase the prevalence of obesity and health care spending? American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 90 (2): 287-305.
Meyerhoefer, C. D., and M. Yang. 2011. The relationship between food assistance and health: A
review of the literature and empirical strategies for identifying program effects. Applied
Economic Perspectives and Policy: ppr023.
Millimet, D. L., R. Tchernis, and M. Husain, M. 2010. School nutrition programs and the
incidence of childhood obesity. Journal of Human Resources 45 (3): 640-654.
Mirtcheva, D. M., and L. M. Powell. 2013. National School Lunch Program participation and
child body weight. Eastern Economic Journal 39 (3): 328-345.
Moffitt, R. 2014. Multiple program participation and SNAP. Forthcoming in SNAP Matters:
How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being, J. Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J.
Ziliak, (eds.), Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mulligan, C. B. 2012. The redistribution recession: How labor market distortions contracted the
economy. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Mykerezi, E., and B. Mills. 2010. The impact of Food Stamp Program participation on household
food insecurity. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 92 (5): 1379-1391.
Nord, M. 2009. Food insecurity in households with children: Prevalence, severity, and
household characteristics. Economic Information Bulletin Number 56. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, September.
Nord, M., and K. Romig. 2006. Hunger in the summer: seasonal food insecurity and the National
School Lunch and Summer Food Service programs. Journal of Children & Poverty 12 (2): 141158.
Ogden, C.L., M. Carroll, B. Kit, and K. Flegal. 2014. Prevalence of Childhood and Adult
Obesity in the United States, 2011-2012. JAMA 311(8):806-814.

48

Oliveira, V., E. Frazão, and D. Smallwood. 2013. Trends in infant formula rebate contracts:
Implications for the WIC program, EIB-119. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Economic Research Service, December.
Oliveira, V., E. Racine, J. Olmsted, and L. M. Ghelfi. 2002. The WIC Program: Background,
trends, and issues (Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Report No. 27). Washington, D.C.:
Food and Rural Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, September.
Parrott, S., and R. Greenstein. 2014. Policymakers often overstate marginal tax rates for lowerincome workers and gloss over tough trade-offs in reducing them. Washington, D.C.: Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities, December.
Peterson, A., B. McGill, B. Thorn, A. Suchman, and D. Ribar. 2014. Examining the growth of
the zero-income SNAP caseload: Characteristics, circumstances, and dynamics of zero-income
SNAP participants. Volume I: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Findings, 1993–2008. Contract
No. AG-3198-C-11-0008. Alexandria, VA: Insight Policy Research, Food and Nutrition Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Ratcliffe, C., S.M. McKernan, and S. Zhang. 2011. How much does the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program reduce food insecurity? American Journal of Agricultural Economics:
aar026.
Ribar, D. C., and L. A. Haldeman. 2013. Changes in meal participation, attendance, and test
scores associated with the availability of universal free school breakfasts. Social Service Review
87 (2): 354-385.
Rossin-Slater, M. 2013. WIC in your neighborhood: New evidence on the impacts of geographic
access to clinics. Journal of Public Economics 102: 51-69.
Schanzenbach, D. W. 2009. Do school lunches contribute to childhood obesity? Journal of
Human Resources 44 (3): 684-709.
Schanzenbach, D. W. 2007. What are food stamps worth? Working paper, University of
Chicago.
Schanzenbach, D. W., and M. Zaki. 2014. Expanding the School Breakfast Program: Impacts on
children's consumption, nutrition and health. Working Paper no. 20308. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
Schmeiser, M. D. 2012. The impact of long-term participation in the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program on child obesity. Health Economics 21 (4): 386-404.
Schmidt, L., L. Shore-Sheppard, and T. Watson. 2015. The effect of safety net programs on food
insecurity. Journal of Human Resources (forthcoming).

49

Shaefer, H. L., and I. A. Gutierrez. 2013. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and
material hardships among low-income households with children. Social Service Review 87 (4):
753-779.
Shapiro, J. M. 2005. Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition cycle.
Journal of Public Economics 89 (2): 303-325.
Short, K. 2011. The research supplemental poverty measure: 2010. Current Population Reports,
(P60-241). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
Administration, U.S. Census Bureau, November.
Short, K. 2014. The research supplemental poverty measure: 2014. Current Population Reports,
(P60-254). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
Administration, U.S. Census Bureau.
Smeeding, T., D. Jolliffe, and L. Tiehen. 2013. The Effect of SNAP on poverty. Discussion
Paper Series no. DP2013-06. Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Center for Poverty
Research, October.
Southworth, H. M. 1945. The economics of public measures to subsidize food
consumption. Journal of Farm Economics 27 (1): 38-66.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2013. Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants and Children food package cost report, fiscal year 2010. Washington, D.C.:
Food and Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, August.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2007. Food Stamp Program: FNS could
improve guidance and monitoring to help ensure appropriate use of non-cash categorical
eligibility. GAO-07-465. Washington, D.C., March.
Vartanian, T. P., and L. Houser. 2012. The effects of childhood SNAP use and neighborhood
conditions on adult body mass index. Demography 49 (3): 1127-1154.
Ver Ploeg, M., and D. Betson. 2003. Estimating eligibility and participation for the WIC
program. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Wang, D. D., et al. (2014). Trends in Dietary Quality Among Adults in the United States, 1999
Through 2010, JAMA Internal Medicine 174(10):1587-1595.
Wilde, P., and M. Nord. 2005. The effect of food stamps on food security: a panel data approach.
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 27 (3): 425-432.
Yen, S. T., M. Andrews, Z. Chen, and D.B. Eastwood. 2008. Food Stamp Program participation
and food insecurity: an instrumental variables approach. American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 90 (1): 117-132.

50

Zaki, M. 2014. Access to short-term credit and consumption smoothing within the paycycle.
Department of Economics, Northwestern University.
Ziliak, J. 2008. Effective tax rates and guarantees in the Food Stamp Program. A report to the
Food and Nutrition Research Program, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, April.
Ziliak, J. P. 2015. Why are so many Americans on food stamps? The role of the economy,
policy, and demographics. In SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being. J.
Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J. Ziliak, (eds.), Redwood City, CA: Stanford
University Press. 2015.
Ziliak, J. P., C. Gundersen, and D.N. Figlio. 2003. Food stamp caseloads over the business cycle.
Southern Economic Journal: 903-919.

51

Figure 1.1 Stylized Representation of SNAP Benefit Formula

Source: Hoynes, McGranahan and Schanzenbach (2015)

Figure 1.2 Cumulative Percent of Counties with Food Stamp Program, 1960-1975

Source: Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009. Weighted by 1970 county population.

52

Figure 1.3 Food Stamp Start Date, by County

Source: Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009).

Figure 1.4 Cumulative Percent of Counties with WIC Programs, 1970-1981

Counties with WIC Sites (weighted %)

100

80

60

40

20

0
1970

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

Source: Hoynes, Page, and Stevens (2011). Weighted by 1970 county population. Missing Data for 1976, 1977.

!

53

Figure 2.1 Real per capita expenditures for SNAP, 1980-2014 (Real 2014 dollars), with U.S.
Unemployment Rate

Source: USDA SNAP Program Data, http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap.
Unemployment rates from http://data.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet. For definitions of recessionary periods see Bitler and
Hoynes 2014. Note: Per capita SNAP expenditures are calculated using the U.S. population as the denominator (not per SNAP
recipient) and inflation adjusted using the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ CPI inflation calculator.

Figure 2.2 Real per capita expenditures for WIC, NSLP and SBP, 1980-2014 (real 2014 dollars)

Source: USDA WIC, NSLP, and SBP program data, http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/wic-program,
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/child-nutrition-tables. Note: Per capita expenditures are calculated using the U.S. population as the
denominator (not per program recipient) and inflation adjusted using the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ CPI inflation calculator.

54

Figure 2.3 Federal expenditures and number of recipients by program (2014)

!

Note: “Other” includes the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP), the Summer Food Service Program
(SFSP), the Special Milk Program (SMP), and the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program (FFVP). Participation for
NSLP and SBP only includes free and reduced-price lunch participants. Participation data is missing from SMP and
FFVP and is not included in this graph.

55

0

Pct. participating in programs
.3
.6

.9

Figure 2.4 Household Participation in Food and Nutrition Programs by Household Income to
Poverty, Households with Children headed by Nonelderly Individual (2013)

0

2

4
6
Ratio of private income to poverty
SNAP
SLP

8

WIC
EITC

Source: Adapted from Bitler and Hoynes (2015). Author’s tabulations of 2014 Current Population Survey capturing
data for 2013 calendar year. Kernel density plot of household program participation, by ratio of household private
income to poverty. Sample includes non-elderly household heads in households with children.

Figure 2.5 Millions of Children Removed from Poverty by Program, 2014

Source: Authors’ tabulation of Short (2015).

56

Figure 3.1 Effects of SNAP on consumption
Panel A: Budget Set Shift

!"#$%&
'(()*

7$'1(/&
-/0""01/089$&
21"#&3456
&&

5

!!

!!

;
,-)'$"&.(/*"%01/"&
21"#&3456

,+

<&
6+

,-)'$"&
.(/*"%01/"&
21"#(-"&3456
!!

!!

,

:

+(()

Panel B: Consumer’s Utility Maximization Response to SNAP

!"#$%&
'(()*
!!

,8

!! 9

!!

!!,78

!!

!!

578

598

!!

!!

,-)'$"&
.(/*"%01/"&21"#&
3456

+7

+9

+(()

57

Figure 3.2 Effects of WIC on consumption

!"#$%&
'(()*&
+,-./0),-'&
-(-1"2%'$"$)&
3(()*4

?

!!

!!

<

=:

80)'$"&.(-*"%2,-"&
9,"#&:;<

80)'$"&
.(-*"%2,-"&
9,"#(0"&:;<
!!

!!

8

>

52%'$"$)&*06*,),7$)&
3(()*

Figure 3.3 Effects of NSLP on consumption

!"#$%&
'(()*
;

!!

!!

73#((:&8-43#

2-)'$"&
3(4*"%,/4"&
5/"#(-"&6789
!!

2

+,%'$"$)&*-.*/)/0$)&
1(()*

58

Figure 3.4 Income-Leisure Tradeoffs and SNAP

!"#$%&

!!
!!

!"#$%&3
45(6(7(5(893
'(%(83

,-.

!!

!!

!!

,.

!!

!!

!!

2

,-

!!

!!

,/

0

, !!
1
!!

'&()*+&

'

Source: Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012).

Figure 3.5 Income-Leisure Tradeoffs and WIC / NSLP

!"#$%&

!!

,-.

!!

,.

!!

!!
!!

!!

!!

,-

!!

!!

!!

9
!"#$%&2
34(5(6(4(782
'(%(72

,/

0

, !!
1

'&()*+&

59

1972: pilot
1974: permanent
program
(continued)

Special
6.2 billion
Supplemental
Nutrition Program
for Women, Infants,
and Children (WIC)

2009: ARRA
provisions (expired
10/2013)

Benefits

60

Food instrument or cash-value
voucher (some states on EBT) to
purchase specified nutritious foods
rich in protein, iron, calcium, vitamins
A, C, and D; nutrition education;
screening and referrals to health and
other social services
8.26 million
Food package assignment varies by
individuals (2014) situational need

Low-income
pregnant or
postpartum
women, infants
(<1), and children
(<5)

13.6% increase in maximum Food
Stamp benefit

Monthly benefit issued electronically
via Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
card account and calculated based on
Thrifty Food Plan
46.5 million
Maximum monthly allotment through
individuals/month 2015: $194 for 1 person household,
(2014)
$511 for 3 person household, and $925
for 6 person household; 2014 average
monthly benefit per person = $125.35,
per household = $256.98

Low-income
households

Population Served

Overview of U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs and Rules

Program and Date of Federal Cost
Introduction
(2014)
Supplemental
74.2 billion
Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP)
formerly FSP
1961: pilot
1975: permanent
program

Table 1.1

WIC eligibility priority system

Pregnant, postpartum, or breastfeeding women,
infants, or children < 5; must be individually
determined to be at "nutritional risk" by a health
professional; meet State residency requirement;
gross income ≤ 185% of FPL

Meet countable resource limit of $2,250 or $3,250
for elderly or disabled; TANF, SSI, and GA
recipients eligible; legal, qualified aliens may be
SNAP eligible; some households may be required to
meet employment, service, and training
requirements; individuals without a Social Security
number, most postsecondary students, and strikers
are not eligible
Temporarily allowed states to suspend eligibility
time limits on ABAWDs

Household gross monthly income < 130% of
poverty

Eligibility Requirements

3.7 billion

(continued)

Child and Adult
3.1 billion
Care Food Program
(CACFP)

1966: pilot
1975: permanent
program

School Breakfast
Program (SBP)

3.9 million
average daily
attendance

SNAP recipients automatically qualify for free
meals

Free breakfast if income ≤ 130% poverty; reducedprice breakfast if income ≤ 185% poverty

SNAP recipients automatically qualify for free
meals

Free lunch if income ≤ 130% poverty; reduced-price
lunch if income ≤ 185% poverty

Eligibility Requirements

61

Reimbursements for meals and snacks Centers are operated by public, private nonprofit,
which conform to meal patterns
and certain for-profit organizations
(approved centers receive $1.62/free
breakfast; $2.98/free lunch; $2.98/ free
supper; $0.82/ free snack)

10.6 million
Nutritionally balanced daily breakfast
children receiving meeting latest Dietary Guidelines for
free breakfast; 1.0 Americans standards
million children
receiving reduced
price breakfast
(2014)
Avg. reimbursement rate = $1.93/free
meal, $1.63/reduced price meal, at
school in severe need (SY14/15)

Table 1.1
(continued)
Program and Date of Federal Cost
Population Served
Benefits
Introduction
(2014)
National School
11.4 billion Low-income
Nutritionally balanced daily lunches
Lunch Program
children
conforming to the latest Dietary
(NSLP)
Guidelines for Americans standards;
1/2 daily nutrition requirements
1946
19.2 million
Avg. reimbursement rate = $3.06/ free
children receiving meal, $2.66/reduced price meal, in
free lunch;
schools where 60% or more of meals
2.5 million
are subsidized and meeting Healthy,
receiving reduced Hunger-free Kids Act requirements
price lunch (2014) (SY14/15)

(continued)

1968: pilot:
1975: permanent

Summer Food
Service Program
(SFSP)

2010: at-risk care
(all states)

1987: adult care

465.6
million

Benefits

Eligibility Requirements

62

Centers must provide nonresidential care services
and be licensed/approved by state
Facilities must be licensed/approved and provide
nonresidential child care services in a group or
family home setting
Adults in care
(see above)
Centers must provide services to adults who are
(functionally
functionally impaired or over age 60, provide
impaired or 60
community-based programs, provided
years of age or
nonresidential services, and be licensed/approved to
older)
provide adult day care services
At-risk children
(see above)
Centers must primarily provide care for children
(age 18 and under)
after school or on weekends, holidays, or school
vacations during school year; provide organized
scheduled activities; include education or
enrichment activities; be located in area near public
school w/ 50% or more of income ≤ 185% poverty
2.7 million
Free meals that meet nutrition
Child's participation at: open site = 50% or more of
children/day
guidelines to all participating children families w/ incomes at or below 185% of FPL;
at approved sites; enrichment activities enrolled site = 50% or more of children enrolled in
activity program are eligible for F/RP school meals;
camp site = free meals only to children who qualify
for F/RP meals
Low-income
Reimbursement rates for rural or selfchildren 18 years prep sites = $2.08/breakfast, $6.35/
old and under at
lunch or supper, $0.87/snack; for all
approved SFSP
other sites = $2.04/ breakfast,
sites
$3.59/lunch or supper, $0.85/ snack

Table 1.1
(continued)
Program and Date of Federal Cost
Population Served
Introduction
(2014)
1968: daycare
Children in day
(see above)
care
1976: family care
Children (12 year (see above)
of age or younger)

153.3
million

Schools receive btwn $50 - $75 per
student for the school year

Children at
Free fresh fruit and vegetables for
elementary schools students outside of normal school
w/a high
meal timeframes
percentage of F/RP
meal eligibles

Priority to high-need schools

Elementary school must have high percentage of
students certified for F/RP meals and participate in
NSLP

Children that meet income guidelines for free meals
who attend a school or institution that does not
participate in other federal child nutrition meal
service programs

Eligibility Requirements

63

Source: SNAP eligibility requirements from http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility; NSLP and SBP reimbursement rates from
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/NAPs14-15.pdf; program statistics from http://www.fns.usda.gov/data-and-statistics; WIC
eligibility requirements from http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/wic-eligibility-requirements; WIC benefits from
http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/wic-eligibility-requirements; SNAP benefits from http://www.fns.usda.gov/node/9320; School meal eligibility
guidelines from http://www.fns.usda.gov/school-meals/income-eligibility-guidelines;
SFSP info: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/frequently-asked-questions-faqs#4.; SFSP rates from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp-reimbursement-rates;
CACFP info from http://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/child-and-adult-care-food-program; CACFP rates from
http://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/reimbursement-rates; SMP data from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/11smhpfy.pdf;
SMP expenditures from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/smsummar.pdf; SMP reimbursement rates from
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/NAPs14-15.pdf; SMP info from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/SMP_Quick_Facts_0.pdf;
FFVP program info from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/handbook.pdf

2002: pilot
2008: permanent
program

Fresh Fruit and
Vegetable Program
(FFVP)

Table 1.1
(continued)
Program and Date of Federal Cost
Population Served
Benefits
Introduction
(2014)
Special Milk
10.5 million 50.0 million half- Reimbursement for 1/2 pints milk
Program (SMP)
pints milk served
to low-income
children
1971: permanent
Reimbursement rate: $0.23/half-pint
program

Table 1.2

WIC Food Packages - Maximum Monthly Allowances

Food Package
I

Recipient
Infants, fully formula fed
(0-5 months)

Infants, partially breastfed
(0-5 months)

II

Infants, fully formula fed
(6-11 months)

Infants, partially breastfed
(6-11 months)

Infants, fully breastfed
(6-11 months)

III

Infants, fully formula fed
(0-11 months)

Infants, partially breastfed
(0-11 months)

Food
WIC formula: 823 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (0-3 months)
WIC formula: 896 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (4-5 months)
WIC formula: 104 fl oz reconstituted powder (0-1
month)
WIC formula: 388 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (1-3 months)
WIC formula: 460 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (4-5 months)
WIC formula: 630 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate
Infant cereal: 24 oz
Baby food fruits & vegetables: 128 oz
WIC formula: 315 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate
Infant cereal: 24 oz
Baby food fruits & vegetables: 128 oz
Infant cereal: 24 oz
Baby food fruits & vegetables: 256 oz
Baby food meat: 77.5 oz
WIC formula: 823 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (0-3 months)
WIC formula: 896 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (4-5 months)
WIC formula: 630 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (6-11 months)
Infant cereal: 24 oz (6-11 months)
Baby food fruits & vegetables: 128 oz (6-11 months)
WIC formula: 104 fl oz reconstituted powder (0-1
month)
WIC formula: 388 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (1-3 months)
WIC formula: 460 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (4-5 months)
WIC formula: 315 fl oz reconstituted liquid
concentrate (6-11 months)
Infant cereal: 24 oz (6-11 months)
Baby food fruits & vegetables: 128 oz (6-11 months)

(continued)

64

Table 1.2
Food Package
IV

V

(continued)
Recipient
Children: 1 - 4 years old

Pregnant and partially breastfeeding
women (up to 1 year postpartum)

Food
Juice, single strength: 128 fl oz
Milk: 16 qt*
Breakfast cereal: 36 oz
Eggs: 1 dozen
Fruits & vegetables: $8.00 in cash value voucher
Whole wheat bread: 2 lb**
Legumes, 1 lb dry or 64 oz canned OR peanut butter,
18 oz
Juice, single strength: 144 fl oz
Milk: 22 qt*
Breakfast cereal: 36 oz
Eggs: 1 dozen
Fruits & vegetables: $10.00 in cash value voucher
Whole wheat bread: 1 lb**
Legumes, 1 lb dry or 64 oz canned AND peanut
butter, 18 oz

VI

VII

Postpartum women (not breastfeeding,
up to 6 months postpartum)
Juice, single strength: 96 fl oz
Milk: 16 qt*
Breakfast cereal: 36 oz
Eggs: 1 dozen
Fruits & vegetables: $10.00 in cash value voucher
Legumes, 1 lb dry or 64 oz canned OR peanut butter,
18 oz
Fully breastfeeding women (up to 1
year postpartum)
Juice, single strength: 144 fl oz
Milk: 24 qt*
Breakfast cereal: 36 oz
Cheese: 1 lb
Eggs: 2 dozen
Fruits & vegetables: $10.00 in cash value voucher
Whole wheat bread: 1 lb**
Fish, canned: 30 oz***
Legumes, 1 lb dry or 64 oz canned AND peanut
butter, 18 oz

* Allowable options for milk alternatives are cheese, soy beverage, tofu, and yogurt (partially). No whole milk for > 2 years. ** Allowable options
for whole wheat bread are whole grain bread, brown rice, bulgur, oatmeal, whole-grain barley, soft corn, or whole wheat tortillas.
*** Allowable options for canned fish are light tuna, salmon, sardines, mackerel, and Jack mackerel. Source: USDA Federal Register/
Vol. 79, No. 42/March 2014/ Rules and Regulations accessed http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/03-04-14_WIC-Food-PackagesFinal-Rule.pdf

65

Table 1.3 NSLP and SBP History
1946
National School Lunch Act
Congress passes to make school lunch program permanent
A. Serve lunches meeting the minimum nutritional requirements
prescribed by Secretary of Agriculture
B. Serve meals without cost or at reduced cost to children of need
C. Operate program on a non-profit basis
D. Utilize commodities declared by the Secretary to be in abundance
E. Utilize commodities donated by the Secretary
F. Maintain proper records of all receipts and expenditures to be
reported to State agency
1952
1st Amendment to change appropriations in AK, HI, P.R., V.I.., and Guam
1962
Amended fund to be apportioned on basis of participation rate
and assistance need rate
1966
Child Nutrition Act
A. Program expanded and strengthened
B. Special Milk Program added
C. School Breakfast Program 2-year pilot begins
1971
Congress specifies SBP to target schools in which there are children
of working mothers and from low-income families
1973
SBP restructured reimbursement from grant to a specific
per-meal reimbursement
1975
SBP becomes permanent with emphasis on schools in severe need
1998
Child Nutrition Reauthorization Act increases federal subsidies for
child nutrition programs
2004
Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act of 2004
A. Required all school districts receiving federal funds for meal programs
to create wellness policies
2010
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act
A. Improves nutrition with a focus on childhood obesity reduction
B. Increases access
C. Increases program monitoring
D. Increases funding
Source: NSLP history from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/NSLP-Program%20
History.pdf; SBP history from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sbp/program-history

66

Table 1.4

Current NSLP and SBP Rules (Post Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act Implementation)
I.
New Dietary Guidelines established by USDA
A. Fluid milk restrictions: unflavored milk can be 1% or fat-free; flavored
milk must be fat-free
B. No added trans fat or zero trans fat
C. Avg. saturated fat content per meal (averaged across week) must be less
than 10% of total calories
D. Fruits and vegetables minimum requirement increase
E. Avg. calories per meal (averaged across week) must fall within defined
ranges for each age/grade group
F. Serve a variety of vegetables from each of these groups every week:
dark green, red/orange, legumes, starchy and 'all other'
G. Half of grain items offered must be 'whole grain rich'
H. Number of servings of grain items and meat/meat alternates offered
must be within the weekly ranges for each age/grade group
I. Minimum daily portion sizes and minimum weekly serving
requirements for each food group
J. Reduce sodium content
II.
Simplifications to direct certification process and increased access
A. Foster children automatically eligible
B. Community eligibility: areas of high poverty qualify for universal free
III.
Payments and Reimbursement changes
A. Increased lunch reimbursement rate by 6 cents for meals that meet
nutrition standards
B. Requires school districts to gradually increase price of paid lunches to
offset new costs
IV.
Increased authority to USDA
A. Regulation of competitive foods
B. Nutritional standards applicable to all food sold in schools
V.
Requires schools to make free potable water where meals are served
VI.
Increased program monitoring
VII.
Privacy protection for individual completing application

Source: USDA Comparison of Previous and Current Regulatory Requirements under Final Rule, http://www.fns.usda.gov/
sites/default/files/comparison.pdf; Summary of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010 from http://www.fns.usda.gov/
sites/default/files/PL111-296_Summary.pdf

67

Table 1.5 Previous and Current School Meal Caloric Standards
Previous (pre HHFKA)
Current (post HHFKA)
Lunch
grades K-3
grades K-5
Min: 633
Min: 550
Max: none
Max: 650
grades 4-12
grades 6-8
Min: 785
Min: 600
Max: none
Max: 700
grades 7-12 (optional)
grades 9-12
Min: 825
Min: 750
Max: none
Max: 850
Breakfast
grades K-12
grades K-5
Min: 554
Min: 350
Max: none
Max: 500
grades 6-8
Min: 400
Max: 550
grades 9-12
Min: 450
Max: 600
Source: Comparison of Previous and Current Regulatory Requirements under Final
Rule from Nutrition Standards in the National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Programs (published January 26, 2012)

68

Table 2.1

SNAP
WIC
NSLP
SBP

Expenditures and Caseload in Food and Nutrition Programs
1990 1995 2000 2005
Expenditures (billions $2014)
28.0 38.2 23.4 37.7
3.8
5.3
5.4
6.0
5.8
6.9
7.6
8.6
1.1
1.6
1.9
2.3

2010

2012

2013

2014

74.1
7.0
10.6
3.1

80.9
6.9
10.7
3.4

81.2
6.5
11.2
3.6

74.2
6.2
11.4
3.7

46.6

47.6

46.5

8.9
2.1
2.1
4.7
31.7
18.7
2.7
12.9
9.8
1.0

8.7
2.0
2.0
4.6
30.7
18.9
2.6
13.2
10.2
1.0

8.3
2.0
2.0
4.3
30.5
19.2
2.5
13.6
10.6
1.0

15.0

15.2

14.8

Average Monthly Participation (millions persons)
SNAP
20.0 26.6 17.2 25.6 40.3
Annual Participation (millions persons)
WIC (total)
4.5
6.9
7.2
8.0
9.2
Women
1.0
1.6
1.7
2.0
2.1
Infants
1.4
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.1
3.5
3.6
4.0
4.9
Children
24.1 25.7 27.3 29.6 31.8
NSLP (total free, reduced, and full paid meals)
Free meals
9.8
12.4 13.0 14.6 17.6
Reduced price meals
1.7
1.9
2.5
2.9
3.0
4.1
6.3
7.6
9.4
11.7
SBP (total free, reduced, and full paid meals)
Free meals
3.3
5.1
5.7
6.8
8.7
Reduced price meals
0.22 0.37 0.61 0.86
1.0

SNAP
WIC
Women (as % of all women aged 18-44)
Children 1-4
Infants < 1
NSLP (as % of children aged 5-17)
Free and reduced price meals
Free meals
All meals
SBP (as % of children aged 5-17)
Free and reduced price meals
Free meals
All meals

Caseload (as % Relevant Population)
8.1
10.1 6.2
8.7
13.2
1.9
13.5
35.3

2.9
21.7
46.5

3.1
23.0
48.5

3.6
24.6
50.5

3.9
28.3
52.9

3.7
29.6
53.4

3.6
28.5
53.8

3.5
26.9
51.9

25.0
21.4
52.5

28.0
24.4
50.2

29.1
24.5
51.5

32.6
22.7
55.3

38.4
32.8
59.2

39.5
34.5
58.3

39.7
35.0
56.6

40.0
35.4
56.2

7.6
7.2
8.8

10.7
10.0
12.4

12.0
10.8
14.3

14.3
12.7
17.4

18.1
16.2
21.7

19.9
18.0
23.7

20.6
18.8
24.4

21.3
19.5
25.2

Source: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/SNAPsummary.xls; CPI is from EROP http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/tables10.html
population is from EROP http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/2010/B34.xls and Census Department
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/17SNAPfyBEN$.xls; http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/SNAPsummary.xls
Additional Spreadsheets provided by Candy Mountjoy (Candy.Mountjoy@fns.usda.gov), Maeve Myers (maeve.myers@fns.usda.gov) and
Gene Austin (Gene.Austin@fns.usda.gov); http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/10sbcash.xls
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/16SNAPpartHH.xls; http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/34SNAPmonthly.xls
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/15SNAPpartPP.xls; http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/06slcash.xls

69

Table 2.2

Characteristics of SNAP Recipients
1996

2000

2005

2010

2012

60
39
16
47
9
15
91
10
23
25

54
35
21
47
10
11
89
8
27
20

54
32
17
47
7
16
88
14
29
30

49
26
16
44
5
24
85
20
30
38

45
24
17
43
6
25
82
20
31
38

37
6
24
19
2
1

26
5
32
25
2
1

15
6
26
23
2
1

8
4
21
21
7
1

7
3
20
23
5
1

All Food Stamp Households

Share with children
Share female heads with children
Share with elderly members
Share of individuals <18
Share of individuals >=65
Share no elderly, no kids, no disabled
Share with gross monthly income below poverty
Share with no cash income
Share with any earnings
Share with no net income
Multiple program participation; share with income from:

AFDC/TANF
General Assistance
SSI
Social Security
Unemployment Insurance
Veterans Benefits

Food Stamp Households without Elderly Members

Share with children
Share female heads with children
Share with elderly members
Share with gross monthly income below poverty
Share with no cash income
Share with any earnings

70
46
0
92
12
26

67
43
0
89
10
33

64
38
0
89
16
35

57
30
0
87
22
34

54
29
0
85
23
37

43
7
17
9
2
1

32
5
24
14
2
1

17
6
20
14
2
1

9
4
16
13
8
1

8
3
16
14
6
0

18
19

15
17

16
17

15
17

15
16

Multiple program participation; share with income from:

AFDC/TANF
General Assistance
SSI
Social Security
Unemployment Insurance
Veterans Benefits
Effective tax rate on:
Earned Income
Unearned Income

Source: Authors' tabulations of SNAP Quality Control Data. Available at http://hostm142.mathematicampr.com/fns/

70

Table 2.3

Food Stamps Maximum Benefits by Household Size (2014)
Net Income (100% Gross Income
Household Size
Maximum Benefit
of poverty)
(130% of poverty)
1
$973
$1,265
$194
2
$1,311
$1,705
$357
3
$1,650
$2,144
$511
4
$1,988
$2,584
$649
5
$2,326
$3,024
$771
6
$2,665
$3,464
$925
7
$3,003
$3,904
$1,022
8
$3,341
$4,344
$1,169
Each additional
(+) $339
(+) $440
(+) $146
person

Notes: Includes Contiguous States, District of Columbia, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.
Does not include Hawaii or Alaska.
Source: Income eligibility standards from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/FY15_
Income_Standards.pdf; Maximum allotments from http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/FY15_Allot_Deduct.pdf

71

Table 2.4

Characteristics of WIC Recipients

Income below 50% FPL
Income below 100% FPL
Income below 150% FPL
Percent of women participants who are
Pregnant
Breastfeeding
Postpartum

1994
42
74
91

2012
37
73
92

52
17
31
100

43
29
28
100

29
40
58
35
36

9
37
72
33
24

Multiple program participation; percent with income from:

TANF
SNAP
Medicaid
SNAP and Medicaid
No TANF/SNAP or Medicaid

Source: "WIC Participant and Program Characteristics 2012: Final Report" FNS, USDA, December 2013
and "WIC Participant and Program Characteristics 1994" FNS, USDA.
Observations with missing data are excluded from the tabulations.

72

Administrative data: Food Stamp
caseloads, state x year 1980-1998

Figlio, Gundersen, and
Ziliak (2000)

(continued)

Ganong and Liebman (2013) SIPP 2007-2011
Administrative county SNAP data:
1990-2011

CPS 1981-1999 and administrative
data on state-year SNAP caseloads

Currie, Grogger, Burtless,
and Schoeni (2001)

Results

73

For full period a one percentage point
increase in the UR leads to a 3.4
percent increase in caseloads per
capita; larger effects (though not
statistically different) in the Great
Recession
State panel fixed effects model
Caseload decreases due to welfare
Main independent variables: UR,
reform, reduction in UR and
SNAP policy variable (recertification reductions in recertification period
length), welfare reform
State panel fixed effects model
Reduction in SNAP in 1990s due
Main independent variables: UR (and primarily to economy and less to
lags), growth of EPOP (and lags),
welfare reform
SNAP policies, welfare policies
State (or county) fixed effects model, Most of the increase in SNAP
including models with lags
between 2007-2011 is due to the
Independent variables include: UR
macroeconomy; SNAP relaxing of
(and lags), SNAP policy, welfare
income and asset limits in 2000s
policy
(Broad Based Categorical Eligibility)
accounts for 8% of the increase in
enrollment; relaxing of ABAWD
accounts for 10%

Design

Administrative data: SNAP caseloads State panel fixed effects model
by state and month 1980-2013,
Main independent variable: UR and
normalized by state x year population interactions for subperiods

Data

Studies of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program

Study
Studies of Determinants of
SNAP Participation
Bitler and Hoynes (2015)

Table 4.1

(continued)

Ziliak, Gundersen, and
Figlio (2003)

Ziliak (2013)

Table 4.1
Study
Kabbani and Wilde (2003)

Administrative data: annual state
caseloads 1980-1999

74

State panel fixed effects model;
estimated static and dynamic
(including lags)
Main independent variables include:
state-year UR, welfare policies

Design
State panel fixed effects model
Main independent variables: UR (and
lags), SNAP policy variable (share of
persons facing recertification periods
≤ 3 months)
CPS 1980-2011
State fixed effects model, including
N=5,552,486 individuals residing in models with lags
2,053,018 households pooled across Independent variables include: UR
all years (173,515 persons in a typical (and lags), SNAP policy, welfare
yr across sample period)
policy

Data
Administrative data: Food Stamp
Quality Control Data, 1990-2000,
state x year

(continued)

A one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate leads to a 2.3%
increase after one year and 8%
decrease in the long run; a 10percentage point increase in the share
of a state’s population waived from
rules limiting food stamp receipt
among ABAWDs results in a 0.5%
increase in contemporaneous
caseloads

Increase in participation from 20072011—50% due to higher UR, 30%
due to policy changes, remainder due
to demographics and other

Results
Increase in 10 pp of share ≤ 3 months
leads to a 2.7 percent reduction in
caseload/pop; reduced error rates by
0.8 pp

(continued)

Blundell and Pstaferri
(2003)

Study
Studies of Impact on
Consumption
Beatty and Tuttle (2012)

Table 4.1
Data

PSID 1978-1992; male headed
married couples age 25-65 in stable
households
N=2,469 unique households

CEX 2007-2010; limit sample to
households with total expenditures
≥150% of average expenditures of
SNAP recipients
N=29,000 household-quarters

(continued)

75

Difference in difference design
comparing SNAP recipients to
nonrecipients before and after SNAP
benefit increases (the ARRA 2009
increase in SNAP benefits being the
largest increase); matching method
used to improve control group; model
the effect of an increase in benefits
using an Engel curve approach
Panel data model with household
fixed effects and parametric modeling
for error (permanent income shock,
measurement error in income,
measurement error in consumption
and taste); framework allowed for
self-insurance, in which consumers
smooth idiosyncratic shocks through
saving; also considered the complete
markets assumption in which all
idiosyncratic shocks are insured

Design

The effect of permanent income
shocks on consumption declines by
about one-third with SNAP

The ARRA policy change [increase in
SNAP benefit of 13.6 percent] led to
a 6.0% increase in food at home; no
significant effects on food-away from
home

Results

(continued)

76

Difference in difference and event
study model using rollout of SNAP
across counties between 1961 and
1975; triple difference using across
group variation (e.g. high vs. low
potential SNAP participation) as third
differencing

PSID 1968-1978; three samples: (i)
all nonelderly headed households, (ii)
nonelderly headed household with
<12 years of education, (iii) female
headed households
N=39,623 family-year observations

Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2009)

Design
Difference in difference model (using
variation in SNAP share at the stores)
to examine the expiration of the
SNAP benefits in ARRA

Panel data model with household
fixed effects; model 1 is first
difference in log income, with an
analysis of variance of the residual;
model 2 is an IV of change in log
consumption on the change in log
income (instruments are changes in
the head’s labor supply)

Data
Grocery store level scanner data from
2012-2014; 431 grocery stores from
Los Angeles, CA, Atlanta, GA and
Columbus, OH

(continued)

Gundersen and Ziliak (2003) PSID 1980-1999, household heads, at
risk of SNAP samples: (i) income
<130% FPL, (ii) income ever <130%
FPL, (iii) average income in bottom
quartile of sample average income
N=8,485 unique households

Table 4.1
Study
Bruich (2014)

Total food consumption increases
with introduction of FSP; MPC out of
FSP is 0.163 and MPC out of cash
income is 0.087

Among families at risk of SNAP
receipt, food stamps reduced income
volatility by about 12% and foodconsumption volatility by about 14%

Results
Due to 2013 SNAP benefit cuts, on
average, SNAP households in CA,
GA, and OH lost $20 dollars in
benefits (per month), resulting in a
$5.91 decline in SNAP households
monthly spending; each $1 of cuts
reduced grocery store expenditure by
$0.37, implying a marginal
propensity to consume food out of
food stamps of 0.30

(continued)

Depolt, Moffitt, and Ribar
(2009)

Borjas (2004)

Design
Difference in differences model;
month and year fixed effects; lowincome households as a treatment
group

77

Estimate effect of public assistance
receipt on FI using welfare reform in
two-sample IV, comparing
noncitizens versus natives
Instrument = triple difference
between state x year x citizenship
status
Longitudinal data from the ThreeUse household fixed effect model,
City Study (Boston, Chicago, and San identifying effects of SNAP
Antonio); low-income families
participation of off switchers (on or
(below 200% of the poverty line)
off program); multiple indicator
N=2973 person-year observations
multiple cause models

Data

CPS-FSS 1995-1999

CEX 2007-2011

Study
Kim (2014)

Studies of Impact on Food
Insecurity

(continued)

Table 4.1

Participation in SNAP is associated
with fewer food hardships

Reduction in proportion of welfare
recipients by 10 percentage points
increased FI by about 5 percentage
points

Results
The increase in SNAP benefits due to
ARRA leads to increases in food
spending and increases in spending
on non-food (housing, transportation,
entertainment), the increase in food
expenditure is slightly less than the
full SNAP benefit increase ($18$24/person monthly benefit increase
and $13/person expenditure increase)

(continued)

Ratcliffe, McKernan, and
Zhang (2011)

Mykerezi and Mills (2010)

Design
Propensity score matching with 2
models

78

Three designs to estimate effect of
SNAP on FI: (i) propensity score
matching, (ii) one year apart
longitudinal estimators, (iii) IV
(instruments: household head being a
non-citizen, SNAP certification
interval in state)
1999 PSID; samples: (i) ≤150% FPL IV model, estimate of SNAP on FI;
(N=1608), (ii) ≤200% FPL (N=2237), also relate loss of SNAP (involuntary,
(iii) ≤250% FPL (N=2837)
“due to government office decision”)
to change in FI
Instrument: state SNAP
underpayment rate and overpayment
rate
1996, 2001, 2004 SIPP panels; low- IV using state SNAP policies as
income households (<150% of
instrument: use of biometric
poverty threshold)
technology, outreach spending, full
immigrant eligibility, and partial
immigrant eligibility

Data
ECLS-K, fall 1998 and spring 1999;
households with incomes <130% of
FPL
N=4,276

Study
Gibson-Davis and Foster
(2006)

Gregory, Rabbitt, and Ribar CPS-FSS 2009-2011, households
(2013)
≤130% FPL

(continued)

Table 4.1

SNAP reduces the likelihood of being
food insecure by 30% and very food
insecure by 20%

FSP participation lowers FI by 19%
(cross section IV using state policy
variables could capture other aspects
of state)

Results
Food stamps do not decrease the
probability of being food insecure,
although they lessen the severity of
the problem according to some
models
Propensity score and longitudinal
models show positive effect of SNAP
on FI; inconsistent results for IV

Data
CPS 2001-2009, families w/at least
one child under 18, <300 % of the
poverty line, no immigrants,
particular focus on single-parent
families
N=28,189 (first stage, December)
N=68,702 (second stage, March)

SIPP 1996, 2001, 2004, households
with children and <150% FPL

CPS-FSS 2001-2002, longitudinally
linked
N=17,331 matched households

Study
Schmidt, Shore-Sheppard,
and Watson (2013

Shaefer and Gutierrez
(2013)

Wilde and Nord (2005)

(continued)

(continued)

Table 4.1

79

Household fixed effects using
transitions onto and off of SNAP

IV with instrument: state-year share
<3 month short recertification;
implementation of biometric
technology

Design
IV approach, effect of program
benefits on FI; instrument actual
benefits with simulated benefits
eligibility and potential benefit
calculator

Transitions into SNAP associated
with transitions into FI

SNAP reduces household food
insecurity by 12.8 percentage points

Results
$1000 in potential benefits (benefits
for which a family is eligible) reduces
low food security by 2 percentage
points on a base rate of 33 percent; a
treatment on the treated $1000 in
benefits reduces low food security by
4 percentage points

Data
1996-1997 National Food Stamp
Program Survey
N=2,179 households

(continued)

(continued)

80

SNAP exposure leads to reduction in
birth weight

SNAP exposure leads to significant
reduction in low birth weight births;
no significant effects for infant
mortality

Design
Results
IV approach to estimate effect of
Participation in SNAP reduces FI by
SNAP participation on FI
0.4 percentage points (7%)
Instruments: state policy variables
(recertification length, EBT
availability), pop. share of
immigrants & 4 dummy variables on
stigma to capture the effect of welfare
stigma: whether the individual had
avoided telling (people about
receiving food stamps), shopped at
stores where (they are) unknown,
(been treated with) disrespect
shopping (with food stamps), or (been
treated with) disrespect telling
(people about being on food stamps)

Studies of Impacts on Child
Health Outcomes
Almond, Hoynes, and
National Vital Statistics data on births Difference in difference and event
Schanzenbach (2011)
1968-1977
study analysis of food stamp program
rollout; examine effects of exposure
to SNAP on birth outcomes, low birth
weight
Currie and Moretti (2008)
Vital statistics data on California
Difference in difference analysis of
births 1960-1974
food stamp program rollout in
California; examine effects of
exposure to SNAP on birth weight

Table 4.1
Study
Yen, Andrews, Chen, and
Eastwood (2008)

(continued)

81

Data
Design
National Vital Statistics data on births Difference in difference using
2000-2007; NHIS 1998-2013,
immigrants' eligibility across states
children aged 6-16
and over time; triple difference with
children of natives; examine effect of
exposure to SNAP in utero on health
at birth, and exposure from time in
utero to age 5 on health outcomes at
ages 6-16
Gibson (2004)
NLSY-79 child sample
Examine effects of SNAP
N= 3831 (girls)
participation over past 5 years on
N=4012 (boys), person-years
overweight, by gender and age;
family and child fixed effects
Kreider, Pepper, Gundersen, NHANES 2001-2006, children 2-17 Partial identification bounding
and Jolliffe (2012)
in households w/income < 130% FPL methods to address selection and
N= 4,418
measurement error (underreporting)
of SNAP; range of models with
weaker and stronger assumptions
Schmeiser (2012)
NLSY-79, children ages 5-18
Examine effects of SNAP
N=8409 (boys)
participation over past 5 years on
N=8144 (girls)
distribution of BMI via IV
Instruments: state-level SNAP
policies including recertification
period length, fingerprinting, and
vehicle asset exclusions
Vartanian and Houser (2012) PSID 1968-2005
Sibling fixed effects model to relate
childhood participation in SNAP to
adult BMI
(continued)

Table 4.1
Study
East (2015a)

Positive effect of childhood SNAP
participation on adult BMI

Mostly insignificant effects, but signs
indicate reduction in overweight for
boys and increase in overweight for
girls
Under weakest nonparametric
assumptions, can not rule out positive
or negative effects of SNAP on
obesity; tightest bounds indicate
beneficial effects of SNAP
SNAP participation significantly
reduces BMI for most child genderage groups

Results
SNAP increases average birth weight
and reduces low birth weight; early
life access improves parent-reported
health at ages 6-16 and insignificant
estimates on school days missed,
doctor visits, and hospitalizations but
signs indicate improvements

Data

(continued)

82

Estimate effect of SNAP on obesity
using welfare reform in two-sample
IV, comparing immigrants to natives
Instrument: triple difference between
state x year x citizenship status

SNAP exposure, especially in early
childhood (age ≤ 4) leads to
significant reduction in metabolic
syndrome in adulthood; SNAP
exposure throughout childhood leads
to improvements in economic
outcomes for women but not men
Insignificant effect of SNAP on
obesity

Examine effects of SNAP
Current and longer term SNAP
participation (past year, past 9 years) participation increased obesity for
on obesity; individual fixed effects
women

Kaushal (2007)

NHIS 1992-2000

Results

Use propensity score weighting to
No significant effects of SNAP on
construct control group along with
obesity rate, overweight rate, or BMI
within person variation in SNAP
participation; estimate both shortterm (one-year participation) and longterm (three-year participation)
treatment effects

Design

Difference in difference and event
study analysis of food stamp program
rollout; examine effects of childhood
exposure to SNAP on adult health
and economic outcomes

NLSY79, ages 20-40
N=13,390

NLSY79 1985-1988
N=6,111

(continued)

Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and PSID 1968-2009
Almond (2015)

Gibson (2003)

Table 4.1
Study
Studies of Impact on Adult
Health Outcomes
Fan (2010)

Current Population Survey 19952007, Working-age adults with high
school education or less

PSID 1968-1978, family head <65
N=48,168 family-years
Three samples: (i) all nonelderly
headed households, (ii) nonelderly
headed household with <12 years of
education, (iii) female headed
households

East (2015b)

Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2012)

Studies of Impact on Labor
Supply

Table 4.1
(continued)
Study
Data
Meyerhoefer and Pylypchuk Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
(2008)
2002-2003, adults age 18-64 eligible
for FSP
N=6,644

83

Difference in difference analysis of
immigrants' eligibility across states
and over time; triple difference with
natives
Difference in difference and event
study model using rollout of SNAP
across counties between 1961 and
1975; triple difference using across
group variation (e.g. high vs. low
potential SNAP participation) as third
differencing

Design
Individual fixed effects and IV
Instruments: state level SNAP
policies including expenditures on
outreach, fingerprinting,
recertification length

For married and single women
employment declines; for married
men employment not affected but
hours of work declines
Hours of work and employment
decline with SNAP introduction, with
the largest effects for female headed
households

Results
SNAP leads to increase in overweight
and obesity for women; no significant
effects for men
(instrument does not vary over time,
so could capture cross-sectional
geographic effects)

Administrative WIC counts, 19902010

Corsetto (2012)

(continued)

CPS survey 1998-2001,
Administrative WIC counts 19922000

WIC participants are negatively
selected w/adverse measures for
education, age, marital status, presence
of father, smoking, obesity, employment
and housing characteristics; WIC
participation is associated w/improved
birth outcomes: 6-7% more likely to
have begun prenatal care in the first
trimester; 2% less likely to bear infants
who are below the 25th percentile of
weight given gestational age or to bear
infants of low birth weight

Results

84

State unemployment rates and poverty
rates are not important determinants of
state WIC caseloads; the presence of
WIC policies such as requiring proof of
income (before required nationally) and
stricter program rules lower
participation
State fixed effects panel analysis
No relationship between state
using variation in unemployment rate unemployment rates and WIC
by state and year
participation for full period (19902010); modest countercyclical effect for
2000-2010

State fixed effects panel analysis
using variation in labor market
characteristics and WIC policies by
state and year

Comparison of WIC versus non-WIC
within sample of Medicaid funded
births; examine impacts on WIC
participation and effect of WIC on
birth outcomes

Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Monitoring System (PRAMS), 19921999, Medicaid paid births
N=60,731

Bitler, Currie, and Scholz
(2003)

Design

Data

Studies of the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)

Study
Studies of Determinants of
WIC Participation and
Selection
Bitler and Currie (2005)

Table 4.2

(continued)

Bitler and Currie (2005)

Studies of Effects on
Pregnancy and Birth
Outcomes

Table 4.2
Study
Rossin-Slater (2013)

Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Monitoring System (PRAMS), 19921999, Medicaid paid births
N=60,731

Data
Administrative birth records, Texas,
2005-2009, linked to administrative
records on openings and closings of
WIC clinics
N=612,694

(continued)

85

Comparison of WIC versus non-WIC
within sample of Medicaid funded
births; examine impacts on WIC
participation and effect of WIC on
birth outcomes

WIC participants are negatively
selected with adverse measures for
education, age, marital status, presence
of father smoking, obesity, employment,
and housing characteristics; WIC
participation is associated with
improved birth outcomes: 6-7 percent
more likely to have begun prenatal care
in the first trimester, and 2 percent less
likely to bear infants who are below the
25th percentile of weight given
gestational age or to bear infants of low
birth weight

Design
Results
IV-maternal fixed effect model
The presence of a WIC clinic in a
Instrument: zip code presence of WIC mother’s ZIP code of residence during
clinics
pregnancy increases her likelihood of
WIC food receipt by about 6%; access
to WIC increases pregnancy weight
gain, birth weight (by 22-32 g), and
breastfeeding (4 percentage points for
mothers with high school degree or
less)

(continued)

86

WIC exposure leads to significant
increase in average birth weight and a
decrease in low birth weight births;
effect on average birth weight range
from 2-7 grams among infants born to
mothers with low education levels
(treatment on the treated effects of 1829 grams)

National Vital Statistics data on births Difference-in-differences and event
1971-1975, 1978-1982
study analysis of county level WIC
program rollout; examine effects of
exposure to WIC on birth outcomes,
low birth weight

Results
WIC leads to improved birth outcomes:
increased birth weight and reduced
preterm birth, small for gestational age,
and low weight gain; effects found for
subsample of full term births (to address
gestational age bias)

Hoynes, Page, and Stevens
(2012)

Design
Maternal fixed effects model

Administrative birth data, Florida,
Difference-in-differences and event WIC reduces low birth weight but has
1997-2001, women 18-44, matched to study approach, using variation in
no effect on average birth weight,
school records of their older siblings eligibility (marginally ineligible
gestational age, or premature birth
(to identify “marginally eligible” and versus marginally eligible, using
“marginally ineligible” families) and longitudinal data on free and reduced
WIC records (to identify date of WIC price lunch status of older sibling)
participation)
and a policy change (increasing
N=2,530 marginally ineligible and
income reporting requirement); also
1,744 marginally eligible (multiple- estimated as IV where the instrument
birth families where there is at least a is the interaction of post-policy
6 yr gap in age between two siblings) change and marginal eligibility

Data
Administrative birth records, New
York City, 1994-2004
N=1.2M

(continued)

Figlio, Hammersma, and
Roth (2009)

Table 4.2
Study
Currie and Ranjani (2014)

Administrative birth records, Texas,
2005-2009, linked to administrative
records on openings and closings of
WIC clinics
N=612,694

Studies of the Effects of WIC
Vendors
McLaughlin (2014)
In-store product survey for California
A50 vendors; individual vendor FI
redemptions for California; locations
of WIC vendors in California;
wholesale costs of WIC goods
Meckel (2014)
Nielsen Consumer Panel 2005-2009;
Administrative data on WIC groceries
in Texas; Texas birth certificates

Rossin-Slater (2013)

Results
WIC participation leads to
improvements in birth weight, low birth
weight, and gestational age; no impacts
on weight for gestational age; largest
effect for African Americans

With EBT implementation, prices
charged to non-WIC recipients increase;
vendor participation and individual
participation in WIC declines

Difference in difference design using
variation in the timing of EBT rollout
across counties to assess causal
effects

87

Vendors compete on products (brand
profile, range and diversity of products)
as well as choosing locations consistent
with Hotelling like incentives

Two-part modeling approach; 1)
establish incentives for brand
competition 2) test intensity of brand
competition using IV

IV-maternal fixed effects model
The presence of a WIC clinic in a
Instrument: zip code presence of WIC mother’s ZIP code of residence during
clinics
pregnancy increases her likelihood of
WIC food receipt by about 6%; access
to WIC increases pregnancy weight
gain, birth weight (by 22-32 g), and
breastfeeding (4 percentage points for
mothers with high school degree or
less)

Table 4.2
(continued)
Study
Data
Design
Joyce, Gibson, and Colman New York City administrative birth Comparison of WIC versus non-WIC
(2005)
data, 1988-2001, Medicaid paid births within sample of Medicaid funded
N>800,00 births
births; examine impacts on WIC
participation and effect of WIC on
birth outcomes

(continued)

Schanzenbach (2009)

Mirtcheva and Powell
(2013)

Gundersen, Kreider, and
Pepper (2012)

Studies of Impact on Child
Health Outcomes

Nord and Romig (2006)

Gleason and Suitor (2003)

Design

Results

88

Receipt of free and reduce-price
lunches reduces the incidence of poor
health by at least 3.5 percentage
points, and reduces obesity by at least
4 percentage points
PSID Child Development
Individual-level fixed effects, change No significant effect of NSLP
Supplement 1997 and 2003,
in participation across waves
participation on body weight for the
individual panel data, children ages 6full sample or by gender
18
Early Childhood Longitudinal Data, Change over time; regression
NSLP increases obesity rates by 1
K-5, individual panel data
discontinuity at eligibility for reduced- ppt/year in change regression;
price lunch
increases obesity in RD

NHANES 2001-2004, individual data Nonparametric partial identification

CSFII 1994-1996, individual dietary Individual fixed effects, comparing No impact on calories at lunch or
recall data, children age 6-18
dietary intake on day ate school lunch over 24 hours; increased consumption
with day did not eat school lunch
of fat and protein; decreased
consumption of added sugars;
increased intake of six vitamins and
minerals
CPS-FSS 1995-2001, survey
Difference in differences estimate of Food insecurity relatively higher in
alternates monthly in year
food insecurity during summer vs.
the summer for households with
school year for families with
school-age children; difference
preschool vs. school-age children
smaller in states that provide more
summer food service lunches

Data

Studies of the National School Lunch Program

Study
Studies of Impact on Dietary
Quality and Food Insecurity

Table 4.3

89

Outcomes from 1976-1980 NHIS and IV exploiting change in funding
1980 Census, state-level factors
formula over time, across states
predicting treatment including
funding, participation, per capita
income, and population aged 5 to 17

Hinrichs (2010)

Sibling fixed effects, comparing
health, behavior and achievement
outcomes across siblings who differ
in NSLP participation

Design

PSID Child Development
Supplement 1997, individual data,
children age 6-12

Data

Dunifon and KowaleskiJones (2003)

Table 4.3
(continued)
Study
Studies of Impact on Student
Achievement

Increasing NSLP exposure by 10
percentage points increased
completed education by .365 years
for women, nearly 1 year for men

Negative OLS relationship between
NSLP participation and child
outcomes appears to be driven by
unmeasured family-specific factors;
no between-sibling differences in
outcomes predicted by NSLP
participation

Results

Studies of Impacts on
Dietary Quality and Food
Insecurity
(continued)

Schanzenbach and Zaki
(2014)

Results

90

Universal free breakfast increases
participation in SBP, larger
participation effects for BIC; no
change in likelihood of eating
breakfast; few impacts on measures
of dietary quality, health or
achievement outcomes

Universal free breakfast increased
breakfast participation both for
students who experienced a decrease
in the price of breakfast and for freelunch eligible students who
experienced no price change; small
positive effect on attendance for
Black and Asian students; no impacts
on student test scores
Difference-in-difference study of
Termination of UFB reduced SBP
termination of UFB program in some participation substantially; largest
schools
reductions for students not eligible
for free or reduce-price meals; no
change in test scores

Triple-difference approach, using
difference in timing of introduction of
universal free breakfast and
difference across student eligibility
for free meals prior to policy change

Design

Individual data: participation and
Random assignment within matchedoutcomes, students grades 2-6 in 153 pair schools to universal free
elementary schools in 6 districts
breakfast or traditional program;
compare within matched-pair schools
that opt for cafeteria breakfast or
Breakfast in Classroom

Ribar and Haldeman (2013) Individual data: test scores and
attendance in Title I Elementary
schools in Guilford County, North
Carolina

Individual data: test scores,
attendance, meal participation
NYC public elementary and middle
schools, 2002-08

Data

Studies of the School Breakfast Program

Study
Studies of Determinants of
Participation
Leos-Urbel, Schwartz,
Weinstein, and Corcoran
(2013)

Table 4.4

Early Childhood Longitudinal Data,
K-5 1998-99
N=13,531

(continued)

Studies of Impact on Student
Achievement
Dotter (2012)
Individual data: achievement,
attendance, behavior in San Diego
elementary schools, 2002-2011

Millimet, Tchernis, and
Husain (2010)

Data
NHANES-III 1988-1994, 5-16 year
olds, individual data

(continued)
Design
Difference-in-differences comparing
students in school to those on school
vacation, across schools that do and
do not offer SBP

School breakfast decreases obesity;
school lunch increases obesity

91

Difference-in-differences on UFB and UFB increased achievement in math
BIC introduction across schools that (0.15 SD) and reading (0.10 SD);
were vs. were not treated
larger gains where fewer students
were previously participating; no
incremental effect of BIC vs. UFB

Growth from kindergarten entry;
selection model for school
participation in SBP; Altonji et al.
approach to assess selection on
unobservables

Results
No impact of SBP on the calories
consumed or on probability student
eats breakfast; improves nutritional
quality as measured on HEI and in
blood serum; no measured positive
spillover effects for other household
members
Crepinsek, Singh, Bernstein, Individual data: dietary recall study, Random assignment within matched- Treatment school students more
and McLaughlin (2006)
students grades 2-6 in 153 elementary pair schools to universal free
likely to consume a nutritionally
schools in 6 districts
breakfast or traditional program
substantive breakfast; no change in
24-hour dietary intakes or in the rate
of breakfast skipping

Table 4.4
Study
Bhattacharya, Currie, and
Haider (2006)

Imberman and Kugler
(2014)

Table 4.4
Study
Frisvold (2012)

Individual data: test scores and
attendance (2003-10) and BMI (200910) in a large urban school district in
the Southwest US

Data
Test score data from 2003 National
Assessment of Educational Progress;
school SBP availability, consumption,
attendance, and behavior from ECLSK

(continued)

92

Difference-in-difference using quasirandom timing of introduction of new
Breakfast in the Classroom program;
all schools eventually treated

Design
States require schools to participate in
SBP if the school exceeds a threshold
percent eligible for free/reduced price
meals; thresholds differ across states;
difference-in-difference and RD
around thresholds

Exposure to BIC for 1 or more weeks
increases achievement in math by
0.09 SD and reading by 0.06 SD; no
impact on grades or attendance

Results
SBP improves test scores in math
(0.09 SD) and reading (0.05-0.12
SD), and improves the nutritional
content of breakfast

