                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF COMMUNITY TRAUMATIC EVENTS ON STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT:
             EVIDENCE FROM THE BELTWAY SNIPER ATTACKS

                                       Seth Gershenson
                                         Erdal Tekin

                                     Working Paper 21055
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21055


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2015




We thank participants at the 2015 annual conferences of the Association for Education Finance
and Policy and Western Economic Association International and seminar participants at
American University and Auburn University for comments and suggestions. Ashlyn Holeyfield,
Stephen Holt, Ly Le, and Catherine Bampoky provided excellent research assistance. We are
responsible for all opinions and errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Seth Gershenson and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Community Traumatic Events on Student Achievement: Evidence from the
Beltway Sniper Attacks
Seth Gershenson and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 21055
March 2015, Revised March 2016
JEL No. I12,I21,I24,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

Community traumatic events such as mass shootings, terrorist attacks, and natural or man-made
disasters have the potential to disrupt student learning in numerous ways. For example, these
events can reduce instructional time by causing teacher and student absences, school closures,
and disturbances to usual classroom routines. Similarly, they might also disrupt home
environments. This paper uses a quasi-experimental research design to identify the effects of the
2002 “Beltway Sniper” attacks on student achievement in Virginia’s public elementary schools.
In order to identify the causal impact of these events, the empirical analysis uses a difference-in-
differences strategy that exploits geographic variation in schools’ proximity to the attacks. The
main results indicate that the attacks significantly reduced school-level proficiency rates in
schools within five miles of an attack. Evidence of a causal effect is most robust for math
proficiency rates in the third and fifth grades, and third grade reading proficiency, suggesting that
the shootings caused a decline in school proficiency rates of about five to nine percentage points.
Particularly concerning from an equity standpoint, these effects appear to be entirely driven by
achievement declines in schools that serve higher proportions of racial minority and
socioeconomically disadvantaged students. Finally, results from supplementary analyses suggest
that these deleterious effects faded out in subsequent years.


Seth Gershenson
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
gershens@american.edu

Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu
I. Introduction

         In contrast to the significant drop in crime in the United States over the last two decades,

the frequency of community traumatic events, such as terrorist attacks, mass shootings, and

natural or man-made disasters has increased during this time period. For example, a study

conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) identified 160 incidents involving active

shooters, in which 486 individuals were killed and 557 individuals were wounded between 2000

and 2013 (U.S. Department of Justice, 2013). 1 The frequency with which these events occur has

increased significantly during this time period, as an average of 6.4 active shooter incidents

occurred annually between 2000 and 2006 compared with an average of 16.4 such incidents per

year between 2007 and 2013. Another study focusing on the time interval between incidents

reached a similar conclusion (Cohen et al., 2014). This pattern has heightened awareness of the

need for effective policies designed to protect children and communities from the direct and

indirect effects of such violent acts. 2

         Accumulating evidence indicates that exposure to violent traumatic events, such as

domestic violence, terrorism, random school shootings, and community traumatic events in

general have deleterious impacts on the health and well-being of children, reflected by

depression, aggressive behavior, anxiety and stress, social and emotional problems, and impaired

cognitive development and academic achievement (Hoven et al., 2005; Fremont, 2004; Daniels

and Haist, 2012; Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010; Danese et al., 2009; Wendling, 2009; Currie and

Tekin, 2012; Di Pietro, 2015).


1
  According to the FBI, “Active shooter is a term used by law enforcement to describe a situation in which a
shooting is in progress and an aspect of the crime may affect the protocols used in responding to and reacting at the
scene of the incident. Unlike a defined crime, such as a murder or mass killing, the active aspect inherently implies
that both law enforcement personnel and citizens have the potential to affect the outcome of the event based upon
their responses.” (U.S. Department of Justice, 2013).
2
  One such example is the Investigative Assistance for Violent Crimes Act of 2012, which authorizes the
Department of Justice to investigate mass shootings in public places.


                                                          3
         The potential effects of community traumatic events on student learning can operate

through both direct and indirect channels. The direct channels can include school absenteeism

and poor academic performance at school due to a lack of focus associated with anxiety and fear,

while indirect channels can include disruptions to processes of learning from parents and

teachers who may experience problems themselves. There is also evidence to suggest that

children do not have to be direct victims or witnesses of community traumatic events to be

harmed. Accordingly, indirect exposure such as learning about a violent death or serious injury,

the fear of death to self or a family member, an increased sense of vulnerability or helplessness,

or repeatedly engaging with trauma-related stories via the media can also harm children’s well-

being (Pfefferbaum et al., 2001; Becker-Blease et al., 2008; Calderoni et al., 2006; Saylor et al.,

2003; Holman et al., 2014).

         This paper provides insights into the impact of community traumatic events on student

achievement using the 2002 “Beltway Sniper” attacks as a natural experiment. 3 As explained in

detail in Section II, the Beltway Sniper attacks were a series of coordinated shootings of

individuals targeted randomly, but living in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area and along

Interstate 95 in Virginia. The attacks left 10 people dead and three people critically injured over

a period of three weeks in October 2002. The question considered in this paper is an important

one because the relationship between community traumatic events and student achievement has

implications for both proactive and reactive policymaking. Regarding the former, debates over

the costs and benefits of policies to prevent community traumatic events or minimize their

harmful consequences on the public could be significantly influenced by evidence that these

3
 Our definition of community traumatic events refers to incidents that affect entire communities by causing
physical, emotional, psychological distress or harm to persons living in them. Individuals exposed to these events
must experience changes in their daily lives to an extent, which often overwhelms them and leads to conditions
beyond their control, often resulting in depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and even suicidality (Praetorius,
2006).


                                                           4
events have a negative impact on student achievement. For instance, if children who are

indirectly exposed to these events suffer significant negative setbacks at school, this would

provide another basis for efforts to identify policy interventions designed to prevent these events

from occurring as well as to reduce exposure among children. Regarding the latter, the strength

of the relationship between community traumatic events and academic achievement and the

types of students who are most affected by the trauma associated with these events have

important implications for the optimal provision of school and community resources following a

traumatic incident.

       Our analysis improves upon existing research along several dimensions. First, we

carefully address the endogeneity of exposure to community traumatic events by exploiting

schools’ geographic distances from the locations of each of the sniper attacks as a measure of

“intensity of treatment.” In other words, variation in the intensity of exposure, as measured by

the distance between schools and shooting sites, allows us to identify the causal impact of these

attacks on student achievement using a difference-in-difference (DD) estimation strategy. More

specifically, we compare the proficiency levels of students attending schools that are located near

one of the shooting sites before and after the shooting incident to the proficiency levels of

students attending schools farther away from the shooting sites. Proficiency rates are an

important, policy relevant measure of schools’ academic performance, as they are the measure

by which schools were graded by the federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).

       Second, unlike most of the extant literature that focuses on outcomes of psychological

well-being, we consider academic achievement of children as the outcome measure.

Psychological manifestations of traumatic events on children may sometimes be latent or the

symptoms may not be promptly recognized by parents. It is also possible that children and




                                                 5
parents are reluctant to acknowledge and seek help for these problems due to social stigma.

Unlike psychological symptomology, academic outcomes are arguably more objective and easily

observable—by parents, teachers, and school administrators—measures of the consequences of

psychological trauma associated with exposure to community traumatic events. Because affected

students may have negative spillovers on their classmates, a finding of any impact on academic

outcomes would also provide a compelling justification for the public and policymakers to be

concerned about how to best help affected children (Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010).

         Third, our outcome measures are school level proficiency rates obtained from official

school records. Therefore, they are not subject to the reporting error potentially inherent in

subjective parental reports of their children’s academic proficiency. This is potentially an

important improvement because parental reports can be problematic in this case if, for example,

trauma associated with these events impairs parents’ ability to report or remember accurately.

Alternatively, some parents may have a tendency to relate any academic problems their children

are experiencing to these tragic events.

         Finally, unlike most other man-made or natural disasters, terrorist attacks, or school

shootings, the beltway sniper attacks were prolonged and intermittent in nature. In this sense, the

psychological manifestations caused by the beltway sniper attacks may more closely resemble

those caused by the chronic community violence that is endemic to many inner city

neighborhoods in the United States. 4 Millions of children suffer from at least one traumatic event

while growing up. For example, studies have shown that 15 percent to 43 percent of girls and 14

percent to 43 percent of boys experience at least one traumatic event while growing up

4
  A recent working paper by Monteiro and Rocha (2013) considers drug battles between gangs that take place in
favelas (slums) in Rio de Janeiro. Using variation in violence that occurs across time and space when gangs battle
over territories, the authors find that exposure to such violence reduces student achievement in math. To the extent
that drug related gang violence constitutes an extreme episode of community wide traumatic event, this study is
informative for the purposes of our analysis.


                                                          6
(Friedman, 2014). Regardless of the cause of the traumatic stressors, these children are likely to

exhibit a wide range of reactions that can affect many facets of their lives, including educational

achievement and attainment. Therefore, the results of the current study are likely to provide a

reliable and representative assessment of the impact of childhood exposure to the type of stress

experienced by a large segment of the United States population.

       Our results provide robust evidence in support of a causal relationship between exposure

to the sniper attacks and math and reading proficiency of students in third and fifth grades.

Specifically, the results suggest that the shootings caused a decline in school proficiency rates of

about five to nine percentage points. These effects are similar in magnitude to those obtained in

Marcotte and Hemelt (2008) of the impact of ten unscheduled snow-related school closures on

math and reading assessments of students in similar grades in Maryland. Our estimates are also

large enough to have changed the standing of a nontrivial number of schools’ Adequate Yearly

Progress (AYP) designations in the first year of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). These

results are fairly robust to the operationalized definition of “closeness” to a sniper attack,

controlling for time-variant school characteristics and school district linear time trends, and

accounting for overlap in the schools affected by the 9/11 Pentagon attack, which had occurred

in the year preceding the sniper attacks. Particularly concerning from an equity standpoint, harm

caused by the sniper attacks appears to be primarily driven by achievement declines in schools

that predominantly serve racial minority and socioeconomically disadvantaged students. Finally,

we show that the reductions in school proficiency caused by the sniper attacks were relatively

short-lived, fading out in subsequent academic years.




                                                  7
II. Background

       A voluminous literature in psychology describes the relationship between childhood

exposure to traumatic events and psychological well-being. Many studies in this literature

suggest an association between exposure to traumatic events and psychological health. However,

these studies are mostly based on conceptual considerations and descriptive empirical analyses

that fail to adequately address the problem of endogenous exposure to traumatic events properly.

These investigations typically rely on information drawn from samples of interviews of

individuals who were exposed to traumatic events such as the September 11th, 2001 terrorist

attack (Beuschesne et al., 2002; Halpern-Felsher and Millstein, 2002; Hoven et al., 2005; Neria

at al., 2011), the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing (Pfefferbaum et al., 1999, 2000), or Hurricane

Katrina (Spell et al., 2008). Several empirical studies acknowledge the potential endogeneity of

exposure to community traumatic events, but attempt to address this problem by conditioning on

a minimal set of control variables in a multivariate regression framework. This is an important

limitation of the literature because children are unlikely to be exposed to these events

exogenously. In other words, children who are exposed to community traumatic events may have

certain attributes that contribute to their poor outcomes regardless of the traumatic events that

they are exposed to. For example, if these events are more likely take place in neighborhoods

with high poverty and crime rates or in communities lacking the necessary resources to cope

with the aftermath of traumatic events, conclusions drawn from correlational studies may

overestimate the true impact of exposure to community traumatic events.




                                                 8
        Similarly, parenting style and specific behaviors adopted by parents in response to

community traumatic events can influence the extent of the harm caused to their children. 5 For

example, some parents may attempt to minimize the negative impact of these events on their

children by limiting children’s exposure to news media or by spending more time with them.

Alternatively, rigid work schedules or their own stresses may limit the amount of extra care and

emotional support that they are able to provide to their children during these times. Even worse,

the stress experienced by parents might even lead to counterproductive behaviors, which may

further fuel anxiety and fear among children, for example, by following trauma-related news

stories in front of their children. Failing to account for these behavioral responses or changes in

parenting styles would cause an upward bias in the case of “negative” parenting style and a

downward bias in the case of “positive” parenting style.

        Another limitation is that the extant literature largely relies on self-reported retrospective

data drawn from interviews of parents about the exposure of their children to these events or

interviews of affected older children. Since information on both exposure and reactions come

from the same source, these data may suffer from systematic measurement error. For example,

parents whose children are performing poorly at school may attribute this problem to past

exposure to a traumatic event. Relatedly, as a practical matter, the analysis samples are self-

selected in the sense that researchers only have data on individuals who agreed to be interviewed.

In summary, credible estimation of the impact of community traumatic events on children’s well-

being poses numerous challenges that the extant literature has failed to systematically address.

We contribute to this literature by applying a DD method to statewide, objective data on primary

school proficiency rates that are immune to these concerns.

5
  There are studies emphasizing the importance of parental behaviors in influencing the consequences of traumatic
events on children (Plybon and Kliewer, 2001; Buka et al., 2001), which have been shown to vary by socioeconomic
status (Guryan et al., 2008; Kalil et al., 2012).


                                                       9
       Recently, several studies examining the short-run effects of acute, extreme violence have

addressed many limitations of earlier research. Specifically, a series of papers by Patrick Sharkey

and coauthors (Sharkey, 2010; Sharkey et al., 2012; Sharkey et al., 2014) exploit the arguably

random temporal variation in extreme violence (i.e., homicides) in inner city neighborhoods in

Chicago and New York to estimate the effect of proximity to such incidents on standardized tests

and other developmental assessments. The authors identify arguably causal effects by noting that

conditional on living in a neighborhood that experiences extreme violence, whether incidents of

extreme violence occur in the week before, or week after, the educational assessment is as good

as random. In both New York and Chicago, the authors find robust evidence that acute exposure

to violence in the week preceding the assessment reduces performance on English Language Arts

test scores, attention, and impulse control relative to a control group of children who were

acutely exposed to extreme violence in the week following the assessment. Similarly, recent

research on the impact of school shootings (i.e., homicides that occurred on school grounds)

finds that fatal school shootings reduce high school proficiency rates by about four to five

percentage points in both math and ELA (Beland and Kim, 2015). The harmful effects are even

larger in more severe incidents that resulted in multiple deaths. These effects are identified using

a school-district fixed effects DD strategy, where the control group is comprised of schools that

did not experience a school shooting, but are in the same district as a school that did.

       These studies represent important advances in our understanding of the causal

relationship between acute exposure to extreme violence and cognitive development. While the

present study constitutes a fresh contribution to the growing line of analyses that take serious

steps to address the endogeneity problem, it also extends the literature in a number of important

dimensions. For example, the other studies (e.g., those by Sharkey and co-authors) are limited to




                                                 10
neighborhoods in large, urban centers that have relatively little socio-demographic diversity,

which may not be representative for the impact of unpredictable and purely random tragedies

that are increasingly taking place in the United States. Furthermore, the identification strategy

employed by Sharkey and coauthors only allows for the identification of impacts that manifest in

the immediate aftermath (e.g., one week) of the events. Finally, all of the studies focus on

incidents of acute violence that do not necessarily generalize to broader, community wide

stressors that play out over longer time horizons. The current study contributes to the literature

discussed above by considering the beltway sniper attacks, which created a high degree of stress

and uncertainty and took place over a period of three weeks across a large, socio-

demographically diverse section of the country, using an identification strategy that can examine

the persistence of such effects as well.

       A related literature studies the effect of large-scale violent events (e.g., civil wars) using

data from countries such as Guatemala (Chamarbagwala and Morán, 2011), Israel (Brück et al.,

2014), Peru (Leon, 2012), Rwanda (Akresh and Walque, 2008), and Tajikistan (Shemyanika,

2006). These studies consistently find that individuals exposed to such events experience worse

educational outcomes. However, the types of events analyzed in these studies often disrupt many

aspects of life, including economic and political systems, and destroy infrastructure. In contrast,

the Beltway Sniper attacks investigated in the current study did not destroy physical

infrastructure nor did they create socio-political upheaval, suggesting that the mechanisms

through which the sniper attacks might have influenced educational outcomes were quite

different than those in previous analyses of large-scale violent events. In this sense, our paper

more closely resembles recent studies of the impact of episodes of violent conflict between drug

gangs and security forces or among the gangs themselves in Mexico (Márquez-Padilla et al.,




                                                 11
2015; Romano, 2015) and Brazil (Monteiro and Rocha, 2013). However, none of these studies

focus on the United States. Therefore, the generalizability of findings from these studies to other

contexts is not straightforward, especially since the settings analyzed in these papers have

substantially higher baseline levels of violence than the United States.

III. The Beltway Sniper Attacks

        The Beltway sniper attacks were a series of coordinated shootings carried out in the

Washington D.C. metropolitan area and along Interstate 95 in Virginia in October 2002. The

locations of these shootings are marked in the map displayed in Figure 1. Between October 2nd

and 24th, ten people were shot fatally and another three people were critically injured by rifle

bullets, fired from some distance with marksman accuracy. Five of the shootings took place in

Virginia, resulting in three fatalities and two serious injuries. One of the shootings targeted a 13-

year-old student, who was wounded by a single bullet that struck him in the chest “as he waited

in front of the school for the doors to be opened” ("John Muhammad v. Maryland," 2007, p. 12).

The shootings sparked one the largest criminal manhunts in U.S. history until the two suspects,

who were later found guilty of these shootings, were captured on October 24th. 6

        The shootings were sporadic in nature, as victims were shot while mowing grass, reading

on a bus station bench, walking in the parking lot of a grocery store, and pumping gas at a gas

station. The unexplained and random nature of the shootings inflicted a tremendous deal of stress

and fear among people living in and around the communities where the shootings had occurred.

This stress and fear prompted many local residents to develop new behaviors or to modify

existing patterns of behavior such as skipping work and school, running or weaving through

parking lots, cancelling outdoor activities, and avoiding shopping centers and gas stations nearby


6
  One of the perpetrators was sentenced to death and his execution was carried out in 2009. The other was sentenced
to six consecutive life sentences without the possibility of parole.


                                                        12
Interstate 95 (Coppola, 2004; Mitchell, 2007; Zivotofsky, 2005). The shootings also occupied

both local and national media attention during this period and this further contributed to public

fear and anxiety (Mitchell, 2007). Media coverage was so intense that 503 articles appeared in

the Washington Post alone during the three-week period of shootings (Muzzatti and

Featherstone, 2007). 7

         As fear quickly spread throughout neighboring communities, many parents reacted by

preventing their children from taking the school bus or walking home alone and instead driving

children to school. Schools went on “lockdown” and cancelled outdoor events such as soccer

games and field trips. 8 Schools in Chesterfield, Goochland, Hanover, Henrico, and Powhatan

counties in Virginia and the city of Richmond closed for multiple days as a result of the

shootings (United Press International, October 22, 2012). The number of school children affected

by school closings reached about 200,000 in Richmond alone (The Times, October 24, 2002).

Furthermore, many parents voluntarily kept their children home even when schools remained

open. As a result, there was a significant increase in absenteeism with daily attendance rates

falling as low as 10 percent at several elementary schools close to one of the shooting sites

(Schulte, 2002).

         Porter (2010) provides an in depth qualitative analysis of the experiences of school

personnel and the emergency response by school district administrators to the shootings in

Montgomery County, Maryland. While this study does not provide any insights into the potential

impact of the attacks on student achievement, it is helpful in understanding the psychological

ordeal experienced by various actors involved in the lives of children affected by the shootings,


7
  Accordingly, over 70 percent of citizens reported that they had followed the news more than usual during the
weeks of the sniper attacks, which highlights the role of media in shaping the public perceptions during the period
(Coppola, 2004; Mitchell, 2007).
8
  See http://www.crimemuseum.org/crime-library/the-washington-dc-sniper.


                                                         13
including parents, teachers, and school administrators. Aside from this qualitative study, most of

our knowledge about the impact of the sniper attacks comes from reviews of newspaper articles

and a few studies based on interviews of a small number of parents and children who had lived

nearby shooting sites. In these studies, it has been suggested that geographic proximity to the

attack sites is an important contributor to psychological symptomology exhibited by children

such as increased vulnerability and stress (Butler et al., 2003; Becker-Blease et al., 2008;

Mitchell, 2007).

       Becker-Blease et al. (2008) analyzed data from the Developmental Victimization Survey,

which was conducted between December 2002 and February 2003. Focusing on the sample of

respondents from Maryland (n=30), Virginia (n=49) and Washington, D.C. (n=2), the authors

found increased stress and worry among children, with more apparent signs among minority

children and those from low-income households. Similarly, these children were also more likely

to change their daily routines during the period of shootings. Furthermore, children living in

neighborhoods with close proximity to the shooting locations were likely more severely affected

than children elsewhere in Virginia and Maryland, as well as the rest of the U.S., not only

because the snipers were only targeting people in that area, but also because these children had

likely been exposed to more intense levels of local media coverage (Becker-Blease et al., 2008).

       Self-Brown et al. (2011) studied the psychological responses of children to the sniper

attacks through telephone interviews conducted in May 2003 by 355 parents who had children

between ages 2 and 27 and had lived in Washington D.C. or in the surrounding counties during

the sniper attacks. About 32 percent of parents participating in the interviews reported that their

children had experienced at least one psychological stress symptom related to the sniper attacks.

       There is also evidence to suggest that the shootings took a toll on the psychological well-




                                                 14
being of both parents and teachers (Schulden et al., 2006; Porter, 2010). Using data collected

from a survey of 1,205 adults who had lived in the communities affected by the shootings in

October 2002, Schulden et al. (2006) showed that 44 percent of parents had experienced at least

one traumatic stress symptom and 7 percent reported symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of

posttraumatic stress disorder. Furthermore, the authors found that females who lived within five

miles of any sniper attack were at greatest risk for traumatic stress.

           In summary, there is widespread evidence to suggest that the sniper attacks of October

2002 had a negative impact on the psychological well-being of citizens, especially children and

those from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds, and those living in neighboring

communities. Given the well-documented relationship between psychological well-being and

school outcomes (e.g., Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010), exposure to these attacks might have also

affected student achievement, although this question has not been studied to date. The goal of the

present study is to fill this gap in the literature.

IV. Data

           Academic performance is measured annually at the school level in the form of

proficiency rates. These rates measure the percentage of students who score at or above a pre-

determined “proficiency score” on Standards of Learning (SOL) standardized tests administered

each spring in Virginia’s public schools. These school-level proficiency rates are made publicly

available by the Virginia Department of Education and are based on student performance on

SOL tests that are typically administered each May. 9 We focus on third and fifth grade

proficiency in mathematics and English Language Arts (ELA) as these SOL tests have been

administered annually by the state since the spring of 1998. Importantly, while the tests

themselves have evolved over time, the basic reporting of schools’ proficiency rates has not.
9
    See http://www.pen.k12.va.us/testing/achievement_data/archived/index.shtml.


                                                         15
        Our primary analysis focuses on the academic years 1997-98 through 2002-03.

Henceforth, we refer to academic years by the spring semester (when the tests were

administered), so the impact of the sniper attacks on test scores would appear in 2003. The DD

identification strategy exploits variation in schools’ geographic proximity to the attack locations.

We argue that this is a plausible measure of the intensity of treatment (i.e., exposure to the sniper

attacks), though arguably all children in the state might have been affected via exposure to

intense media coverage. Therefore, there may have been spillover effects on the “control”

schools that were farther away from the attacks. However, it is important to note that such a bias

would work against finding significant effects of these attacks on school proficiency rates, and

thus our estimates may be interpreted as lower bounds of the “true” treatment effects. Sensitivity

analyses consider various definitions of schools’ treatment statuses, or “closeness,” to the

attacks.

        Closeness can be defined by either the “commute” or “crow flies” distance between each

school’s street address and that of the nearest sniper shooting. 10 The results are quite robust to

which of these definitions is used to construct measures of “closeness,” so we focus on the “crow

flies” distance for simplicity. After choosing how to measure the distance between each school

and its nearest sniper attack, we then must assume a functional form through which distance

enters the econometric model. The preferred baseline model uses a simple binary indicator for

“within 5 miles” of at least one shooting. However, as shown in Appendix Table A1, the main

results are robust to using alternative definitions such as “within 10 miles,” multiple categorical

indicators (i.e., within 5 miles, 5 to 10 miles, and > 10 miles), and a continuous quadratic


10
  Both types of distances were generated by the website freemaptools.com/how-far-is-it-between.htm, which uses
an algorithm that evaluates potential driving routes to identify the shortest route between two geocoded addresses
for the “commute” distance and latitude and longitude geocodes to compute straight line “as the crow flies”
distances.


                                                        16
function of miles to the nearest attack. Again, these alternatives yield qualitatively similar

results, so we focus on the “within 5 miles” binary measure of “treatment” for simplicity.

       Our identification strategy assumes that sniper attacks had either no or little impact on

children who attended schools relatively far from the attacks. This assumption does not require

the proficiency levels of these students to be similar to those of their counterparts who attended

schools located in close proximity to the shootings. Instead, it requires the proficiency levels to

be trended similarly between the two groups of students. Indeed, schools that are farther away

from the shooting sites are mostly located in rural counties. As a result, the composition of

students attending these schools differs from that in schools close to shooting sites in several

dimensions including race, socioeconomic status, and academic achievement. There are also

corresponding differences in school characteristics such as school enrollment (size) and student-

teacher ratio. While this does not necessarily constitute a problem for our analysis, we exclude

schools that are outside a 50-mile radius of all sniper shootings from the analytic sample in an

attempt to create a control group that resembles the treatment group more closely. Exclusion of

these schools also amounts to a conservative approach since, if anything, it would bias our

analysis against finding an effect given the likelihood of spillover effects on the control group.

Finally, eliminating these schools guards against the possibility that proficiency levels of

students in rural schools were trending differently than those of relatively more urban schools in

the Washington, D.C. suburbs, perhaps due to differences in district-level policies. This is not an

implausible scenario since district policies may reflect in part the political and cultural

preferences of citizens, which are likely to differ significantly between rural and urban

communities. Nonetheless, the main results are robust to using alternative cut-offs such as 40

miles or 60 miles and to including all Virginia schools in the analytic sample.




                                                  17
         We augment the school-level proficiency and “closeness to sniper attack” data with

information on time-variant school-level characteristics that are publicly provided in the National

Center for Education Statistics’ Common Core of Data. 11 Specifically, these variables include

total enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, percent eligible for free or reduced price lunch,

number of full time equivalent teachers (FTE), and pupil-teacher ratio. All but the last two

variables have been collected since 1998, while FTE and pupil-teacher ratios are only available

from 1999 forward. We therefore imputed 1998 values of FTE and pupil-teacher ratio, though

we also consider models that exclude these two imputed variables and the main results are

robust. 12 Importantly, controlling for these time-variant school characteristics in the DD

regression models increases the precision of the DD estimates and controls for potentially

confounding changes in schools’ student and teacher characteristics.

         Table 1 shows that while only 5 of the 13 sniper shootings occurred in Virginia, the

shootings that occurred in Maryland and in Washington D.C. plausibly affected Virginia’s public

school students as well, given the proximity and overlap in media coverage between Northern

Virginia and the areas outside Virginia in which sniper attacks occurred. For example, the

October 3rd sniper shooting in Kensington, Maryland was within 5 miles of two Virginia public

schools and within 10 miles of 72 Virginia public schools. Similarly, all but two of the Maryland

attacks were within 10 miles of at least one Virginia public school and four of the Maryland

attacks were within 10 miles of more than ten Virginia public schools. Thus, Table 1 suggests

that the earlier attacks that occurred in Maryland and in Washington D.C. potentially affected

residents of Virginia and contribute to the geographic variation in “treatment status.”


11
  See http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/.
12
  Values were imputed as the fitted values of linear regressions containing school fixed effects, linear time trends,
observed total enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent eligible for free or reduced price lunch.
Results are robust to only controlling for the four school-level characteristics that are observed starting in 1998.


                                                          18
       Table 2 summarizes the proficiency rates both for the overall sample and separately by

distance to the nearest sniper attack. Proficiency rates ranged from about 60 to 80 percent. To put

these numbers in perspective, the thresholds for making AYP in Virginia in the first two years of

NCLB were 61 in ELA and 59 in mathematics (Virginia Board of Education, 2010).

Interestingly, columns 2 and 3 show that there are statistically significant differences between

“treated” and “control” schools in average proficiency rates. This suggests that there were some

systematic differences between schools by schools’ proximities to an attack, which is

unsurprising as the attacks were relatively close to the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.

These differences further motivate our decision to restrict the sample to schools within 50 miles

of at least one attack and highlight the importance of accounting for preexisting differences

between “treated” and “control” schools in the econometric model.

       Columns 4-6 of Table 2 present the same summary statistics for the analytic sample of

schools within 50 “as the crow flies” miles of at least one sniper attack. It is immediately obvious

that these control schools more closely resemble the treated schools, as proficiency gaps between

treated and control schools tend to be smaller and lose their statistical significance. This is the

analytic sample used in the main analyses.

       Table 3 similarly summarizes schools’ distances to the sniper attacks and the time-variant

school characteristics observed in the Common Core of Data. A nontrivial number of Virginia

public schools were proximate to at least one sniper attack. The average school in the analytic

sample (within 50 miles of at least one sniper attack) was about 16 miles from at least one sniper

attack. About 16 percent of elementary schools were within 5 miles “as the crow flies” of a

sniper attack and 37 percent were within 10 miles. There are several differences between treated

and control elementary schools, as defined by the “5 mile” treatment. Treated schools appear to




                                                  19
be somewhat smaller in enrollment, but this difference is not significantly different from zero.

Racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic differences in enrollments are statistically significant,

however, as treated schools’ enrollments are less black, more Hispanic, and more disadvantaged.

Despite being smaller, on average, treated elementary schools have significantly more FTE

teachers and significantly lower pupil-teacher ratios.

V. Econometric Model

         Our goal is to estimate the impact of exposure to the beltway sniper attacks on academic

achievement. To accomplish this goal, we specify the following reduced form empirical model:

         yst = β0 + β1Xst +β2Closes×d2003 + λt + δs + εst,                                         (1)

where yst is the proficiency rate of school s in academic year t in a particular grade and subject. 13

The time-varying school characteristics described in the previous section are represented by the

vector Xst. The variable “Closes” is a binary indicator equal to one if the school is within 5 miles

of any shooting location, and zero otherwise. Sensitivity analyses reported in Appendix Table A1

specify “closeness” as either a continuous quadratic function of the school’s distance to the

closest attack site or a pair of mutually exclusive categorical indicators for “within 5 miles” and

“5 to 10 miles from a sniper attack,” with the omitted reference category being “more than 10

miles from an attack.” The binary indicator d2003 equals one in the academic year 2003, which is

the treatment year in which the sniper attacks occurred, and zero otherwise. Year fixed effects

(λt) control for any secular time trends in the outcome variables and year-specific statewide

shocks to academic achievement associated with, for example, national or state level policies.

School fixed effects (δs) account for any unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity between

schools in Virginia. Finally, εst represents an idiosyncratic error term. The coefficient of interest


13
  We estimated equation (1) using the natural logarithm of the outcome variables instead of levels. These results are
similar to those presented in our paper and are available from the authors upon request.


                                                         20
is β2, which represents the average effect of being within five miles of a sniper attack on school

proficiency. All versions of equation (1) are estimated by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). 14 In all

analyses standard errors are robust to clustering at the school level, making statistical inference

robust to arbitrary forms of both heteroskedasticity and serial correlation within schools over

time. 15

           A causal interpretation of the estimate of β2 in equation (1) hinges on the “parallel trends”

assumption required by the DD method. Intuitively, this means that while there may be pre-

existing differences between “treated” and “control” schools, there are no pre-existing

differential trends between “treated” and “control” schools. We examine the implications of this

assumption in two ways. First, we follow Marcotte and Hemelt (2008) in explicitly relaxing the

“parallel trends” assumption by estimating an augmented version of equation (1) that controls for

school district-specific linear time trends. This specification accounts for any unobservable

district level characteristics and policies that are trending linearly over time and predict

proficiency rates, which is potentially important given that policies and decisions regarding

school closures are typically made at the district level (Marcotte & Hemelt, 2008). Note that an

alternative approach could be to estimate models with school-specific linear trends. However,

with about 540 elementary schools in the analytic sample and only 6 years of data, we lose a

commensurate number of degrees of freedom by doing so. As a result, estimates of β2 in models

that condition on school specific linear trends are less precise, though are generally of the same

sign as those obtained from the estimation of equation (1) and its district trend analog. For these



14
   We also estimated the models by Weighted Least Squares (WLS) using schools’ enrollments as weights (Solon,
Haider, and Wooldridge, 2013). These estimates are similar to those presented in our paper and are available from
the authors upon request.
15
   Clustering at the district level yields nearly identical statistical inference, which is unsurprising because schools
are nested in districts and all models condition on school fixed effects. We prefer clustering at the school level
because the treatment varies at the school level.


                                                           21
reasons, we present variants of equation (1) that condition on school-district time trends. Given

that school policies are typically determined at the district level, schools within districts are

likely to be trending similarly. 16

         Second, we directly test the “parallel trends” assumption by estimating an event-study

specification that allows the treatment to have an effect in the years prior to the sniper attacks. If

these placebo effects are meaningful in the statistical sense, particularly in the year before the

sniper attacks, we would worry that the “parallel trends” assumption fails and that significant

estimates of β2 in the baseline equation (1) are spuriously driven by pre-existing differential

trends in the treated schools. It is reassuring, then, that in the results presented below both the

district-trend and event-study models provide evidence that is consistent with the sniper attacks

having a causal effect on schools’ math and ELA proficiency rates.

         Finally, we estimate the baseline and district trend models separately by school type to

test for the presence of heterogeneous effects, as there are several reasons why schools serving

different student populations might be differentially affected by community traumatic events.

Specifically, because the aggregate data do not distinguish between proficiency rates of different

student subgroups, we divide schools into terciles based on the percentage of total 2003

enrollment that is black, and the percentage of total 2003 enrollment that is eligible for free or

reduced price lunch (FRL). There are at least two reasons to expect that the academic

achievement of socioeconomically disadvantaged and racial minority students was

disproportionately harmed by the disruptions and stress caused by the sniper attacks. First, as

16
  As an alternative attempt to account for the possibility of differential trends at the school level, we also estimate
our models controlling for two-way interactions of each of our school-level control variables and year indicators. If
the year-to-year changes in test scores at the school level are highly correlated with changes in school level
characteristics such as enrollment, pupil-teacher ratio, and the racial composition of the schools, then these
interactions may capture the changes in school level trends in a flexible way. The results from this specification are
similar to the main results presented in the paper and are available from the authors upon request.



                                                          22
discussed in section II, parental behaviors have the potential to mitigate the impact of community

traumatic events on children (Plybon and Kliewer, 2001; Buka et al., 2001). Given the large

research literature documenting the differences by SES in both the quality and quantity of time

parents spend with school-age children (e.g., Guryan et al., 2008; Kalil et al., 2012), it is

plausible that high-SES parents had the resources necessary to provide support at home and

outside the traditional school day to help children cope with the trauma. Second, recent research

on the effects of weather-induced school closures and student absences on academic achievement

finds that, at least in certain subjects and grade levels, the harmful effects of lost instructional

time are greater in poorer schools (Marcotte & Hemelt, 2008; Goodman, 2014). Given that

school closures and student absences are potential mechanisms through which the sniper attacks

affected achievement, the harmful effects of sniper-induced absences and school closures might

be greater in disadvantaged schools, if such schools are less able to provide the appropriate

counseling and, more generally, struggle to solve the coordination problem inherent in public

education (i.e., Lazear, 2001). Moreover, given that absenteeism rates are higher in

disadvantaged schools (Goodman, 2014), another potential source of heterogeneity in the sniper

attacks’ effects on academic achievement is through larger effects of the attacks on student

absences in low-SES schools.

VI. Results

        Our main results are presented in Table 4. Each cell in Table 4 contains the estimate of β2

in a unique regression, which measures the effect of being within five miles of a sniper attack.

We present estimates separately for both the ELA and math proficiency rates for each of grades

three, five and eight. Column 1 of Table 4 reports estimates of β2 in specifications that exclude

time-variant school characteristics from the model while the estimates displayed in columns 2




                                                  23
and 3 successively add time-variant school characteristics and linear district time trends to the

specification in column 1. All three sets of specifications condition on school and year fixed

effects.

           Column 1 of Table 4 shows that being within a five-mile radius of a sniper attack is

associated with lower pass rates in both subjects for both grade levels. The estimated effects are

all statistically significant at the one percent level and the magnitudes are sizeable, ranging from

about three to five percentage points. Taking the means presented in Table 2 as a basis, these

estimates translate into effect sizes in the range of four percent for fifth grade ELA to 8.2 percent

for fifth grade math. 17 Column 2 shows that these estimates are robust to controlling for time-

variant school characteristics. This suggests that the other known determinants of academic

proficiency are orthogonal to the within-school variation in exposure to sniper attacks. Appendix

Table A1 shows that these findings are robust to how “closeness” to a sniper attack is measured,

as both continuous and nonparametric specifications strongly suggest that schools closer to

sniper attacks experienced significant declines in proficiency rates in 2003 relative to schools

that were farther away.

           Column 3 of Table 4 presents estimates from a specification with district trends that

relaxes the parallel trends assumption. At first glance, these estimates are somewhat less

precisely estimated than those in columns 1 and 2, perhaps due to a reduction in the size of the

point estimates. Nonetheless, after conditioning on linear district time trends we observe that

being within a five-mile radius of a sniper attack site is still associated with a statistically

significant decrease in proficiency rates on third grade ELA and third and fifth grade math tests.

In other words, while there is some evidence of differential trends in districts nearby the sniper


17
 The effect sizes are as follows for each of the six outcomes: 7.9 percent and 4.0 percent, for third and fifth grade
ELA and 6.2 percent and 8.2 percent for third and fifth grade math, respectively.


                                                          24
attacks, the sniper attacks are associated with statistically significant negative deviations from

those trends in three subjects. This result is consistent with previous research on the harmful

effects of disruptions to learning, which finds that weather-related school closures and exposure

to acute incidents of extreme violence have relatively larger effects on achievement in the

elementary grades (Marcotte & Hemelt, 2008; Sharkey et al., 2014). Moreover, it is important to

emphasize that the estimated effects on math proficiency are the most robust to conditioning on

district trends. This is consistent with the previous literature on the efficacy of school inputs that

routinely shows that math achievement scores are more sensitive than ELA scores to shocks to

school environments (e.g., Hanushek & Rivkin, 2010). Currie and Thomas (2001) speculate that

this may be because children are more apt to learn reading skills at home, which suggests that, to

the extent that the sniper attacks caused absences, school closures, and displaced instructional

time during school days, it makes sense to see larger effects on math achievement.

       Next we estimate an event-study version of equation (1) to trace out the trends in

proficiency rates, separately for treated and control schools, year-by-year for the periods leading

up to the year of the sniper shootings. As discussed in section IV, this provides a simple test of

the “parallel trends” assumption required for consistency by the DD specification given in

equation (1). Formally, this is done by augmenting equation (1) to include interactions between

each of the year indicators with the Close treatment indicator. Event study estimates of

specifications that control for time-variant school characteristics are presented in Table 5.

Consistent with our earlier findings, the estimates of the coefficients on the interaction between

the Close and 2003 (treatment year) indicators are negative for all four tests and statistically

significant for the math grades for both grades. Furthermore, these treatment effect estimates are

larger in magnitude than all of the other interaction terms. Intuitively, the goal of the event study




                                                 25
analysis is to examine the differences between treatment and control schools in the years leading

up to 2003, the academic year in which the sniper attacks took place. This is most easily

accomplished visually, so we plot the interactions terms reported in Table 5, along with their 95

percent confidence intervals, in Figure 2. As illustrated in Figure 2, there is a clear overall

pattern of a statistically significant divergence in 2003 from the pre-sniper attack period trends.

The aforementioned pattern is most pronounced for third grade English and third and fifth grade

math scores. Furthermore, the estimates on the year indicators suggest that average pass rates had

been increasing consistently over the analysis period. Interpreting the estimates on the interaction

terms in conjunction with the individual year indicators supports the hypothesis that the sniper

attacks decreased proficiency rates in nearby schools.

       It is important to remember that the sniper shootings had primarily occurred along the

Interstate-95 (I-95) corridor. One argument against our identification strategy could be that there

was something peculiar about schools located along the I-95 corridor that caused the proficiency

rates in these schools to decrease in the year of the sniper attacks. In our analysis thus far, control

schools along I-95 are grouped together with other control schools that were within 50 miles of a

sniper attack. As a result, we could be obtaining the partial impact of some confounding event

that affected all schools along the I-95 corridor that had nothing to do with the sniper attacks.

While we do not have a specific confounding event or factor that differentially affected schools

along I-95 in 2003 in mind, we nevertheless guard against this possibility by estimating our main

models using an analytic sample restricted to schools in districts along the I-95 corridor. Doing

so allows us to conduct the analysis with a more homogenous sample of schools that are less

susceptible to potentially confounding factors that violate the parallel trends identifying

assumption. If the estimates obtained in Table 4 were indeed caused by the sniper attacks,




                                                  26
analyses of the I-95 sample should yield results similar to those obtained in the full sample.

Accordingly, we re-estimate our preferred specifications using a restricted analytic sample of

schools located along the I-95 corridor. Specifically, the main “I-95 sample” includes all schools

in the 20 school divisions (districts) through which I-95 passes and the city/town school divisions

that are within 10 miles of I-95. 18 As shown in Table 6, the estimates from this sample are very

similar to those in Table 4. Most notably, the estimates on proficiency rates on third and fifth

math test scores are both statistically significant and qualitatively and quantitatively similar to

those from Table 4 despite significant reductions in the sample size. We interpret this finding as

evidence against an argument that our results are driven by some confounding factor related to

treated schools’ proximity to I-95. To ensure that our analyses are internally consistent and to

maintain statistical power, the results from the analyses that follow are obtained from the broader

Virginia schools sample.

        Given the evidence presented to this point, which suggests that the sniper attacks caused

a statistically significant decrease in school proficiency rates in third grade ELA and third and

fifth grade math, a natural question to consider is whether the trauma persisted into subsequent

school years. The SOL tests continued in a similar form for two additional years following the

academic year in which the sniper attacks had occurred. Accordingly, Table 7 presents estimates

from models that utilize data through 2005. These models include the usual Close×d2003

interaction term and Close×Post interaction terms, where Post equals one if the academic year is

2004 or 2005, and zero otherwise. The specifications estimated in Table 7 are otherwise identical

to the baseline specifications estimated in Table 4. Once again, the results presented in Table 7

18
  The 14 county school divisions are Greensville, Emporia, Sussex, Prince George, Dinwiddie, Chesterfield,
Henrico, Hanover, Caroline, Spotsylvania, Stafford, Prince William, Arlington, and Fairfax. The six city/town
school divisions are Petersburg, Colonial Heights, Richmond, Fredericksburg, Falls Church, and Alexandria.
Because seven of the county school divisions contain schools with catchment areas that are more than 10 miles from
I-95, we also verify that these results are robust to further restricting the “I-95 sample” to exclude such schools.


                                                        27
are consistent with the sniper attacks having had a negative impact on students’ academic

achievement. Even in the most conservative models that condition on linear district time trends,

reported in panel C of Table 7, the estimated effects of being within 5 miles of a sniper attack are

uniformly negative and are statistically significant in three subjects: third grade ELA and third

and fifth grade math. However, these effects do not appear to persist, as the estimated effects of

proximity to a sniper attack in subsequent years tend to be statistically indistinguishable from

zero and small in magnitude. It is perhaps unsurprising that we detect no persistent effects of the

sniper attacks on proficiency rates in subsequent years, as the attacks occurred in October of

2002 and the 2004 tests were administered in May 2004, more than 18 months later. One

possible explanation for the lack of persistent effects is that parents and school administrators

recognized the decline in achievement in affected schools and responded in the following

academic year to reverse these negative effects. Our data do not allow us to test these

hypotheses. However, this is not an implausible scenario especially considering the strong

incentives imposed by NCLB to meet minimum achievement thresholds at the time. Regardless,

this is a comforting finding in the sense that the negative impacts on school achievement

associated with the sniper attacks appear to be relatively short-lived. Even though it may be

possible to reverse the harmful impacts of community traumatic events on student achievement,

doing so would still to come at a cost given the private parental and public resources that need to

be reallocated towards remedying these problems. Therefore, efficiency losses associated with

these attacks should not be overlooked. It is also important to note that while the effects on test

scores may have faded out, effects on socio-emotional outcomes might persist, as Chetty et al.

(2011) find that effects of primary school classroom quality on test scores “fade out” quickly,

effects on non-cognitive measures in later grades and on earnings in adulthood persist.




                                                 28
The 2002 Pentagon Attack

         It is important to note that the impact of any other traumatic event that might have

happened elsewhere in the country during our analysis period would be captured by our year

fixed effects. One potential exception is the terrorist attack on the Pentagon that occurred on

September 11, 2001. 19 Given the close proximity of the Pentagon to several of the Virginia

communities affected by the sniper attacks that occurred almost one year later, it is possible that

persistent psychological symptomology of trauma associated with the September 2001 attacks,

and with the Pentagon crash in particular, might confound our analysis of the 2002 sniper

attacks. In other words, the effects of the sniper attacks documented above might be at least

partly attributable to the Pentagon attack of September 11, 2001. Thus, we remove school-year

observations in 2002 that were within 5 miles of the Pentagon from the baseline analytic sample

to reduce potential contamination of the pre-treatment control group, though the main results are

robust to either not making this sample restriction or to excluding these schools from all six years

of data. Still, this does not rule out the possibility that the sniper attacks compounded or triggered

existing trauma in communities that had previously been affected by the September 11, 2001

attack on the Pentagon. However, any direct impact of the Pentagon attack on 2002 proficiency

rates would also be accounted for in the event-study analysis.

         To provide further insights into the issue, we consider a version of equation (1) in which

the treatment is redefined as being within a five-mile radius of the sniper attacks in October 2002

or within a five-mile radius of the Pentagon in 2001. In addition to providing evidence on the


19
  The attack on the Pentagon was part of a larger, coordinated terrorist attack by the terrorist group Al-Qaeda on the
United States. On September 11, 2001, two planes crashed into the World Trade Center buildings in New York City.
On the same day, a third plane crashed into the Pentagon causing a partial collapse of the headquarters. A fourth
plane, which was heading to Washington D.C., crashed in a field in Pennsylvania. A total of 2,996 individuals were
killed in the attacks. The total number of casualties at the Pentagon crash was 189, including 59 passengers, 125
people who were in the building at the time, and 5 terrorists. As the deadliest terrorist attack ever carried out in the
U.S., the events of September 11, 2001 caused a tremendous amount of fear and anxiety.


                                                          29
sensitivity of our main results, this analysis is interesting in its own right, as it provides evidence

on the average impact of both the Pentagon and sniper attacks. As shown in Table A2, these

estimates are similar to those shown in Table 4 both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Heterogeneity in the Sniper Effects

       Finally, we conclude our analysis with an investigation of potential heterogeneity in the

effects of the community trauma associated with the 2002 sniper attacks on school proficiency

rates. As discussed above, this analysis is motivated by the common finding in the literature on

the psychological effects of community traumatic events that signs of trauma are

disproportionately concentrated among racial minority and socioeconomically disadvantaged

children (Shannon et al., 1994; Becker-Blease et al., 2008, Neria et al., 2006). To answer this

question, we ordered schools based on the percentage of students in 2003 who were eligible for

FRL and the percentage of students who were black. Then we divided each of the distributions

into three equal parts and estimated the baseline models separately for schools in the bottom and

top terciles. The bottom terciles contain relatively advantaged schools while the top terciles

contain relatively disadvantaged schools. Columns 1-4 of Table 8 report baseline estimates of

equation (1) that control for time-variant school characteristics. Columns 5-8 of Table 8 report

analogous estimates of specifications that also condition on district linear time trends.

       Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 report baseline estimates for schools in the bottom and top

terciles of the FRL distribution, respectively. Based on previous research, we expect the effects

of the sniper attacks on proficiency rates to be more pronounced among the relatively poorer

schools in column 2. Indeed, this is exactly what we see: the point estimates for the bottom

tercile sample in column 1 are relatively small in magnitude and indistinguishable from zero

while those for the top tercile of the FRL distribution reported in column 2 are negative, larger in




                                                  30
magnitude, and statistically significant at the 1 percent confidence level. Reductions in the

poorer (top-tercile) schools’ proficiency rates caused by the sniper attacks are large—more than

twice the size of the baseline estimates that restricted the effect to be homogeneous for all

schools—at more than 10 percentage points for each ELA and math test. The estimates reported

in columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 show a similar result: harmful effects of proximity to the sniper

attacks are significantly larger in schools that serve predominantly black student populations,

which are similar in size to the effects observed in the relatively poor schools. Again, this result

is consistent with the extant literature that predicts racial minority children to be more adversely

affected by community traumatic events.

       Next, the remaining four columns of Table 8 re-estimate the same models separately by

school type, this time controlling for district linear time trends. The estimated impacts of

proximity to a sniper attack on proficiency rates in schools in the wealthiest tercile of the

distribution, which are reported in column 5, are once again indistinguishable from zero.

However, the corresponding estimates for the poorest tercile of schools, shown in column 6,

remain large in magnitude and statistically significant for the math scores in both grades.

Similarly, a comparison between columns 7 and 8 indicate that the effects are largely driven by

schools that are predominantly black. In particular, none of the estimates in column 7, which

shows estimates for schools at the bottom tercile in black enrollment, are meaningful either

economically or statistically. In contrast, the effects are much larger in magnitude and

statistically significant in three out of four outcome models in column 8, which shows the

estimates for schools that predominantly serve black students.

       Importantly, the results presented in Table 8 indicate that the October 2002 sniper attacks

had harmful, statistically significant effects on academic achievement in schools serving




                                                 31
disadvantaged populations, and that these effects were not driven by districtwide trends in

performance. Rather, these effects represent negative deviations from trends and suggest that the

findings documented throughout much of this paper—that the 2002 Beltway sniper attacks

reduced academic achievement in Virginia’s public schools—were largely driven by declines in

student achievement in schools serving socioeconomically disadvantaged and racial minority

students. This is unsurprising, as these students, communities, and schools are regularly

subjected to numerous other stressors and have relatively fewer resources with which to cope

with unanticipated shocks such as the sniper attacks, which presented yet another hurdle for

students, teachers, and administrators in these schools to overcome.

       In light of our earlier finding that the negative effects of the sniper attacks on student

achievement did not persist beyond the academic year of 2002-2003, it is important to assess

whether the same pattern holds for the heterogeneity analysis. Thus, we conducted the

heterogeneity analysis utilizing data through 2005, similar to what we did in Table 7. As shown

in Table 9, these results are largely consistent with those reported in Tables 7 and 8, i.e., the

sniper attacks caused a reduction in student achievement in 2003 but mostly for students

attending disadvantaged schools. Once again, however, these effects are relatively short-lived.

Focusing on columns 2 and 4, which shows the estimates for relatively disadvantaged schools,

none of the estimated effects of exposure to the sniper attacks significantly persist into 2004 and

2005. Furthermore, these estimates are smaller in magnitude in most cases. Generally, the

estimates in Table 9 are consistent with the patterns and results that emerge from the previous

analyses.




                                                  32
VII. Conclusions

       The increased frequency of community traumatic events in the United States places a

significant and rising number of children at an enormous risk for psychological problems. The

current study documents that these types of events not only undermine the psychological well-

being of children, but can also significantly disrupt their cognitive development, especially in the

short run. Difference-in-difference estimates that leverage the natural experiment created by the

October 2002 “Beltway Sniper” attacks indicate that children who attended schools close to the

shooting locations experienced lower academic achievement than their counterparts who

attended schools farther away. The estimates are most robust for proficiency in third and fifth

grade math, suggesting that shootings caused a decline in school proficiency rates of about five

to nine percentage points. Particularly concerning from an equity standpoint, these effects appear

to be entirely driven by achievement declines in schools that enroll large numbers of racial

minority and socioeconomically disadvantaged students.

       The plausibility and practical significance of these results can be interpreted in a couple

of ways. First, to put the magnitude of our estimates in perspective, recall that a likely

mechanism through which the sniper attacks affected achievement was the disruption of school

routines and associated reductions in instructional time. It is useful, then, to compare our point

estimates to those of similar analyses of the impact of disruptions to the school schedule on

school-level proficiency rates. For example, Marcotte and Hemelt (2008) estimated the impact of

unscheduled school closings on school proficiency rates in Maryland by exploiting the natural

experiment created by temporal and geographic variation in snowfall. The authors found that ten

unscheduled, weather-related school closings reduced third and fifth grade math proficiency rates

by between 5 and 7 percentage points. These effects are remarkably similar in magnitude to the




                                                 33
effects of the sniper attacks documented in the current study. The current study thus furthers our

understanding of how external disruptions to school environments and school schedules can

affect student achievement.

       Second, one dimension of the policy relevance of our findings can be inferred by

considering how the sniper-induced reductions in proficiency rates affected schools’ standing

under the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) accountability policy, which was first implemented in

the same school year that the sniper shootings occurred. Importantly, math and ELA proficiency

rates play a critical role in determining whether schools made Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP)

under NCLB. To make AYP, among other things, schools’ overall proficiency rates must meet or

exceed a threshold predetermined by the state. In 2003 the ELA and math proficiency thresholds

were 61 and 59, respectively (Virginia Board of Education, 2010). Under NCLB, failing to make

AYP in two consecutive years made schools subject to potentially severe sanctions.

       Table 10 reports tabulations from a simple back-of-the envelope calculation of the

number of schools whose proficiency rating would have crossed the AYP threshold had they

(not) been within 5 miles of the sniper attacks. Specifically, we use the conservative district-

trend estimates reported in Tables 4 and 8 to compute two counterfactuals: the number of treated

schools that failed but would have passed had they been outside the 5 mile radius of the nearest

sniper shooting and the number of control schools that passed but would have failed had they

been inside a 5 mile radius of the nearest sniper shooting. Overall, the sniper shootings changed

between 1 and 2 percent of schools’ positions relative to the AYP threshold. However, this figure

is significantly higher for schools in the top terciles of the distributions of the percentage of

students eligible for FRL and the percentage of black students. In these relatively disadvantaged

schools, between 7 and 20 percent of elementary schools’ positions relative to the AYP threshold




                                                  34
changed as a result of the sniper attacks. This is consistent with results presented in Table 8,

which show that disadvantaged schools were particularly harmed by the sniper attacks, but is

also driven by the fact that many disadvantaged schools were initially closer to the AYP

thresholds due to their relatively lower proficiency rates. Accordingly, it is important that state

and federal consequential K-12 accountability policies recognize the impacts that community

traumatic events can have on the student test scores that determine sanctions, as failing to do so

might expand existing inequities between schools.

       More generally, these findings suggest that local and state education systems might

respond to community traumatic events by providing additional resources, support, and guidance

to affected schools and communities. For example, Weems et al. (2009) describe a school-based

intervention that significantly reduced test anxiety among racial minority students who were

exposed to Hurricane Katrina. Moreover, targeted support would be justified, given that

disadvantaged schools and communities appear to bear a disproportionate burden of the harmful

effects. There are also implications for proactive policies designed to eliminate or minimize the

proclivity of manmade community traumatic events, as doing so in an efficient manner requires

equating the marginal cost and marginal benefit of such efforts. The results presented here

suggest that the costs of random shooting incidents may be larger than previously thought, as the

psychic and emotional costs recognized by previous research spill over into schools and affect

students’ cognitive development and exam performance some five months after the event.

       Finally, our auxiliary analysis suggests that the deleterious impact of the sniper shootings

on student achievement did not persist into the subsequent academic year, at least as measured

by SOL proficiency rates. When we repeated our analysis with data extending to the end of the

academic years 2004 and 2005, estimated treatment effects in these later years are smaller in




                                                 35
magnitude and less precisely estimated than those in the academic year 2003. On the one hand,

this finding can be interpreted as a glimpse of positive news since there might have been a

correction to the disruption caused by the sniper attacks that brought achievement trends back to

their pre-attack trajectories. However, this should not lessen concerns over the impact of

community wide traumatic events on student development for at least two reasons. First, any

public and private efforts expended to counter the harmful effect of these attacks on student

achievement would still represent an efficiency loss for society in light of the scarcity of

educational resources. Second, educational interventions that affect both test scores and non-

cognitive skills often have long-run impacts on socioeconomic outcomes (e.g., labor market

success) even when their effects on test scores fade out relatively quickly (Chetty et al., 2011).




                                                 36
                                            References

Bat-Zion, N., & Levy-Shiff, R. (1993). Children in war: Stress and coping reactions under the
threat of Scud missile attacks and the effect of proximity. In L. Leavitt & N. Fox (Eds.), The
Psychological Effects of War and Violence on Children, (pp. 143–179). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Beauchesne, M. A., Kelley, B. R., Patsdaughter, C. A., & Pickard, J. (2002). Attack on America:
Children's reactions and parents' responses. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 16(5), 213-221.

Becker-Blease, K. A., Finkelhor, D., & Turner, H. (2008). Media exposure predicts children's
reactions to crime and terrorism. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 9(2), 225-248.

Beland, L.P., Kim, W. (2015). The Effect of High School Shootings on Schools and Student
Performance. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis.

Bensley L., Van Eenwyk, J., & Wynkoop Simmons, K. (2003). Childhood family violence
history and women’s risk for intimate partner violence and poor health. American Journal of
Preventative Medicine, 25(1), 38-44.

Brück, T., Di Maio, M., and Miaari S.H. (2014) Learning the Hard Way: The Effect of Violent
Conflict on Student Academic Achievement. IZA Discussion Paper 8543, Institute for The Study
of Labor.

Buka, S. L., Stichick, T. L., Birdthistle, I., & Earls, F. J. (2001). Youth exposure to violence:
prevalence, risks, and consequences. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 71(3), 298.

Butler, A. S., Panzer, A. M., & Goldfrank, L. R. (2003). Understanding the psychological
consequences of traumatic events, disasters, and terrorism. Washington (DC): National
Academies Press. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK221638/

Calderoni, M. E., Alderman, E. M., Silver, E. J., & Bauman, L. J. (2006). The mental health
impact of 9/11 on inner-city high school students 20 miles north of Ground Zero. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 39, 57– 65.

Carrell, S. E., & Hoekstra, M. L. (2010). Externalities in the classroom: How children exposed to
domestic violence affect everyone's kids. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1),
211-228.

Chamarbagwala, R., & Morán, H. E. (2011). The human capital consequences of civil war:
Evidence from Guatemala. Journal of Development Economics, 94(1), 41-61.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, & D. Yagan. (2011).
How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project Star. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1593-1660.

Cohen, A. P., D. Azrael, & M. Miller. (2014). Rate of mass shootings has tripled since 2011,



                                                 37
Harvard research shows. http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/10/mass-shootings-
increasing-harvard-research

Coppola, D. P. (2004). Gripped by fear: Public risk (mis)perception and the Washington, DC
sniper. Disaster Prevention and Management, 14(1), 32-54.

Currie, J., & Tekin, E. (2012). Understanding the cycle childhood maltreatment and future
crime. Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), 509-549.

Currie, J. & Thomas, D. (2001). Early test scores, socioeconomic status, school quality, and
future outcomes. Research in Labor Economics, 20, 103-32.

Danese, A., T. E. Moffitt, H. Harrington, B. J. Milne, G.Polanczyk, C. M. Pariante, R. Poulton,
& A. Caspi. (2009). Adverse childhood experiences and adult risk factors for age-related disease:
Depression, inflammation, and clustering of metabolic risk markers. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 163(12), 1135-1143.

Daniels, J. A., & Haist, J. (2012). School violence and trauma. (2012). In L. L. Levers (Ed.),
Trauma Counseling: Theories and Interventions, 335-348. Trauma counseling: Theories and
interventions (pp. 335-348). New York: Springer Publishing Company.

Di Pietro, G. (2015). The Academic Impact of Natural Disasters: Evidence from L'Aquila
Earthquake. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8867.

Fremont, W. P., Pataki, C., & Beresin, E. V. (2005). The impact of terrorism on children and
adolescents: terror in the skies, terror on television. Child and Adolescent psychiatric clinics of
North America, 14(3), 429-451.

Friedman, M. (2014). PTSD: National Center for PTSD. U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.
Retrieved March 11, 2014.

Galea, S., Ahern, J., Resnick, H., Kilpatrick, D., Bucuvalas, M., Gold, J., et al. (2002).
Psychological sequelae of the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York City. New England
Journal of Medicine, 346(13), 982-987.

Goodman, J. (2014). Flaking Out: Student Absences and Snow Days as Disruptions of
Instructional Time (No. w20221). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guryan, J., Hurst, E., & Kearney, M. (2008). Parental education and parental time with children.
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22, 23-46.

Halpern-Felsher, B. L., & Millstein, S. G. (2002). The effects of terrorism on teens’ perceptions
of dying: The new world is riskier than ever. Journal of Adolescent Health, 30(5), 308-311.

Hanushek, E. A., & Rivkin, S. G. (2010). Generalizations about using value-added measures of
teacher quality. The American Economic Review, 267-271.



                                                 38
Holman, E. A., Garfin, D. R., & Silver, R. C. (2014). Media’s role in broadcasting acute stress
following the Boston Marathon bombings. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(1), 93-98.

Hoven, C. W., Duarte, C. S., Lucas, C. P., Wu, P., Mandell, D. J., Goodwin, R. D., et al. (2005).
Psychopathology among New York City public school children 6 months after September
11. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(5), 545-551.

John Allen Muhammad v. State of Maryland (2007, November 5). Court of Special Appeals of
Maryland (No. 0986, September Term 2006). Retrieved from
http://mdcourts.gov/opinions/cosa/2007/986s06.pdf. On March 20th, 2015.

Kalil, A., Ryan, R., and Corey, M. (2012). Diverging destinies: Maternal education and the
developmental gradient in time with children. Demography, 49, 1361–83.

La Greca, A. M., Silverman, W. K., & Wasserstein, S. B. (1998). Children’s pre-disaster
functioning as a predictor of posttraumatic stress following Hurricane Andrew. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 883–892.

Lazear, E. P. (2001). Educational production. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 777-
803.

Leon, G. (2012). Civil conflict and human capital accumulation the long-term effects of political
violence in Perú. Journal of Human Resources, 47(4), 991-1022.

Marcotte, D. E., & Hemelt, S. W. (2008). Unscheduled school closings and student performance.
Education Finance and Policy, 3(3), 316-338.

Márquez-Padilla, F., Pérez-Arce, F., Rodriguez C.C, (2015). The (Non-)Effect of Violence on
Education : Evidence from the War on Drugs in Mexico. World Bank

Mitchell, A. (2007). Social impacts of fear: An examination of the 2002 Washington, DC sniper
shootings. Unpublished working paper, Colorado State University, Boulder, CO.
http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/awards/paper-competition/Mitchell_ImpactsOfFear.pdf

Monteiro, J., & Rocha, R. (2013). Drug battles and school achievement: evidence from Rio de
Janeiro’ s favelas. Working Paper, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.

Muzzatti, S. L., & Featherstone, R. (2007). Crosshairs on our backs: The culture of fear and the
production of the DC sniper story. Contemporary Justice Review, 10(1), 43-66.

National Center for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (2014). PTSD in children and teens.
Washington, DC: United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Retrieved from
www.ptsd.va.gov/PTSD/public/ family/ptsd-children-adolescents.asp




                                               39
Neria, Y., R. Gross, M. Olfson, M.J. Gameroff, P. Wickramaratne, A. Das, D. Pilowsky, A.
Feder, C. Blanco, R.D. Marshall, R. Lantigua, S. Shea, & M.M. Weissman (2006). Post-
traumatic stress disorder following disasters: a systematic review. General Hospital Psychiatry
28, 213222 .10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.02.00216675364.

Neria, Y., DiGrande, L., & Adams, B. G. (2011). Posttraumatic stress disorder following the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks: A review of the literature among highly exposed
populations. American Psychologist, 66(6), 429.

Pfefferbaum, B., Nixon, S. J., Tucker, P. M., Tivis, R. D., Moore, V. L., Gurwitch, R. H., ... &
Geis, H. K. (1999). Posttraumatic stress responses in bereaved children after the Oklahoma City
bombing. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 38(11), 1372-
1379.

Pfefferbaum, B., Seale, T. W., McDonald, N. B., Brandt Jr, E. N., Rainwater, S. M., Maynard, B.
T., & Miller, P. D. (2000). Posttraumatic stress two years after the Oklahoma City bombing in
youths geographically distant from the explosion. Psychiatry, 63(4), 358-370.

Pfefferbaum B., Nixon, S. J., Tivis, R. D., Doughty, D. E., Pynoos, R. S., Gurwitch, R. H., &
Foy, D. W. (2001). Television exposure in children after a terrorist incident. Psychiatry, 64(3),
202–211.

Plybon, L. E., & Kliewer, W. (2001). Neighborhood types and externalizing behavior in urban
school-age children: Tests of direct, mediated, and moderated effects. Journal of Child and
Family Studies, 10(4), 419-437.

Porter, B. J. (2010). A Portrait of School District Crisis Management: Leadership Choices in
Montgomery County during the Sniper Shootings of October 2002. Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Maryland, College Park.

Praetorius, R. T. (2006). Suicide and Community Traumatic Events: Is There a Connection?
Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.

Romano, Pedro Paulo Orraca. (2015). Crime Exposure and Educational Outcomes in Mexico.
Working Paper, University of Sussex.

Sachs-Ericsson, N., Blazer, D., Plant, E.A., & Arnow, B. (2005). Childhood sexual and physical
abuse and the 1-year prevalence of medical problems in the National Comorbidity Survey.
Health Psychology, 24(1), 32-40.

Saigh, P. A., Mroueh, M., & Bremner, J. D. (1997). Scholastic impairments among traumatized
adolescents. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 429–436.

Saylor, C. F., Cowart, B. L., Lipovsky, J. A., Jackson, C., & Finch, A. J. Jr. (2003). Media
exposure to September 11: Elementary school students’ experiences and posttraumatic
symptoms. American Behavioral Scientist, 46, 1622-1642.



                                                40
Schulden, J., Chen, J., Kresnow, M. J., Arias, I., Crosby, A., Mercy, J., Simon, T., Thomas, P.,
Davies-Cole, J., & Blythe, D. (2006). Psychological responses to the sniper attacks: Washington
DC area, October 2002. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 31(4), 324-327.

Schulte, Brigit. (2002). Schools shaken by threat but won’t shut down. The Washington Post.
October 23. p.A1.

Self-Brown, S. R., Massetti, G. M., Chen, J., & Schulden, J. (2011). Parents' Retrospective
Reports of Youth Psychological Responses to the Sniper Attacks in the Washington, DC,
Area. Violence and Victims, 26(1), 116-129.

Shannon, M. P., Lonigan, C. J., Finch, A. J., & Taylor, C. M. (1994). Children exposed to
disaster: I. Epidemiology of post-traumatic symptoms and symptom profiles. Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 33, 80–93.

Sharkey, P. (2010). The acute effect of local homicides on children's cognitive performance.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(26), 11733-11738.

Sharkey, P. T., Tirado-Strayer, N., Papachristos, A. V., & Raver, C. C. (2012). The effect of
local violence on children’s attention and impulse control. American journal of public health,
102(12), 2287-2293.

Sharkey, P., Schwartz, A. E., Ellen, I. G., & Lacoe, J. (2014). High stakes in the classroom, high
stakes on the street: The effects of community violence on students’ standardized test
performance. Sociological Science, 1, 199-220.

Shemyakina, O. (2011). The effect of armed conflict on accumulation of schooling: Results from
Tajikistan. Journal of Development Economics, 95(2), 186-200.

Solon, G., Haider, S. J., & Wooldridge, J. (2013). What are we weighting for? (No. w18859).
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Spell, A. W., Kelley, M. L., Wang, J., Self-Brown, S., Davidson, K. L., Pellegrin, A., Palcic, J.
L., Meyer, K., Paasch, V., & Baumeister, A. (2008). The moderating effects of maternal
psychopathology on children's adjustment post–Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Clinical Child &
Adolescent Psychology, 37(3), 553-563.

United States Department of Justice (2013). A Study of Active Shooter Incidents in the United
States Between 2000 and 2013. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Washington, D.C. Retrieved
from http://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2014/september/fbi-releases-study-on-active-shooter-
incidents/pdfs/a-study-of-active-shooter-incidents-in-the-u.s.-between-2000-and-2013 on March
12th 2015.

United Press International (2002). Sniper makes demands and threats in note. October 22.
Retrieved from http://www.greatdreams.com/sniper.htm on March 12th, 2015.



                                                41
Virginia Board of Education. (2010). Consolidated State Application Amended Accountability
Workbook for State Grants under Title IX, Part C, Section 9302 of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (Public Law 107-110).

Weems, C. F., Taylor, L. K., Costa, N. M., Marks, A. B., Romano, D. M., Verrett, S. L., &
Brown, D. M. (2009). Effect of a school-based test anxiety intervention in ethnic minority youth
exposed to Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 30(3), 218-226.

Wendling, P. (2009). PTSD can persist months after school shooting. Adolescent Health, 22.

Widom CS, DuMont KA, Czaja SJ. (2007). A prospective investigation of major depres- sive
disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected children grown up. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64(1), 49-56.

Zivotofsky, A. Z., & Koslowsky, M. (2005). Short communication: Gender differences in coping
with the major external stress of the Washington, DC sniper. Stress and health, 21(1), 27-31.




                                               42
Figure 1: Locations of the Beltway Sniper Attacks




Source: Clark County Prosecutor,
http://www.clarkprosecutor.org/html/death/US/muhammad1181.htm.




                                                  43
Figure 2: Event Study Estimates of the Impact of Sniper Attacks on Pass Rates

                  Grade 3 English                       Grade 5 English
    10
    5
    0
    -5
    -10




                     Grade 3 Math                           Grade 5 Math
    10
    5
    0
    -5
    -10




              1999         2001      2003            1999         2001      2003
                                        year
                            Effect          95% Confidence Interval


Notes: The omitted year is 2002. Brackets represent 95 percent confidence intervals, robust to
clustering at school level. The bars represent the estimated interaction terms reported in Table 5,
from event study models that control for time-varying school characteristics and school and year
fixed effects.




                                                44
Table 1: Description of Sniper Attacks’ Proximities to Virginia (VA) Schools
                                                       Distance to
                                                                     VA schools    VA schools
#         Date       Fatal         City        State   nearest VA
                                                                     within 5 mi   within 10 mi
                                                         school
1      October 2     Yes      Silver Spring    MD         9.88           0              1
2      October 3     Yes        Rockville      MD            7.08        0             13
3      October 3     Yes        Rockville      MD            7.08        0             14
4      October 3     Yes       Silver spring   MD            7.07        0             14
5      October 3     Yes       Kensington      MD            4.49        2             72
6      October 3     Yes       Washington      DC            7.07        0             33
7      October 4      No      Fredericksburg   VA            1.20        18            34
8      October 7      No          Bowie        MD            18.76       0              0
9      October 9     Yes        Manassas       VA            0.28        28            62
10     October 11    Yes      Fredericksburg   VA            1.02        20            34
11     October 14    Yes       Falls Church    VA            0.71        82            170
12     October 19     No         Ashland       VA            0.97        5             33
13     October 22    Yes      Silver Spring    MD            10.24       0              0
Note: Distances are measured in miles “as the crow flies.”




                                               45
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for School Pass Rates
                            All schools                               Schools within 50 miles
                             Outside 5      Within 5                        Outside 5         Within 5
                 All                                          All
                               miles         miles                             miles           miles
                 (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
English 3       63.36          63.02        67.58***        67.25             67.19            67.58
               (17.19)        (17.37)        (14.09)        (17.31)           (17.88)         (14.09)
                [6312]        [5837]          [475]         [2882]            [2407]           [475]
English 5       72.29          72.04        75.38***        74.86             74.76            75.38
               (16.45)        (16.65)        (13.44)        (16.76)           (17.33)         (13.44)
                [6284]         [5809]         [475]         [2913]            [2438]           [475]
Math 3          73.23          72.91        77.19***        76.09             75.87            77.19
               (16.68)        (16.94)        (12.39)        (16.70)           (17.42)         (12.39)
                [6310]        [5836]          [474]         [2879]            [2405]           [474]
Math 5          60.84          60.39        66.37***        65.09             64.84            66.37
               (21.85)        (22.08)        (17.87)        (21.49)           (22.12)         (17.87)
                [6283]        [5810]          [473]         [2909]            [2436]           [473]
Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Sample sizes are reported in brackets.
“Within ‘x’ miles” refers to schools’ proximity to the nearest sniper attack. ***, **, and *
indicate statistically significant differences between treated (within 5 miles) and control groups
at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively.




                                               46
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for School Characteristics
                         All                        Treated                     Control
                          (1)                         (2)                         (3)
Miles                   15.73                        2.93                      18.23***
                        (11.88)                      (1.15)                     (11.42)
Within 5 mi              0.16                        1.00                      0.00***
Within 10 mi             0.37                        1.00                      0.25***
Enrollment              566.53                      544.18                      570.88
                       (195.16)                     (163.43)                   (200.49)
% black                  0.25                        0.16                      0.26***
                        (0.27)                       (0.11)                     (0.28)
% Hispanic               0.08                        0.21                      0.06***
                        (0.12)                       (0.17)                     (0.08)
% FRL                    0.29                        0.33                        0.28*
                        (0.24)                       (0.21)                     (0.24)
FTE                     37.89                        40.90                     37.31***
                        (13.51)                     (13.13)                     (13.51)
Pupil-teacher
                        15.65                        13.34                     16.10***
ratio
                        (9.32)                       (2.67)                     (10.06)
N                        2878                         460                        2418
Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically
significant differences between treated (within 5 miles) and control groups at the 99th, 95th,
and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. Sample restricted to schools within 50
miles “as the crow flies” of at least one attack. FRL = free or reduced price lunch. FTE = full
time equivalent teachers.




                                               47
Table 4: Estimates of Effect of Proximity to Sniper Attacks on School Pass Rates
 Specification:           Parsimonious                  Baseline                                  Trends
 Outcome                          (1)                           (2)                                 (3)
 English 3                      -5.305                        -5.221                              -1.924
   [2,851]                    (0.956)***                    (0.993)***                           (1.087)*
 English 5                      -2.968                        -3.013                              -1.376
   [2,881]                    (1.083)***                    (1.099)***                            (1.167)
 Math 3                         -4.692                        -4.950                              -2.624
   [2,848]                    (0.941)***                    (0.929)***                          (0.964)***
 Math 5                         -5.321                        -5.285                              -2.974
   [2,878]                    (1.339)***                    (1.310)***                           (1.350)**
 School fixed effects             Yes                           Yes                                 Yes
 Controls                         No                            Yes                                 Yes
 District Trends                  No                            No                                  Yes

Notes: Each cell reports the interaction term (treatment effect) from a distinct regression. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses and are robust to clustering at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. Sample sizes are reported in brackets. Analytic
samples restricted to schools within 50 miles of at least one sniper shooting. School controls in columns 2 and 3
include FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent
FRL eligible. All models control for school and year fixed effects. Sample contains data from 1998-2003 school
years (6 years). Observations in 2002 for schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded from the analytic
samples.




                                                           48
Table 5: Event Study Estimates of Effect of Proximity to Sniper Attacks on School Pass
Rates
 Outcome                 ELA 3              ELA 5            Math 3           Math 5
                           (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)
1998                    -24.284             -2.973           -19.877          -23.008
                      (0.815)***         (0.677)***        (0.683)***       (0.854)***
1999                    -15.774             -3.345           -15.176          -19.807
                      (0.617)***         (0.602)***        (0.575)***       (0.707)***
2000                    -14.548             -5.207            -9.824           -5.997
                      (0.547)***         (0.514)***        (0.499)***       (0.648)***
2001                     -9.378             -2.579            -4.174           -3.829
                      (0.568)***         (0.552)***        (0.465)***       (0.621)***
2002                       ---                ---               ---              ---
2003                     1.954              4.496             5.642            3.771
                      (0.557)***         (0.580)***        (0.508)***       (0.684)***
1998×Close               -0.237             1.561             -0.283           1.142
                        (1.796)            (1.643)           (1.443)          (2.268)
1999×Close               0.693              3.240             1.447            2.695
                        (1.669)           (1.598)**          (1.275)          (2.129)
2000×Close               -1.320             -0.659            -0.381           -1.825
                        (1.485)            (1.349)           (1.177)          (1.729)
2001×Close               0.139              1.980             0.305            -1.250
                        (1.268)            (1.265)           (1.031)          (1.705)
2002×Close                Omit
2003×Close               -2.097             -0.478            -2.447           -3.495
                        (1.388)            (1.392)          (1.095)**        (1.531)**
School-years (N)         2,851              2,881             2,848            2,878
Schools (clusters)        513                546               511              541
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are robust to clustering
at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 99th,
95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. Analytic samples
restricted to schools within 50 miles of at least one sniper shooting. All models
control for school and year fixed effects, district linear time trends, and the
following time-variant school controls: FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio,
total school enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent FRL
eligible. Sample contains data from 1998-2003 school years (6 years).
Observations in 2002 for schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded
from the analytic samples.




                                                   49
Table 6: Effect of Proximity to Sniper Attacks on School Pass Rates [Interstate 95
corridor sample]
Specification:            Parsimonious              Baseline                Trends
Outcome                        (1)                    (2)                    (3)
English 3                    -5.323                 -4.244                 -1.110
  [2,243]                  (1.002)***             (0.984)***               (1.064)
English 5                    -3.389                 -2.877                 -1.726
  [2,269]                  (1.113)***             (1.112)***               (1.190)
Math 3                       -5.576                 -4.646                 -2.744
  [2,242]                  (1.018)***             (0.977)***             (0.958)***
Math 5                       -6.409                 -5.259                 -3.703
  [2,264]                  (1.424)***             (1.369)***             (1.384)***
School fixed effects          Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Controls                       No                    Yes                    Yes
District Trends                No                     No                    Yes
Notes: Each cell reports the interaction term (treatment effect) from a distinct
regression. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are robust to
clustering at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. Sample sizes
are reported in brackets. Analytic samples restricted to schools in districts that
are in the Interstate 95 corridor. School controls in columns 2 and 3 include
FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment, percent black,
percent Hispanic, and percent FRL eligible. All models control for school and
year fixed effects. Sample contains data from 1998-2003 school years (6
years).




                                                    50
Table 7: Persistence in Effect of Sniper Attacks on School Pass Rates
Subject:                English 3              English 5              Math 3       Math 5
                            (1)                         (2)            (3)           (4)
A. No school controls
2003×Close                -5.188                       -3.173        -4.567         -5.107
                        (0.950)***                   (1.049)***    (0.950)***     (1.330)***
2004/5×Close              -3.089                       -0.727        -3.482         -4.543
                        (1.021)***                    (1.126)      (1.079)***     (1.341)***
Diff. (p)                  0.05                        0.011          0.177         0.635


B. School controls
2003×Close                -5.314                       -3.414        -4.749         -5.258
                        (0.968)***                   (1.044)***    (0.960)***     (1.298)***
2004/5×Close              -2.808                       -0.480        -2.986         -4.190
                        (1.031)***                    (1.085)      (1.047)***     (1.304)***
Diff. (p)                  0.021                       0.003          0.035         0.383


C. School controls and linear district time trends
2003×Close                -2.609                       -1.518        -2.341         -2.802
                        (1.003)***                    (1.067)      (0.898)***     (1.255)**
2004/5×Close               1.318                       2.370          0.663         -0.348
                          (1.133)                    (1.202)**       (1.152)       (1.333)
Diff. (p)                  0.001                      0.0001          0.001         0.054
N                          3,835                       3,877          3,835         3,876
Notes: The omitted category is pre-2003×Close, where Close is defined as 0 to 5 miles.
Standard errors in parentheses are robust to clustering at the school level. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence,
respectively. Analytic samples restricted to schools within 50 miles of at least one sniper
shooting. School controls include FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment,
percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent FRL. All models control for school and year fixed
effects. Sample contains data from 1998-2005 school years (8 years). Observations in 2002 for
schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded from the analytic samples.




                                                              51
Table 8: Heterogeneity in Effects of Proximity (5 miles) to Sniper Attacks on School Pass Rates
                     Bottom tercile     Top tercile    Bottom tercile    Top tercile    Bottom tercile   Top tercile   Bottom tercile   Top tercile
Sample:                   FRL              FRL              black           black            FRL            FRL            black          black
                      enrollment        enrollment       enrollment      enrollment       enrollment     enrollment     enrollment      enrollment
Outcome                    (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)
English 3                -1.599          -10.294          -2.834           -8.246           -1.570         -3.107         -0.206          -2.391
                         (1.495)       (1.750)***        (1.429)**       (1.531)***        (1.511)        (2.129)         (1.422)        (1.689)
English 5                0.571            -6.751          -1.064           -5.883           1.026          -3.803          0.424          -3.989
                         (1.141)       (2.111)***         (1.179)        (1.747)***        (1.279)        (2.456)         (1.216)       (2.013)**
Math 3                   0.170           -11.471          -0.708           -9.470           -1.248         -3.965          0.855          -4.044
                         (1.293)       (1.883)***         (1.087)        (1.520)***        (1.313)        (2.157)*        (1.408)       (1.680)**
Math 5                   -2.118          -11.160          -3.047           -9.170           -1.044         -5.336         -0.779          -4.787
                         (1.774)       (2.733)***        (1.585)*        (2.138)***        (1.700)        (2.823)*        (1.470)       (2.270)**
Controls                  Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
School & year FE          Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
District trends            No              No               No               No              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Notes: Each cell reports the interaction term (treatment effect) from a distinct regression. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
and are robust to clustering at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of
confidence, respectively. Sample sizes are reported in brackets. Analytic samples restricted to schools within 50 miles of at least one
sniper shooting. School controls in columns 2 and 4 include FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment, percent
black, percent Hispanic, and percent FRL eligible. All models control for school and year fixed effects. Sample contains data from
1998-2003 school years (6 years). Observations in 2002 for schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded from the analytic
samples. The % FRL terciles are 18 and 47. The % black terciles are 9 and 34.




                                                                          52
Table 9: Persistence in Heterogeneous Effects of Proximity (5 miles) to Sniper Attacks on School Pass Rates
                         Bottom tercile          Top tercile           Bottom tercile       Top tercile black
Sample:
                        FRL enrollment        FRL enrollment          black enrollment        enrollment
Outcome                       (1)                   (2)                      (3)                   (4)
English 3 (2003)            -2.300                 -3.750                 -1.010                 -3.151
                            (1.548)               (1.917)*                (1.331)               (1.564)**
         (2004/5)           -0.285                  0.938                  4.167                  1.285
                            (1.404)                (2.389)              (1.527)***               (1.859)
English 5 (2003)             0.648                 -2.990                 -0.124                 -3.319
                            (1.100)                (2.220)                (1.086)               (1.835)*
         (2004/5)            0.847                  0.883                  4.099                  0.537
                            (1.152)                (2.606)              (1.122)***               (2.151)
Math 3 (2003)               -1.157                 -4.209                  0.655                 -4.027
                            (1.283)               (1.927)**               (1.166)              (1.523)***
         (2004/5)           -1.329                  1.178                  3.892                  0.753
                            (1.649)                (2.433)               (1.580)**               (1.917)
Math 5 (2003)               -1.922                 -5.294                 -0.761                 -4.362
                            (1.490)               (2.469)**               (1.520)               (2.043)**
         (2004/5)            1.012                 -3.567                  4.138                 -2.826
                            (1.705)                (2.502)               (1.952)**               (2.177)
Notes: Each cell reports the interaction term (treatment effect) from a distinct regression.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are robust to clustering at the school level. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence,
respectively. Sample sizes are reported in brackets. Analytic samples restricted to schools within
50 miles of at least one sniper shooting. School controls in columns 2 and 4 include FTE
teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, and
percent FRL eligible. All models control for school and year fixed effects, time-variant school
controls, and district linear time trends. Sample contains data from 1998-2003 school years (6
years). Observations in 2002 for schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded from the
analytic samples. The % FRL terciles are 18 and 47. The % black terciles are 9 and 34.




                                                     53
Table 10: Schools whose Adequate Yearly Progress Proficiency Status Affected by
Sniper Attacks
                              Treated schools                 Control schools
                            (would have passed)             (would have failed)
                                   Top          Top                Top          Top
                        All                             All
                                  tercile     tercile             tercile     tercile
                      schools                         schools
                                   FRL         black               FRL         black
                         1           2           3       4           5           6
English 3                3           -          -          11         -          -
Math 3                   0          0           0          1          5          6
English 5                 -          -          0          -          -          2
Math 5                   4          5           3          18        15         17
Total                    7          5           3          30        20         25
Percent                1.5%       18.5%       7.0%        1.3%     19.8%       17.1%


Notes: Based on conservative estimates that condition on district trends
(Tables 4 and 7). Numbers are only reported for tests on which there were
statistically significant effects.




                                                     54
Appendix Table A1: Sensitivity of Baseline Estimates to Functional Form of Distance
Subject:                English 3            English 5               Math 3             Math 5
                            (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)
A. Quadratic in miles
Miles                     0.680                0.497                  0.680             0.668
                        (0.124)***          (0.136)***             (0.129)***         (0.172)***
Miles2                    -0.013              -0.009                 -0.012             -0.012
                        (0.003)***          (0.003)***             (0.003)***         (0.004)***
APE                       0.609                0.445                  0.615             0.601
                        (0.110)***          (0.120)***             (0.114)***         (0.152)***


B. Multiple discrete distance categories
0 to 5 miles              -5.406              -4.818                 -5.475             -6.071
                        (1.939)***            (5.959)              (1.011)***         (1.000)***
5 to 10 miles             -2.142               4.281                 -3.056             -3.808
                          (2.447)             (5.505)               (1.215)**         (1.076)***
Diff. (p)               0.003***               0.364                 0.050*            0.049**


N                         2,851                2,881                  2,848             2,878
Notes: The omitted category in panel B is (> 10 mi. from attack). Standard errors in parentheses
are robust to clustering at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. Analytic samples restricted to
schools within 50 miles of at least one sniper shooting. All models control for school and year
fixed effects and time-variant school controls including FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio,
total school enrollment, percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent FRL. Sample contains
data from 1998-2003 school years (6 years). Observations in 2002 for schools within 5 miles of
the Pentagon are excluded from the analytic samples.




                                                      55
Appendix Table A2: Effect of Proximity (5 miles) to Pentagon or Sniper Attack on School Pass
Rates
Specification:             Parsimonious                  Baseline                  Trends
Outcome                          (1)                       (2)                      (3)
English 3                      -5.734                     -5.880                  -2.640
  [2,880]                    (0.872)***                 (0.912)***               (1.071)**
English 5                      -2.164                     -2.391                  -1.205
  [2,911]                     (1.135)*                  (1.113)**                 (1.224)
Math 3                         -4.094                     -4.477                  -2.258
  [2,877]                    (0.850)***                 (0.810)***              (0.848)***
Math 5                         -4.275                     -4.485                  -2.183
  [2,907]                    (1.198)***                 (1.123)***               (1.257)*
School fixed effects            Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Controls                        No                         Yes                      Yes
District Trends                 No                         No                       Yes
Notes: Each cell reports the interaction term (treatment effect) from a distinct
regression, in which the treatment term indicator equals one if the school was within 5
miles of the Pentagon in 2002 or was within 5 miles of a sniper attack in 2003. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and are robust to clustering at the school level. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of
confidence, respectively. Sample sizes are reported in brackets. Analytic samples
restricted to schools within 50 miles of at least one sniper shooting. School controls
include FTE teachers, student-teacher ratio, total school enrollment, percent black,
percent Hispanic, and percent FRL eligible. All models control for school and year fixed
effects. Sample contains data from 1998-2003 school years (6 years). Observations in
2002 for schools within 5 miles of the Pentagon are excluded from the analytic samples.




                                                   56
