                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                THE EMPIRICISTS' INSURGENCY

                                              Eli Berman
                                           Aila M. Matanock

                                         Working Paper 21061
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21061


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2015




Forthcoming in Annual Review of Political Science doi: 10.1146/annurev-polisci-082312-124553.

This study, along with many of the recent empirical contributions cited, would not have been possible
without the active support of the Minerva Research Initiative. The authors acknowledge support of
Minerva award FA9550-09-1-0314, National Science Foundation award 1247743 and Office of Naval
Research contract 11583194. Opinions, findings, conclusions and recommendations are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect views of our funders. We thank our editor, James Fearon, as
well as Laia Balcells, Chris Blattman, Michael Callen, Joseph Felter, Jill Hazelton, David Laitin, Jacob
Shapiro, Paul Staniland, Erin Troland and participants in a seminar at the US Agency for International
Development for comments on drafts, without implicating them in our mistakes. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Eli Berman and Aila M. Matanock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Empiricists' Insurgency
Eli Berman and Aila M. Matanock
NBER Working Paper No. 21061
April 2015
JEL No. F51,F52,H56,N76,N85,N87,O0

                                              ABSTRACT

Research on insurgency has been invigorated this past decade by better data, improved methods, and
the urgency of understanding active engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan. This empiricists’ insurgency
reinforces a classic literature on the essential role of civilians while challenging older theories about
how they affect conflict outcomes. It provides a general framework describing “irregular” insurgencies
(where government capacity exceeds rebel capacity), which is analytically cohesive and empirically
tested using subnational data from multiple conflicts. The new research provides guidance on intervention
design, including governance improvement, development programs, and rules of engagement. The
design of interventions matters: some key evidence comes from measuring the effects of misguided
policies. The framework may enable better conceived and implemented interventions, including foreign
engagements with and without troop deployment, depending on the type of insurgency and mindful
of political limitations. We position these findings in the literature, and highlight directions for future
research, including legal aspects of countering insurgency.


Eli Berman
Department of Economics, 508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
elib@ucsd.edu

Aila M. Matanock
210 Barrows Hall #1950
Berkeley, CA 94720-1950
matanock@berkeley.edu
Table of Contents
 Introduction................................................................................................................................. 3
    Irregular conflict ...................................................................................................................... 4
    The role of civilians .................................................................................................................. 4
 Insurgency for empiricists: a base framework ............................................................................ 5
 Recent evidence .......................................................................................................................... 7
 Scope of the framework ............................................................................................................ 10
    Attributable information and targeting civilians ................................................................... 11
    What if civilians provide resources? ...................................................................................... 13
    Opportunity costs, predation and taxation ........................................................................... 13
    Rule of law and restrictions on combatants .......................................................................... 17
 Suggestions................................................................................................................................ 18
 Conclusions................................................................................................................................ 21
 Literature Cited ......................................................................................................................... 26




                                                                     2
Introduction
Imagine a typical environment faced by government forces (or their allies) in a modern
insurgency, perhaps a village in Afghanistan or the Philippines, where rebels ambush
government patrols or deploy improvised explosive devices (IEDs) to attack them. Preparations
for these insurgent actions are likely to be observed by civilians, community members who
could anonymously report the insurgents to government forces. Those tips from civilians are
critical. They allow government forces to leverage their advantage in technology and
equipment in order to effectively pursue insurgents who could otherwise vanish into the
population, raising the government’s chances of controlling the village. Both government forces
and insurgents therefore have strong incentives to elicit civilian tips through a variety of
methods, including winning “hearts and minds.” Both sides therefore might attempt to provide
services of value to noncombatants while avoiding gratuitous civilian casualties.

        In many senses that stylized narrative would be familiar to a reader of the classic
literature on 20th century insurgency, yet new data and methods allow a more precise
understanding of current insurgencies. Examining first the similarities, classic references dating
back to at least the communist revolution in China all describe conflicts in which winning over
the cooperation of the local population is a tactical objective (Clutterbuck 1966, Galula 1964,
Kalyvas 2006, Mao 1937, Thompson 1966). Bing West’s personal account, The Village, from
Vietnam, describes this setting in very clear detail (2003). These conflicts would all be irregular
(or asymmetric), by which we mean that the government forces have a clear advantage over
rebels in coercive capacity (i.e., munitions, manpower, equipment, or communications) that can
be applied to control territory. The U.S. Army field manual designed to guide counterinsurgency
strategy in Iraq and Afghanistan shares that “hearts and minds” logic (Kilcullen 2006, U.S. Army
2007). A shared theme in that classic literature is that treating insurgencies as conventional
warfare is deeply misguided because it neglects the consequential role that civilians play in
sharing information (Mao 1937, Nagl 2002, Popkin 1979). That argument reappears more
recently in the cross-national analysis of Lyall and Wilson (2009), who link the replacement of
foot patrols with the use of mechanized vehicles to poor information collection and ultimate
failure of counterinsurgents.

        Before diving into a framework, analysis and data, note that the scenario described
above is specific in many ways. Most importantly it describes irregular insurgencies, rather than
subnational conflicts in which the balance of capacity between government and rebels is more
symmetric. Table 1 provides examples of symmetric conflicts in the right column, and irregular
in the left. We follow Kalyvas and Balcells (2010) in arguing for the importance of this
distinction.

                                      [Table 1 about here ]

                                                3
Irregular conflict
Irregular tactics allow rebel groups to persist in fighting stronger governments despite their
weakness, by blending back into the civilian population after an attack (Arreguín-Toft 2001,
Lyall & Wilson 2009). The willingness of civilians to silently accept that reintegration is a critical
resource for insurgents. If civilians inform about the rebels’ identity and location then the
government can bring to bear its advantage in capacity to act decisively.

        From a policy perspective, irregular conflict characterizes most civil conflicts in which
the U.S. and other Western governments are likely to be involved, even after Afghanistan, if
only because Western intervention tends to create asymmetry. Irregular conflict has decreased
since the end of the Cold War, as it especially well-documented across African cases (e.g. Reno
2011), but it remains the most common form of subnational conflict, accounting for 54 percent
of conflicts and 41 percent of conflict-years (Kalyvas & Balcells 2010). Over the past few years,
these have been the conflicts in which the West has intervened: in the NATO operation in Libya
in 2011 and in the French-led intervention in Mali in 2013: local information allowed
intervening parties to effectively use their asymmetric advantage to target combatants,
recalling the logic of our motivating example.

         In contrast, in conventional (i.e., symmetric) insurgencies, government and rebel forces
have comparable capacities, as in the Liberian civil war in which both sides had low capacity
(Lidow 2012). In conventional conflicts, even if governments or rebel groups receive
information, they generally cannot use it to create an overwhelming advantage. For instance,
knowing who the opposing commander is, or where he is, is of little value if he is in a well-
protected bunker too far behind enemy lines to be targeted with available means. In these
symmetric subnational conflicts, both sides may still use violence for similar ends as in
conventional interstate wars (e.g. Balcells 2010), but information is less useful operationally
(Ellis 1999, Reno 1999).

The role of civilians
Among irregular insurgencies, the framework is circumscribed by two additional assumptions
that the classic literature is sometimes vague about: (a) the consequential action of
noncombatants is information sharing, rather than supplying resources, recruits or perhaps
shelter to combatants; (b) information can be shared anonymously, without endangering the
civilian who snitches.2 Those assumptions position us in the set of subnational conflicts in the
top left corner of Table 1. Importantly, we also make the strong assumption that neither side
actively targets civilians through coercion or intimidation. This may seem an unusual starting

2
  Another clear scope limitation is that civilians are assumed to respond to incentives. If not, in an irregular conflict
in which civilians can take consequential actions and are irreconcilably committed to one side, combatants may
resort to forced resettlement (e.g. Zhukov 2014), ethnic cleansing or even genocide to gain and maintain control of
territory.

                                                           4
point, given the emphasis in the literature on civilian massacres (e.g. Kalyvas 2012); however,
the recent literature focuses has less to say about that disturbing phenomenon—perhaps for
lack of evidence—so we focus first on the strategies of combatants, and then return to discuss
targeting of civilians within that broader context. We also discuss below how the scope of this
framework might be expanded by allowing attributable information sharing (with both
government and rebels), taxation, extortion, and repeated interactions.

        Our objective is to review the recent empirical literature on irregular insurgency, which
suggests that a framework built on these assumptions is relevant, discuss its relationship with
the literature—both current and classic—speculate on the relevance to future conflicts, and to
policy, and suggest directions for future research. We concentrate on conflict at a local level,
which will be less compelling if the government decides not to contest that particular location.
These political choices are important limitations to the effectiveness of counterinsurgency. We
return to that scope limitation and its policy implications below. We emphasize recent
subnational empirical results, and focus on quantitative research although qualitative research
may be needed to fill some of the gaps we identify in the literature, which Blattman and Miguel
(2010) argues is critical to a research agenda that aspires to develop and test theories of
subnational conflict.

Insurgency for empiricists: a base framework
Figure 1 provides a schematic description of irregular insurgency under these assumptions. The
boxes represent the three types of protagonists involved, government forces, rebels, and
noncombatants (the civilian population composed of local community members). Arrows
represent actions. Government forces and rebels attack each other, as in conventional models
of conflict.34 A defining aspect of this literature is that civilians have a consequential role: they
can share information (tips) with government forces. That information, about the identity or
location of rebels, or even about local terrain and customs, makes government attacks on
rebels much more effective at controlling territory (by capturing, killing, or intimidating rebels). 5
We call this framework information-centric.

                  [Figure 1: Information-centric irregular insurgency – about here]

3
  The combatants could be fighting over territory, over some other policy concession, or simply trying to capture
economic rents. This analysis is not sensitive to changing our assumptions about combatants’ objectives.
4
  We have modeled only the violent interaction government and rebels. While this is a useful simplification that
produces important insights, and follows much of the existing literature, governments may pursue other tactics,
including offering concessions or allowing political participation (Cunningham et al. 2012, Daly 2014, Matanock
2013, Powell 2013, Staniland 2013), which may change the balance of power or even end the conflict.
5
  Why assume that civilians provide tips only to government and not to rebels? They may well do, but we
emphasize the tips provided to government because a key implication of asymmetry is that information flow is far
more valuable to government than it is to rebels, as it complements capacity. A more general approach would
measure net information-sharing with government; that would not affect testable implications.

                                                        5
        Why would civilians share information with government? Because doing so could deliver
control of their neighborhood to an entity that advantages them. Civilians might have
underlying attitudes and beliefs, formed by norms, grievances, ethnic or religious identity, and
available information, which may or may not be pliable. Assuming that these attitudes and
beliefs6 do not commit them irrevocably to supporting one side or another, information-sharing
can be influenced by the combatants’ actions: services provided by either government or
rebels, and the extent to which government and rebel attacks endanger noncombatants.
Government and rebels, mindful of the consequential choice that civilians will make in sharing
information, will therefore divert resources from conflict with each other in order to provide
services to civilians. Services might include personal security, dispute adjudication and justice,
education, health, infrastructure or even representation.

       Attacks by government forces or rebels may inadvertently harm civilians, as represented
by the arrows labeled “civilian casualties.” Here again it is in the interest of combatants to
expend effort in order to avoid harming civilians, who might in turn punish combatants by
modulating their information-sharing.

         Civilians can share information through anonymous tips. (We will revisit the anonymity
of tips, and how it influences the safety of civilians.) The anonymity of tips is an increasingly
relevant assumption as mobile phone networks become more pervasive, as they are already in
Afghanistan and Iraq. The greater the flow of information from civilians to government, the
higher the probability that a rebel attack will fail, and so the less attacks rebels will attempt.

         The framework laid out in the figure can be formally modeled as a three-sided game
(Berman, Shapiro and Felter, 2011), which is useful to verify internal consistency and to
generate testable implications. Those implications are intuitive. Before laying them out, note
that the framework can be usefully generalized in many ways: civilians could share information
with rebels, civilians may be irreconcilable with the government or the rebels, information
sharing could be attributable—so that combatants (both rebels and government) might punish
civilians for sharing information—both sides could tax (or extort) civilians, civilians could share
information out of gratitude for past acts, the interaction could be repeated, and so forth. We
explore some of these extensions below, and discuss how they change the implications of the
base framework.




6
  The literature sometimes distinguishes between attitudes (preferences and feelings), and beliefs (about facts).
For example, a citizen could empathize with government but expect it to be a terrible provider of security
(especially if it loses), and therefore rationally cooperate with rebels. This survey has little to add on that point, so
henceforth we refer to both attitudes and beliefs as “attitudes”. We revisit this point in the Suggestions section
below.

                                                            6
The framework has five major testable implications, taking the assumptions as given for now:
1. Both government and rebels have an incentive to provide services, an incentive which
increases in the value of information shared.

2. Service provision by government will reduce rebel violence, as it increases information
sharing with government, which in turn increases the risk of failure for rebels, should they
attack, wasting rebel effort.

2a. A related implication is that projects that are (a) created to address the needs of the
civilians in the local community, and (b) conditioned on information sharing by the community
(i.e. revoked when information is not shared) will be more violence-reducing. In practice,
smaller projects are more likely to have these characteristics than larger projects, both because
they are likely to be developed in consultation with the local community and because they are
more easily revoked.

2b. A further implication is that innovations that increase the value of projects to residents will
make them more violence-reducing (e.g., including development professionals or, potentially,
community input in design and implementation).

3. Security provided by the government and service provision are complementary activities, for
two reasons. First, the greater the security that the government can provide to service
providers, the more effective will service provision be. Second, following on the asymmetry
assumption, the greater the capacity of government forces to suppress rebels, the more value
they obtain from tips that flow as a result of service provision.

4. Civilian casualties reduce civilian support for whichever side caused the casualties, which
allows the other side to increase either attacks (for rebels) or attack suppression (for
government). The logic is (again) through the effect of anticipated civilian casualties on the
calculation of civilians in deciding whether to share tips.

5. Innovations that make anonymous tips to government easier for civilians can reduce rebel
violence; these are often technical innovations.

Recent evidence
The conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq and several other ongoing subnational conflicts have
generated unprecedented amounts of data on political violence in asymmetric conflicts like that
described by Figure 1. Improvements in data collection, as well as an increased willingness of
government agencies to share data, have created an unprecedented opportunity for empirical
analysis of multiple conflicts.




                                                 7
       We now compare, in turn, the predictions of the base framework, to recent empirical
findings.

1. The framework’s first prediction is that both government and rebels will provide services in
any territory they control, to induce information sharing. Importantly, their motivation need
not be due to a concern for the wellbeing of civilians; they could care only about the value of
civilians in providing information. A clear example is service provision by US forces in Iraq and
Afghanistan under the Commanders Emergency Response Program (CERP). These development
funds, which were spent on projects chosen by battalions and brigades, were
disproportionately allocated to communities with the highest predicted levels of violence
(Adams 2014, Berman et al 2011b), rather than those with the largest population or the
greatest economic need. Another example is the implementation of land reform in Colombia,
which was concentrated in areas where violence posed the greatest risk to elites (Albertus &
Kaplan 2013).

         The same is true of rebels: rebel provision of services is apparently widespread, but has
not until recently been systematically documented.7 (The U.S. counterinsurgency manual refers
to it only in passing (U.S. Army 2007)). For example, using retrospective surveys, Heger (2010)
documents community services provided by the Irish Republican Army; Keister (2010) describes
services provided by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Moro National Liberation Front
in the southern Philippines; and, Diaz et al. (2014) report on services provided by drug
trafficking organizations in Mexico. Flanigan (2008) uses personal interviews to document
provision of similar sets of basic municipal services by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam (LTTE)
in Sri Lanka and Hezbollah in Lebanon. Berman (2009) describes, using secondary sources, the
provision of services by Hamas, Hezbollah, the Mahdi Army, and the Taliban. These sources and
anecdotal evidence suggest that when rebels control territory, they typically provide at least
some form of security and dispute adjudication services to noncombatants, apparently at low
cost to themselves. New research on rebel institutions attempts to explain systematic variation
in such provision (e.g. Arjona 2014, Arjona et al Forthcoming, Huang 2014).

2. Second, the framework implies that service provision by government will reduce rebel
violence, if it in fact makes civilians better off.89 Direct evidence for that implication again

7
  An exception is a careful study of land redistribution and other service provision by Maoist rebels in China (Hinton
1966).
8
  Recent work theorizes that different types of group structures, organizations, and constellations produce
variation in violence against the government, and explores how effective counterinsurgency campaigns are against
that violence (an entire review could be written, but, for example, see Cunningham et al. 2012, Metternich et al.
2013, Shapiro 2013, Staniland 2014). This research suggests that some rebels may be less susceptible to disruption
of their leadership structure, even if attacks are foiled.
9
  As with rebel groups, government structures, organizations, and constellations also produce variation in how
effective counterinsurgency campaigns (again, an entire review could be written on this topic, but, for example, on

                                                          8
comes from the CERP programs in Iraq and Afghanistan. Since CERP projects were typically
conducted in consultation with local communities, we think that they generally did improve
welfare of civilians. Projects in both countries were remarkably cost-effective in reducing
violence: in Iraq, Berman, Shapiro and Felter (2011b) find that a dollar of CERP spending per
capita is estimated to have reduced violence by 1.6 incidents per 100,000 residents over a half
year. During the period of highest violence during U.S. involvement in Iraq, incidents averaged
59 per 100,000, which would have cost $37 per capita to remediate at this rate. Adams (2014)
replicates a qualitatively similar result for CERP spending in Afghanistan for the 2011-2013
period. Albertus and Kaplan (2013) show that where implemented, land reform did reduce
violence.

2a. The related implication that small projects are most effective at reducing violence also find
support in the data. In Iraq the violence reduction associated with a dollar of CERP spending per
capita is about five times larger for projects budgeted at less than $50,000, than those with
larger budgets (Berman et al 2011b). In Afghanistan, Adams (2014) finds that small CERP
projects are significantly more violence reducing as well.

2b. Assuming that development expertise make projects more valuable to residents, we can
test indirectly whether more valuable projects are more violence-reducing. Berman et al
(2013b) interact spending in three development programs (small CERP, large CERP and one
USAID program) with the presence of a Provisional Reconstruction team in the same district.
Those teams include 9‐15 development experts from USAID and other agencies living locally
and advising on projects. In all three cases, expertise increases the violence-reducing effect of a
dollar of spending, that increase being large and statistically significant for small CERP projects.
(e.g. Long 2010) Although experts in Iraq improved outcomes, international interveners do not
always increase effectiveness, perhaps because their expertise is not effectively developed or
deployed (e.g., recently, Autesserre 2014).

Not all programs or economic activity would be violence-reducing in this framework, as we will
see in the discussion of extortion, predation and taxation below. That general question is
related to the complementarity between security and economic activity, which we turn to now.

3. The framework’s third prediction is that security and development spending are
complementary in reducing violence. Evidence from the CERP data in Iraq, as well as another
USAID program, support that prediction: the violence-reducing effects of the programs are
enhanced by troop strength in the same district (Berman et al., 2013b). In fact, in the absence

military culture and practice, see Long 2010, Lyall and Wilson 2009). Much of this existing work simply suggests
that deviation from implementing the strategy of using conditional incentives to produce information undermines
the counterinsurgency campaign; these factors, however, could also have other effects, of course.


                                                       9
of troops in the district, none of these three programs (which are quite cost-effective on
average) were statistically violence-reducing at all (regardless of size). We revisit the question
of insecure development projects below.

4. Given the evidence that civilians reward combatants for service provision, it should not be
surprising that they would punish combatants for generating civilian casualties, the fourth
prediction of the theory. That implication is tested in several recent research papers. Condra
and Shapiro (2012) find that in Iraq both coalition (allied and Iraqi) and rebel forces suffer
increased attacks in the weeks following civilian casualties that they generate. Condra et al
(2010) finds the same for civilian casualties caused by international forces in Afghanistan,
though not for Taliban forces. That pattern is consistent with survey evidence on civilian
attitudes toward combatants in Afghanistan, which finds that in Taliban dominated areas
international forces are blamed for civilian casualties, while Taliban forces are less so (Blair et al
2014, Lyall 2013).

5. The evidence so far can be interpreted as consistent with a framework in which civilians
reward or punish combatants through a variety of mechanisms. An implication specific to the
information-sharing mechanism is the fifth prediction: innovations that make anonymous tips
easier to provide will increase their provision. That prediction is directly tested with data on the
introduction of cellular coverage in an area. Cellular coverage explicitly enables tip sharing with
government forces, which then favors those forces by reducing rebel violence, as demonstrated
during the conflict in Iraq, where the expansion of cellular coverage into peripheral areas had
the predicted violence-reducing effect (Shapiro & Weidmann forthcoming).

Overall, the information-centric framework described in Figure 1 performs well in testing, using
data from a small set of recent conflicts. We turn now to exploring how limiting its assumptions
might be, when compared to the full literature on subnational conflicts.

Scope of the framework
With an empirically tested framework in hand, it is natural to ask what scope of subnational
conflicts it can help us understand, within the vast literature on insurgencies and civil wars.10 In
this section we interrogate the assumptions of that base framework, use them to create a
taxonomy of subnational conflicts, then see if the insights carry over into other categories when
we relax assumptions. Table 1 (above) illustrates our approach. The framework we describe
assumes that the role of civilians is in choosing whether or not to provide information, as
opposed to providing some other support, and that information sharing is anonymous, situating
the base framework in the top row of the “irregular” conflict column. Taking this approach to
scope, our interest is in knowing whether the insights still apply if we stray out of the top left

10
     For recent reviews, see Blattman and Miguel 2010, and Kalyvas 2012.

                                                         10
box—for instance when information sharing is attributable (as in the Greek civil war), rather
than anonymous (as in Afghanistan or Iraq)?

Attributable information and targeting civilians
We begin with two assumptions best relaxed simultaneously: unattributable tips and no
targeting of civilians. If information shared is attributable rather than anonymous, the civilian
doing so faces the risk of retaliatory violence. Anonymous information sharing was assumed
above in order to provide a simple, fairly realistic description of the setting in Iraq and
Afghanistan, where a civilian could call a tip line without attribution11 (and measures of
retaliatory violence were not available). Though empirical evidence on anonymous tips is by its
nature hard to come by, recall that empirical support for the information-centric theory comes
from the suppressive effect of the availability of cellphone coverage on violence in Iraq (Shapiro
& Weidmann forthcoming).

        Yet attribution and retaliation play a critical role in the literature on irregular conflicts,12
most importantly in the control-collaboration model which originated to explain spatial
variation in the use of indiscriminate (as opposed to selective) violence (Kalyvas 2006).13 In that
model, selective violence provides more effective incentives, and so it is preferred by
combatants, and used in higher proportion in areas in which they have better control –and
hence more tools to motivate collaboration. That prediction is validated by data from both the
Greek civil war and in analysis of violence perpetrated by both the Vietcong and US forces
during the Vietnam War (Kalyvas & Kocher 2009). More recently, (Lyall 2009) finds that Russian
troops in Chechnya fired artillery indiscriminately on civilians in local communities, and that this
gruesome tactic successfully suppressed attacks on Russian forces. Recent research also
suggests that collective punishment is most effective when the potential support populations
and the geographic combat areas are small (Downes 2007). Interestingly, in analyzing the more
recent case of Israeli suppression of Palestinian rebel groups during the Intifada, Bhavnani et al
(2011) find that Israeli counterinsurgents use a higher proportion of selective violence than the
model predicts, even in areas that it does not control.14 The authors attribute that deviation to




11
   Anonymous tip lines do present the problem of separating signal from noise. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
Insurgents will use tip lines to generate misinformation and noise, given a chance.
12
   Alternatively, communities could protect themselves from retribution (by both government and rebel forces)
through dispute resolution and brokered agreements, as documented in Colombia (Kaplan 2013).
13
   Note that targeting civilians to influence their cooperation, in this context, is still distinct from a models of
terrorism, in which civilians are targeted in order to induce some political change (e.g. Crenshaw & Pimlott 1997,
de Figueiredo and Weingast 2001, Shapiro 2013). Pape et al. (2014) seeks to integrate logics of control and
coercion to build a general model of civilian targeting by militant groups.


                                                         11
an overwhelming asymmetric advantage in the capacity of Israeli counterinsurgents to gather
information and act on it.

         What happens in the information-centric framework if a civilian must flag down a
soldier to share information, exposing himself to possible attribution? The probability of being
identified and punished introduces a cost of information-sharing. That cost would reduce
civilians’ incentives to share tips, but not eliminate them, since the benefits of supplying tips
might be quite large when information is scarce. In that expanded framework combatants still
have incentives to compete in service provision, and to avoid civilian casualties, in order to
incentivize tips, and those efforts are rewarded in the sense that they suffer fewer attacks. The
main implications of the base framework are not qualitatively changed by allowing attributable
information sharing, though civilians are less likely to share tips if they can be identified and
punished.

        While the information-centric framework and the control-collaboration model both
revolve around information-sharing by civilians, they former emphasizes the benign policy
implications for service provision by combatants, while the latter draws out the coercive
implications for intimidation and violence (both indiscriminate and selective). An omnibus
framework allows both, and it appears that nothing in either approach precludes combatants
simultaneously using both service provision and violence on civilians. While we know of no
systematic study, survey evidence indicates that the Irish Republican Army, for instance, did
both simultaneously (Heger 2010), and anecdotes suggest that the same is true of all service-
providing rebel groups. We return to the question of targeting civilians below, in our discussion
of rule of law.

         Attribution has tactical implications. When civilians can provide support anonymously,
government (or rebels) might prefer to reward them with local public goods, rather than
providing individual payments that would identify the supporter, in effect choosing
indiscriminate over selective rewards. If government has an advantage over rebels in the cost of
public good provision, it will then better be able to suppress rebel violence in the case of
anonymous support. On the other hand, should government have a cost advantage in
protecting civilian supporters, it will be advantaged in the case of attributable support.
Elections provide a form of attribution at the polling station level, as Steele (2011)
demonstrates with evidence of post-election displacement in neighborhoods supporting a rebel
affiliated party in northwest Colombia, and Balcells and Steele (2012) show more broadly in
Colombia and Spain.
14
  Empirical research on Colombia and Vietnam is generally supportive of the control-collaboration model, though
with caveats: most notably, Colombian paramilitaries gain information from rebel defectors rather than civilians in
Vargas (2009); while government selective violence in Vietnam may have been complemented by the threat of
indiscriminate violence in Douglass (2012).

                                                        12
        Allowing for attribution and targeted retribution implies cascade dynamics. If support is
attributable, civilians may well keep their preferences private, publicly favoring one side or
another only when the act is collective enough to depress the probability of individual
punishment. That logic leads to tipping points and cascade dynamics in collective action and
preference revelation (Kuran 1991, Kuran 1995, Kuran 1997, Lohmann 1994). In contrast, in
unattributable contexts, those with private preferences for one side or the other can act on
them with or without collective expression.

What if civilians provide resources?
So far we have assumed that the role of civilians is to provide information (or to refuse). Yet
much of the theoretical literature on subnational conflict, and the classic empirical literature,
assumes alternatively that the consequential action of civilians is to provide recruits and other
material support (Blattman and Miguel 2010), a resource-centric approach. Still other parts of
the literature remain vague about what the role of civilians is, such as the counterinsurgency
manual (U.S. Army 2007), which can be understood as both information-centric and resource-
centric.

The key aspect of information in the base framework is the strong complementarity it has with
government capacity, as illustrated in the introductory narrative. If civilians provide recruits or
other resources that are not strong complements for government capacity, then the
predictions of the information-centric framework will generally not follow. For instance,
government service-provision may provoke rather than reduce rebel violence in a resource-
centric model, since it may increase the marginal returns to violence by more than it increases
the marginal costs.15

Opportunity costs, predation and taxation
Evidence on the primary role civilians might play in irregular conflict is elusive. Certainly rebels
were not born combatants, so recruitment must have occurred, but those recruits might not be
local and the recruitment of local civilians might not be as important in generating violence as is
information. So evidence on the role of civilians is indirect, and requires extending the base
framework with specific mechanisms.

        The “opportunity cost” mechanism posits that the primary means by which civilians
influence violence is by voluntarily providing recruits to rebels. If so, increases in employment
rates should be associated with declines in violence, and if economic activity increases
employment, it should decrease violence as well. This approach operates by bidding up the


15
  An exception would be if recruits were to provide local knowledge, as Felter (2005) documents among
counterinsurgents in the Philippines and Lyall (2009) suggests for Chechnya. In that case the implications of the
base framework are retained.

                                                         13
wages of potential recruits to insurgency, raising the opportunity cost of their time as
insurgents, as in Becker’s theory of crime (Becker 1968).

        This variant is conceptually important for policy design because it has motivated “quick
intervention” job creation programs, which were widely administered in Iraq and Afghanistan,
the idea being that they suppressed insurgency by reducing the flow of civilian recruits into
rebel forces (U.S. Army 2007). Observationally equivalent is the idea that unemployment
creates a grievance which generates support for insurgents (Brainard 2007).16 Alternatively,
resources provided by the government, rather than influencing the civilian population to not
provide recruits, might actually pay off the active rebels to stop fighting (e.g. Nielsen et al
2011). Or, increased economic activity may have an ambiguous effect on conflict because while
increasing the opportunity cost of fighting—thus reducing the likelihood of conflict—it also
increases the resources that may be contested through violence (Fearon 2008).

        Before turning to evidence on economic activity and violence, it’s useful to extend the
framework in a way that symmetrically generates that opposite prediction, by considering
extortion and taxation (Fearon 2008). The idea is that economic activity will trigger increased
violence, as combatants fight to capture economic rents (Collier 2000, Grossman 1999); it is
most developed in contest models that consider multiple sectors with different effects (Besley
& Persson 2010, Dal Bó & Dal Bó 2011, Dube & Vargas 2013). If we generalize the base
framework, extending the role of government and rebels by allowing them to tax or extort
economic rents, then economic activity (be it increased income, aid flows, or private
investment, for example) can have a violence-increasing effect: combatants might use violence
to generate revenue either by fighting to control territory where they can tax or extort, or
through taxation or extortion in contested spaces (Berman et al 2013).

        The link between economic activity and violence has been studied extensively. Across
countries income per capita is negatively correlated with subnational violence (Collier &
Hoeffler 2004, Fearon & Laitin 2003) and investment predicts stability (Kapstein & Converse
2008), though the causal direction of that relationship is debatable. Within countries the
evidence is mixed: Humphreys and Weinstein (2008) find that low wages and poverty predict
rebel recruitment in Sierra Leone (and government recruitment as well), and Verwimp (2005)
shows that poverty predicts perpetration of genocide in Rwanda; using cross-sectional
evidence across subnational regions of Africa, however, Condra (2010) concludes that rebellion
is associated with groups emanating from relatively higher income areas, while, broadening this
sample to all states and focusing on geocoded subnational data, Cederman et al (2011) find that

16
   Cross-nationally, some related results, like lower rates of male secondary schooling correlating with increased
civil war (Collier and Hoeffler 2004), suggest that this could be the mechanism, but, across studies, the evidence is
not consistent.

                                                         14
both rich and poor groups, compared to the national average, fight more often. To deal with
causal concerns one can turn to instrumental variation in income, in which a recent survey
yields mixed results (Blattman & Miguel 2010): for instance, variation in agricultural production
due to rainfall shocks is negatively correlated with violence (Miguel et al 2004),17 whereas
variation in natural resource income due to international price shocks is positively correlated
with violence (Dube & Vargas 2013).18 The explanation for these mixed results may be that the
type of conflict matters: evidence of a negative correlation of income with violence comes
from mostly symmetric conflicts in Africa, whereas flooding in Pakistan (including in areas with
irregular conflict) is associated with increased support for government (Fair et al 2014). Survey
evidence from Pakistan (again including regions with irregular conflict) indicates a positive
correlation between economic well-being and support for militants, with especially low support
among the urban poor who live in proximity to militants (Blair et al 2013, Shapiro & Fair 2010).

        Subnational evidence from three irregular conflicts in the last decade, in Iraq,
Afghanistan, and the Philippines, reveals that increased employment rates in each of those
conflicts are positively correlated with violence (Berman et al 2011a). Extortion is one possible
explanation. Other possibilities include a causal path from violence suppression to employment,
where the means by which violence is reduced (roadblocks, curfews, barriers) reduce labor
demand. Alternatively, higher incomes might make tips more expensive for government forces
to obtain. Philippine data are particularly useful because they indicate the initiator of attacks:
geospatial data on investments in the Philippines reveal that increases in investment are
associated with increases in violent attacks, predominantly government initiated attacks on
rebels—as predicted by an extension in which government is motivated to control territory by
potential tax revenue (or by denying that revenue to rebels) (Berman et al 2013a).

        Extortion and taxation have implications for program design. Their logic predicts that aid
and other government programs can increase violence, if those programs are insufficiently
secure. Crost et al (2014a) find that on learning that a World Bank development project will
arrive, violence increases in Philippine villages. Nunn and Qian (2012) find that increases in food
aid due to exogenous variation in U.S. wheat production cause increased political violence
within countries already suffering civil conflict. In contrast, Beath et al. (2012) report
experimental evidence that service provision improved perceived security without apparent
deployment of extra forces, i.e., providing no evidence of extortionary violence. Böhnke and
Zürcher (2013) report correlational evidence that aid in Afghanistan is not associated with

17
   Ciccone (2011) critiques this estimation of the relationship between rainfall and conflict on methodological
grounds, while Miguel and Satyanath (2010, 2011) respond by claiming that an effect holds even in the suggested
specifications.
18
   Besley and Persson (2011) and Bruckner and Ciccone (2010) also follow in this vein using cross-national data;
however, both mainly use more endogenous measures of income and only use instruments, either as secondary or
robustness checks.

                                                      15
increased (or decreased) security. Since the outcome measures in both studies are perceptions,
rather than incidents, and both samples were from relatively safe parts of Afghanistan, we see
this evidence as neutral on a violence-reducing mechanism and mildly contradicting the
extortion mechanism. Finally, Crost et al (2014b) report experimental evidence that conditional
cash transfers in Philippine villages reduce both violent incidents and insurgent influence. They
posit that, in contrast to the same authors’ results on development projects increasing violence,
cash transfers to individuals are hard to extort, and that they are perceived as conditional on
cooperation (implication 2a above).

        Comparing the results regarding these last two implications with those on service
provision and complementarity (2, 2a, 2b, 3), recent scholarship yields no general conclusion
that economic reconstruction suppresses violence. This is particularly true in irregular conflicts,
in which insurgents only require a small force, and only at night –by day they could work on
“quick intervention” development projects! In fact, in contrast to the violence-reducing
properties of CERP spending mentioned above, the vast majority of the $32B of reconstruction
spending by the U.S. military in Iraq tracked by Berman et al (2011b) failed to reduce violence in
the district in which it was spent.19

        A more careful conclusion is this. Reconstruction, humanitarian relief and service
provision can reduce violence in asymmetric conflicts, with both theory and evidence
suggesting sufficient conditions: small, well-secured projects, informed by development
experts, and perceived by civilians to be conditional on cooperation.

         More generally, this collection of micro-based evidence suggests that the role of
civilians and the balance of forces appear to be linked. As Balcells (2010) points out in studying
the Spanish Civil War, when forces are symmetric and fighting takes place along fronts,
information from civilians is of less operational value for taking territory. In that setting the
sheer number of recruits matters more. That logic provides a possible explanation for the
pattern we see in the incidence of cases in Table 1, which shows no studies of symmetric
conflicts in which information sharing by civilians is emphasized, and only one of an irregular
conflict in which recruiting seems to matter (the Dube and Vargas study from Colombia).
Moreover, studies that find a violence reducing-effect of economic activity appear to come
from symmetric conflicts. A possible overall explanation is that the primary role of civilians in
irregular conflicts is to provide information (which strongly complements the capacities of the




19
  About eleven percent of U.S. casualties in the Iraq war were personnel conducting reconstruction activities
(SIGIR 2012).

                                                        16
strong side), while their primary role in symmetric conflicts might be to provide recruits and
other resources, which aid both sides in about the same proportion.20

Rule of law and restrictions on combatants
We argued above in discussing the coercion-collaboration model that information sharing by
civilians provides incentives for both specific retaliation and collective punishment, by both
rebels and government. Yet government forces in modern insurgencies are often bound by
rules of engagement with combatants and civilians. While the recent set of empirical studies
tends to focus on these cases, counterinsurgent are sometimes much less constrained.
Examples include well-known conflicts, such as the British in the Second Anglo-Boer War
(Downes 2007, Swinton 1904), genocides throughout the African Great Lakes region (Prunier
2009), as well as the recent government actions in Sri Lanka against the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE). These strategies range from forced displacement to ethnic cleansing, but
we know relatively little about their use (for work exploring this, for example, see Hazelton
2011). They account for 20 to 33 percent of cases, according to different studies (Arreguín-Toft
2001, Downes 2006, Valentino 2004).

        How much information is required to implement rules of engagement, or even rule of
law? Rule of law requires information sufficient to allow successful prosecution, whereas
extrajudicial targeting may require less in the way of proof. In this way, the information-centric
approach relates to research on gangs in the U.S., or drug-trafficking organizations in Mexico
(for example, see Akerlof & Yellen 1994, Diaz-Cayeros et al 2014). As Table 2 illustrates,
informational requirements increase as institutions progress (from right to left) to methods
more respectful of human rights. Anonymous information sharing also declines if rule of law
does not allow witness anonymity.

                                             [Table 2 about here]

        In all of these cases information provision remains a central component, though the
ranges in which the civilians’ benefits from information sharing outweigh the costs may change.
Drawing on cases in this literature, and on economic theory, we suggest that as rule of law is
lost so are property rights, and with them economic efficiency. Under these circumstances
more suppressive counterinsurgency strategies may become relatively more attractive to
government forces. The longer term cost of these strategies is unclear since counterinsurgents
may lose their own credibility by shifting to them (Fearon 2008), especially in democracies
(Arreguín-Toft 2001, Merom 2003).



20
  This is not to say that recruitment is unimportant, just that material incentives are not the major mechanism for
doing so in small insurgent groups. For an analysis of characteristics enabling recruitment see Petersen (2012).

                                                        17
Suggestions
While the empirical insurgency has generated a burst of evidence-based scholarship, it is still
hard to overstate our ignorance about irregular conflicts, especially on policy-relevant
questions. For instance, theory suggests that project aid should be conditional on cooperation
with government in order to be violence reducing, yet the nature of that implicit contract is
seldom observed, so evidence for conditionality is indirect—we only know that goods more
easily withdrawn tend to be more violence suppressing, and we have survey evidence that
CERP in Afghanistan was conditionally implemented.21 More empirical research on the
mechanics of successful project aid in conflict environments would be extremely useful.22

       Evidence for information sharing as an important mechanism is also indirect, which
might be corrected with data from “tip lines,” or using retrospective data on the sources of
information flows.

        The emphasis on attitudes of civilians underlines the importance of measuring them.
Recent research has explored experimental methods for measuring attitudes, as well as actions,
in these contexts. Expressed preferences differ across different measures, depending on how
intrusive they are (Blair et al 2013, Blair et al 2012, Lyall et al 2012, Matanock & García Sanchez
2013, Rosenfeld et al 2014). Questions remain on measurement, especially as to which set of
preferences civilians will act on under particular circumstances.

        Given these measurement difficulties, we know very little about attitude changes:
preferences might be stable, particularly at extremes, so that governance improvements and
violence are only able to shift attitudes of moderates. Downes (2007), among others, argues
that this is the case, in contrast to other theories that suggest that all attitudes can be
influenced by control or, at least, expected control, as in Kalyvas (2006). Some evidence
suggests that attribution of blame and credit, beyond attitudes, is affected by existing
preferences (for example, on airstrikes in Afghanistan, see Lyall 2013).

         The literature sometimes distinguishes between attitudes (preferences and feelings)
and beliefs (about facts). CERP spending is anecdotally tied to more tips, and seems to cause
fewer attacks on troops. While evidence of CERP success may indicate attitudes changing
(winning hearts and minds), the data do not rule out the alternative possibility that CERP
spending causes civilians to believe, or expect, that CERP providers are competent and are thus
likely to continue governing. That alternative evokes a conditional compliance equilibrium (e.g.
Levi 1997). It would be useful in designing programs to know whether their success is due to
inducing cooperation, changing attitudes, or signaling competence.

21
  Berman et al 2011b.
22
  Specifically, the framework and empirics suggest sufficient conditions, as small, conditional, secure and well
informed projects are effective. Whether all those conditions are necessary has not been demonstrated.

                                                         18
       Experimental evidence now indicates that exposure to violence induces an extreme
preference for certainty in economic choices of residents of conflict zones (Callen et al 2014c).
Implications for political choices made by civilians, including information sharing, remain
unexplored.

        Information technology provides new opportunities for surveys and interventions in
conflict environments. For example, Driscoll and Lidow (2014) managed to conduct a
representative survey of civilians in the dangerous chaos of Mogadishu in 2012 in the midst of
high levels of violence. They used satellite imaging to generate a sampling frame and a
combination of passive GPS and real time surveying over the mobile network to validate
enumerator locations while protecting the safety of their enumerators. Blumenstock et al
(2014) investigate whether mobile money (cellphone based transactions) provide an
alternative to ATMs and carrying cash in insecure environments, revealing that access to
currency (i.e., cashing out) remains the vulnerable part of the mechanism. Callen et al (2014b)
demonstrated the effectiveness of mobile phones in governance improvement, to monitor
medical employee absence in clinics and communicate absences in real time to administrators.
The new pervasiveness of mobile networks, even in irregular conflict environments, could
revolutionize the nature of information sharing, institutional innovations, and “big data” based
research.

         More broadly, the base framework, and the literature generally, treats combatants and
their foreign allies as a unitary entity, despite frequent evidence of disagreement about
preferences, strategy and methods—between NATO Afghanistan and the Karzai government,
for instance.23 In fact, a disproportionate amount of recent existing evidence comes from two
conflicts–Iraq and Afghanistan—featuring external counterinsurgents, an imbalance that future
empirical studies will hopefully correct. Returning to Figure 1, imagine a box labeled “Allies”
sitting above each of “Government” and “Rebels”, allowing an analysis of those relationships.
When threatening to withdraw assistance, foreign allies trade off the stability of the local
combatant against its compliance in counterterrorism, control of ungoverned spaces, and
quality of governance. We know very little about the responsiveness of combatants to
incentives provided by foreign allies, or why foreign allies sometimes abandon conditionality in
those relationships. Research along those lines is well motivated by current policy concerns.

         The relationship between allies and combatants is a macro level question, so it is worth
emphasizing that the base framework is limited in scope to the micro level of a village or
district. Reducing violence locally may be necessary but cannot be sufficient to decide a larger
insurgency. Broader expectations about the future quality of government, support by allies, and

23
  For exceptions, see Barnett & Zürcher 2008, Ghani 2009, Lake 2010, on statebuilding, and Padro et al 2012, on
agency among allies practicing counterinsurgency.

                                                       19
the resilience of power sharing deals and truces might be equally important (Fearon 2004,
Leites & Wolf 1970, Walter 2002). The local success of counterinsurgency against Sunni rebels
in the “Anbar Awakening” in 2006/7 (Biddle et al 2012), and its’ dramatic unraveling in 2014
provide an example of the dangers of partnership with a local ally with weak motivation to
control parts of its own territory.24

         These “macro” level questions lend themselves less to analysis by empiricists, for lack of
large subnational samples, yet individual expectations of macro variables are still
consequential, and measurable. For instance, in a dynamic setting, it is not clear that a forward
looking civilian, knowing that the foreign ally will eventually depart—along with its support for
the local ally, does not largely discount any temporary development assistance. (Practitioners
call this “renting hearts and minds.”) How the campaign is going may also influence
expectations (e.g. Gelpi et al 2005/06). In that context the challenge for interveners would be
how to signal a long term commitment to a local ally. How that signal is perceived locally is an
empirically tractable question.

         To expand that example, past research indicates that the level of commitment of
international interveners has important implications for efficacy (Matsuzaki 2012), but is this
driven by expectations about future control or about what (conditional) resources they provide
while on the ground? Those questions will likely become even more important as the U.S. and
its allies withdraw from Afghanistan and focus on smaller, more cooperative missions, like the
recent French military assistance in Mali, or interventions to guarantee election-based power
sharing bargains (Matanock 2014). Those critical research questions, which have been
developed carefully through case studies and comparative analysis, have micro-level
implications that could be empirically investigated using the new tools for measuring attitudes.

        Can a temporary intervention in conflict environments induce the type of persistent
improvements in governance that would change civilian expectations? That is a motivation for
Community Driven Development (CDD) programs in more secure environments (Mansuri & Rao
2004), and for several dozen ambitious democracy and governance enhancement experiments
in conflict and post-conflict environments (Moehler 2010). For instance, experimental evidence
on a CDD in post-conflict Liberia shows improvements in measures of local social cohesion
(Fearon et al 2009). On the other hand, Casey et al (2012) and Humphreys et al (2014) find no
effect of CDD interventions on local institutions in post-conflict Sierra Leone and Congo,

24
  Governments may have incentives not to attempt to control all of their territory, and foreign interveners even
more so. Some studies provide evidence on micro-level support in both domestic and foreign interventions (for
example, see Blair et al. 2013, Blair et al. 2014, Lyall et al. 2013, Matanock & Garcia-Sanchez 2014, Shapiro & Fair
2010, but also studies on U.S. opinion during these conflicts, such as Gelpi, et al. 2005/06). New theories need to
be developed regarding how local support implies sustained and successful COIN. Domestic politics of potential
interveners, including perceptions by different actors of the stakes, are important (e.g. Sanaei, 2014).

                                                         20
respectively, and an anti-corruption experiment in Pakistan indicates that public employee
absence is a symptom of political rents accruing to entrenched patronage networks (Callen et al
2014a). Experimental evidence from Afghanistan suggests that electoral corruption can be
reduced using a mobile phone based intervention (Callen & Long forthcoming), and that doing
so improves both attitudes toward government and willingness to share information with it
about rebel activities (Berman et al 2014), when measured a few months later. In general, this
literature shows mixed results for CDD interventions, though more hopeful results for anti-
corruption and dispute resolution treatments, while evidence of longer term treatment effects
on outcomes or even on expectations remains absent, at least for now (Moehler 2010).

       Finally, while it is intuitive to imagine extending the base framework to a repeated
interaction, with government, rebels and civilians maximizing their long term wellbeing, that
model has not yet been solved technically. In that respect much of our intuition about how
expectations are formed, how signals might matter, and how capacity building affects current
choices, for instance, has not been checked for internal validity.

Conclusions
Newly available data and methods have enabled a wave of new research activity. We have
surveyed only the highlights. (The Empirical Studies of Conflict (ESOC) project—which both
authors participate in—provides links to some of this research.)25 That research, a small
insurgency in itself, has led to a firmer understanding of irregular (asymmetric) conflicts,
organized around a framework that seems to describe most cases. In particular, the role
civilians play, and the kinds of policies that influence their behavior are now much better
understood. The framework that emerges suggests fruitful avenues for further research on
governance, rule of law, attitudes, dynamics and agency between allies.

        Over the last decade, while Western militaries were slow to shift from conventional
approaches to a model that recognized the consequential actions of civilians, aid organizations
were also slow to recognize that development program designs, however effective they may be
in secure environments, might be wasteful or even violence-inducing in insecure locations. In
particular, evidence-based analysis prescribes a shift away from designs based on an
opportunity-cost model towards those based on an information-centric approach in
asymmetric conflict environments, which emphasizes governance and service provision. These
conclusions may be particularly salient in non-coercive “boots off the ground” interventions in
future conflicts.

       The inferential power of these empirical studies, enabled by access to high-quality
administratively collected data, invites a reconsideration of the data infrastructure available to

25
     For a more complete list of recent papers, see esoc.princeton.edu.

                                                          21
researchers on subnational conflict --especially in light of the controversial outcomes of costly
multinational interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Had better data been available faster for
research, we believe that better informed decisions could have been made, at the tactical,
strategic, and public policy levels. NGOs such as Iraq Body Count, Shahuda and the South Asia
Terrorism Portal now provide high quality data. Initiatives such as AidData and ESOC have the
potential to provide a valuable public service by aggregating information from many newly
available sources in a single user-friendly site, enabling advances in research and policy analysis.
The academic community and funders of academic research might consider ways of building
out those initiatives.




                                                22
Table 1: Types of Subnational Conflict

          Civilians                                         Balance of forces

          Provide             Irregular (rebel < govt.)              Symmetric (rebel  govt.)

Information, anonymous        Afghanistan, Iraq, and Philippines
                              (Berman et al 2011), Algeria (Galula
                              1964), China (Mao 1937), Guatemala
                              (Stoll 1993), Malaya (Clutterbuck
                              1966, Thompson 1966), Vietnam
                              (Popkin 1979, Kalyvas & Kocher
                              2009, West 2013)

Information, attributable     Greek civil war
                              (Kalyvas 2006)

Recruits or other resources   Colombia                               Syria [current],
                              (Dube & Vargas 2013)
                                                                     Azerbaijan (Kalyvas &Balcells 2010),
                                                                     Bosnia (Kalyvas &Balcells 2010), Congo
                                                                     (Kalyvas &Balcells 2010), Georgia (Kalyvas
                                                                     &Balcells 2010), Liberia (Ellis 1999, Lidow
                                                                     2012), Rwanda [1994] (Kalyvas &Balcells
                                                                     2010), Somalia [1991] (Kalyvas & Balcells
                                                                     2010)

Note: The classification of conflicts comes from Kalyvas and Balcells (2010), who graciously
shared their data.




                                                23
    Table 2: Suppression across Different Rule Scenarios

 Opponent         Gangs in           Taliban in            Boers in South Africa
                    U.S.            Afghanistan



Legal Basis     Rule of Law    Rules of Engagement               No Rules



Information
                  Prosecute            Target                 Target/Coerce
requirement

Government
                   Welfare            Security                   Security
   seeks




                                          24
Figure 1: Information-centric insurgency




                                           25
Literature Cited
Adams G. 2014. Conflict of Interest: Military-Led Development Insights from Afghanistan for
         Warfighters, Development Practitioners, and Policy Makers. Thesis, MPA International
         Development, Harvard University
Akerlof G, Yellen J. 1994. Gang Behavior, Law Enforcement and Community Behavior. In Values and
         Public Policy, ed. Aaron, Mann, Taylor. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
Albertus M, Kaplan O. 2013. Land Reform as a Counterinsurgency Policy: Evidence from Colombia.
         Journal of Conflict Resolution 57: 198-231
Arjona A. 2014. Wartime Institutions: A Research Agenda. Journal of Conflict Resolution
Arjona A, Kasfir N, Mampilly Z, eds. Forthcoming. Rebel Governance in Civil War. Cambridge, U.K.:
         Cambridge University Press
Arreguín-Toft I. 2001. How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conﬂict. International Security
         26: 93–128
Autesserre, Séverine. 2014. Peaceland: Conflict Resolution and the Everyday Politics of International
         Intervention: Cambridge University Press.
Balcells L. 2010. Rivalry and Revenge: Violence against Civilians in Conventional Civil Wars. International
         Studies Quarterly 54: 291-313
Balcells L, Steele A. 2012. Warfare, Political identities, and Displacement in Spain and Colombia, Centro
         de Estudios Avanzados en Ciencias Sociales., Madrid
Barnett M, and Zürcher, C. 2008. The Peacebuilder’s contract: How External statebuilding reinforces
         weak statehood. in The Dilemmas of Statebuilding: Confronting the contradictions of postwar
         peace operations, ed. R. Paris, T. Sisk, New York: Routledge, pp. 23-52.
Beath A, Christia F, Enikolopov R. 2012. Winning hearts and minds through development? evidence from
         a field experiment in Afghanistan.
Becker G. 1968. Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach. Journal of Political Economy: 169-217
Berman E. 2009. Radical, Religious, and Violent. Cambridge, M.A.: MIT Press
Berman E, Callen M, Felter JH, Shapiro JN. 2011a. Do Working Men Rebel? Insurgency and
         Unemployment in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines. Journal of Conflict Resolution 55: 496-
         528
Berman E, Callen MJ, Gibson C, Long JD. 2014. Election Fairness and Government Legitimacy in
         Afghanistan. In National Bureau of Economic Research WP
Berman E, Felter J, Kapstein E, Troland E. 2013a. Predation, Taxation, Investment and Violence: Evidence
         from the Philippines. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper
Berman E, Felter JH, Shapiro JN, Troland E. 2013b. Modest, Secure and Informed: Successful
         Development in Conflict Zones. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 103: 512-17
Berman E, Shapiro JN, Felter JH. 2011b. Can Hearts and Minds Be Bought? The Economics of
         Counterinsurgency in Iraq. Journal of Political Economy 119: 766-819
Besley T, Persson T. 2010. State Capacity, Conflict, and Development. Econometrica 78: 1-34
Besley T, Persson T. 2011. The Logic of Political Violence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 1411-
         45
Bhavnani R, Miodownik D, Hyun Jin Choi. 2011. Three Two Tango: Territorial Control and Selective
         Violence in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. Journal of Conflict Resolution 55: 133-58
Biddle S, Friedman JA, Shapiro JN. 2012. Testing the Surge: Why Did Violence Decline in Iraq in 2007.
         International Security 37: 7-40
Blair G, Christine Fair C, Malhotra N, Shapiro JN. 2013. Poverty and Support for Militant Politics:
         Evidence from Pakistan. American Journal of Political Science 57: 30-48



                                                    26
Blair G, Imai K, Lyall J. 2012. Comparing and Combining List and Endorsement Experiments: Evidence
         from Afghanistan. Princeton: Princeton University
Blair G, Imai K, Lyall J. 2014. Comparing and Combining List and Endorsement Experiments: Evidence
         from Afghanistan. American Journal of Political Science: n/a-n/a
Blattman C, Miguel E. 2010a. Civil War. Journal of Economic Literature 48: 3-57
Blattman C, Miguel E. 2010b. Civil War. Journal of Economic Literature 48
Blumenstock J, Callen M, Ghani T. 2014. Violence and Financial Decisions: Evidence from Mobile Money
         in Afghanistan. University of Washington
Böhnke JR, Zürcher C. 2013. Aid, minds and hearts. The Impact of aid in conflict Zones, Conflict
         Management and Peace Science 30(5): 411-432.
Brainard L, and D.H. Chollet. 2007. Introduction. In Too Poor for Peace? Global Poverty, Conflict and
         Security in the 21st Century, ed. LaDHC Brainard. Washington DC: Brookings
Brückner M, Ciccone A. 2010. International Commodity Prices, Growth and the Outbreak of Civil War in
         Sub-Saharan Africa*. The Economic Journal 120: 519-34
Callen M, Gulzar S, Hasanain A, Khan Y. 2014a. The Political Economy of Public Employee Absence:
         Experimental Evidence from Pakistan. UCLA
Callen M, Gulzar S, Hasanain A, Khan Y, Rezaee A. 2014b. Personalities and Public Sector Performance:
         Evidence from a Health Experiment in Pakistan. UCLA
Callen M, Isaqzadeh M, Long JD, Sprenger C. 2014c. Violence and Risk Preference: Experimental
         Evidence from Afghanistan. The American Economic Review 104: 123-48
Callen M, Long JD. forthcoming. Institutional corruption and election fraud: Evidence from a field
         experiment in Afghanistan. American Economic Review
Casey K, Glennerster R, Miguel E. 2012. Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts Using a
         Preanalysis Plan*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
Cederman L-E, Weidmann NB, Gleditsch KS. 2011. Horizontal Inequalities and Ethnonationalist Civil War:
         A Global Comparison. American Political Science Review 105: 478-95
Ciccone A. 2011. Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: A Comment. American Economic Journal: Applied
         Economics 3: 215-27
Clutterbuck R. 1966. The Long, Long War: Counterinsurgency in Malaya and Vietnam. New York: Praeger
Collier P. 2000. Rebellion as a Quasi-Criminal Activity. The Journal of Conflict Resolution 44: 839-53
Collier P, Hoeffler A. 2004. Greed and Grievance in Civil War. Oxford Economic Papers 56: 563-95
Condra LN. 2010a. Ethnic Group Rebellion against the State: Perils of the Periphery. San Diego: Institute
         on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC)
Condra LN, Shapiro JN. 2012. Who Takes the Blame? The Strategic Effects of Collateral Damage.
         American Journal of Political Science 56: 167-87
Condra LNJHF, Radha K. Iyengar, and Jacob N. Shapiro. 2010b. The Effect of Civilian Casualties in
         Afghanistan and Iraq. In NBER WP #16152
Crenshaw M, Pimlott J. 1997. Encyclopedia of world terrorism. Armonk, NY: Sharpe Reference
Crost B, Felter JH, Johnston P. 2014a. Aid Under Fire: Development Projects and Civil Conflict. American
         Economic Review 104: 1833-56
Crost B, Felter JH, Johnston PB. 2014b. Conditional Cash Transfers, Civil Conflict and Insurgent Influence:
         Experimental Evidence from the Philippines. University of Colorado
Cunningham, Kathleen Gallagher, Kristin M. Bakke, and Lee J. M. Seymour. 2012. "Shirts Today, Skins
         Tomorrow: Dual Contests and the Effects of Fragmentation in Self-Determination Disputes."
         Journal of Conflict Resolution 56: 67-93.
Dal Bó E, Dal Bó P. 2011. Workers, Warriors, and Criminals: Social Conflict in General Equilibrium.
         Journal of the European Economic Association 9: 646-77


                                                    27
Daly, Sarah Zukerman. 2014. "State Strategies in Multi-Ethnic Territories: Explaining Variation in the
          Former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc." British Journal of Political Science 44: 381-408.
de Figueiredo, R, Weingast, B. 2001. Vicious Cycles: Endogenous Political Extremism and Political
Violence. Paper presented at the American Political Science Association Annual Meeting, Washington,
D.C.
Diaz-Cayeros A, Magaloni B, Matanock AM, Romero V. 2014. Living in Fear: The Dynamics of Extortion in
          Mexico’s Criminal Insurgency. Stanford, C.A.: Stanford University
Douglass RW. 2012. Hearts, Minds, or Bodies: the Strategy of Selective Violence in Civil War. Princeton,
          N.J.: Princeton University
Downes AB. 2006. Desperate Times, Desperate Measures: The Causes of Civilian Victimization in War.
          International Security 30: 152–95
Downes AB. 2007. Draining the Sea By Filling the Graves: Investigating the Effectiveness of
          Indiscriminate Violence as a Counterinsuregency Strategy. Civil Wars 9: 420-44
Driscoll J, Lidow N. 2014. Representative Surveys in Insecure Environments: A Case Study of Mogadishu,
          Somalia. Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology 2: 78-95
Dube O, Vargas JF. 2013. Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from Colombia. The
          Review of Economic Studies
Ellis S. 1999. The Mask of Anarchy: The Destruction of Liberia and the Religious Dimension of an African
          Civil War. New York: New York University Press
Fair, C, Kuhn, P, Malhotra, N, and Shapiro, J. 2014. Economic Shocks and Civic Engagement: Evidence
          from the 2010-11 Pakistani Floods. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univeristy.
Fearon J. 2008. Economic Development, Insurgency, and Civil War. In Institutions and Economic
          Performance, ed. E Helpman, pp. 292-328. Cambridge, M.A.: Harvard University Press
Fearon JD. 2004. Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer than Others? Journal of Peace Research
          41: 275-301
Fearon JD, Humphreys M, Weinstein JM. 2009. Can Development Aid Contribute to Social Cohesion after
          Civil War? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Post-Conflict Liberia. American Economic Review:
          Papers and Proceedings 99: 287-91
Fearon JD, Laitin DD. 2003. Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War. American Political Science Review 97:
          75-90
Felter JH. 2005. Taking Guns to a Knife Fight: A Case for Empirical Study of Counterinsurgency. Stanford
          University, Stanford, C.A.
Flanigan ST. 2008. Nonprofit Service Provision by Insurgent Organizations - the Cases of Hizballah and
          the Tamil Tigers. Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 31: 499-519
Galula D. 1964. Counterinsurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice. Wesport, C.T.: Praeger
Gelpi C, Feaver P, Reifler J. 2005/06. Success Matters: Casualty Sensitivity and the War in Iraq.
          International Security 30
Ghani A, Lockhart C. 2009. Fixing failed states: a framework for rebuilding a fractured world: Oxford
          University Press
Grossman H. 1999. Kleptocracy and Revolutions. Oxford Economic Papers 51: 267-83
Hazelton, Jacqueline L. 2011. Compellence and Accommodation in Counterinsurgency Warfare: Brandeis
          University.
Heger L. 2010. In the Cross-Hairs: Examining the Factors That Make Terrorists Likely to Attack Civilians.
          University of California, San Diego, San Diego
Hinton W. 1966. Fanshen: A Documentary of Revolution in a Chinese Village. Berkeley, C.A.: University of
          California Press
Huang R. 2014. The Wartime Origins of Postwar Democratization: Civil War, Rebel Governance, and
          Political Regimes. ed. T A&M. College Station, T.X.

                                                   28
Humphreys M, Sanchez de la Sierra R, Van der Windt P. 2014. Social Engineering in the Tropics: Case
          Study Evidence from East Congo. Columbia University
Humphreys M, Weinstein JM. 2008. Who Fights? The Determinants of Participation in Civil War.
          American Journal of Political Science 52: 436-55
Kalyvas SN. 1999. Wanton and senseless?: The logic of massacres in Algeria.Rationality and Society
          11(3): 243-285.
Kalyvas SN. 2006. The Logic of Violence in Civil War. New York: Cambridge University Press
Kalyvas SN. 2012. Micro-Level Studies of Violence in Civil War: Refining and Extending the Control-
          Collaboration Model. Terrorism and Political Violence 24: 658-68
Kalyvas SN, Balcells L. 2010. International System and Technologies of Rebellion: How the End of the
          Cold War Shaped Internal Conflict. American Political Science Review 104: 415-29
Kalyvas SN, Kocher MA. 2009. The Dynamics of Violence in Vietnam: An Analysis of the Hamlet
          Evaluation System (HES). Journal of Peace Research 46: 335-55
Kaplan O. 2013. Protecting Civilians in Civil War: The Institution of the ATCC in Colombia. Journal of
          Peace Research 50: 351-67
Kapstein EB, Converse N. 2008. The Fate of Young Democracies. New York: Cambridge University Press
Keister J. 2010. States within States: The Social Contracts of Armed Groups. University of California, San
          Diego, San Diego
Kilcullen D. 2006. Counterinsurgency Redux. Survival 48: 111-30
Kuran T. 1991. Now Out of Never: The Element of Surprise in the East European Revolution of 1989.
          World Politics 44: 7-48
Kuran T. 1995. The Inevitability of Future Revolutionary Surprises. The American Journal of Sociology
          100: 1528-51
Kuran T. 1997. Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsification.
          Cambridge, M.A.: Harvard University Press
Lake DA. 2010. Building Legitimate States after Civil Wars. In Strengthening Peace in Post-Civil War
          States: Transforming Spoilers into Stakeholders, ed. M Hoodie, CA Hartzell, pp. 29-52. Chicago,
          I.L.: University of Chicago Press
Leites N, Wolf C. 1970. Rebellion and Authority: An Analytic Essay on Insurgent Conflicts. Chicago:
          Markham Publishing
Levi M. 1997. Consent, Dissent, and Patriotism. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press
Lidow NH. 2012. Violent Order: Rebel Organization and Liberia's Civil War. pp. 1-396. San Diego:
          Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation
Lohmann S. 1994. The Dynamics of Informational Cascades: The Monday Demonstrations in Leipzig, East
          Germany, 1989-91. World Politics 47: 42-101
Long A. 2010. First War Syndrome : military culture, professionalization, and counterinsurgency doctrine.
          MIT, Cambridge, M.A.
Lyall J. 2009. Does Indiscriminate Violence Incite Insurgent Attacks? Evidence from Chechnya. Journal of
          Conflict Resolution 53: 331-62
Lyall J. 2010. Are Coethnics More Effective Counterinsurgents? Evidence from the Second Chechen War.
          American Political Science Review 104: 1
Lyall J. 2013. Dynamic Coercion in Civil War: Evidence from Air Operations in Afghanistan. New Haven,
          C.T.: Yale University
Lyall J, Blair G, Imai K. 2012. Explaining Support for Combatants during Wartime: A Survey Experiment in
          Afghanistan. In Midwest Political Science Association Annual Meeting. Chicago
Lyall J, Blair G, Imai K. 2013. Explaining Support for Combatants during Wartime: A Survey Experiment in
          Afghanistan. American Political Science Review 107: 679-705


                                                   29
Lyall J, Wilson I. 2009. Rage Against the Machines: Explaining Outcomes in Counterinsurgency Wars.
         International Organization 63: 67-106
Mansuri G, Rao V. 2004. Community-Based and Driven Development: A Critical Review. World Bank
         Research Observer 19: 1-39
Mao T-T. 1937. On Guerilla Warfare. Urbana: University of Illinois Press
Matanock, AM. 2013. "Candidates and Combatants: Why Do Simultaneous Electoral and Armed
         Campaigns Occur?" Paper presented at the American Political Science Association Annual
         Meeting, Chicago, I.L.
Matanock AM. 2014. Governance Delegation Agreements: Shared Sovereignty as a Substitute for
         Limited Statehood. Governance 27(4): 589-612.
Matanock AM, Garcia-Sanchez M. 2014. Controlling Hearts and Minds? Examining Popular Support for
         the Military in Colombia. Berkeley, C.A.: University of California, Berkeley.
Matsuzaki R. 2012. Building Institutions under Foreign Occupation: Police Reform in Colonial Taiwan
         versus the Philippines. Stanford University
Merom G. 2003. How Democracies Lose Small Wars: State, Society, and the Failures of France in Algeria,
         Israel in Lebanon, and the United States in Vietnam Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
Metternich, NW, Dorff, C, Gallop, M, Weschle, S and Ward, MD. 2013. "Antigovernment Networks in
         Civil Conflicts: How Network Structures Affect Conflictual Behavior." American Journal of
         Political Science 57: 892-911.
Miguel E, Satyanath S. 2010. Understanding transitory rainfall shocks, economic growth and civil conflict,
         National Bureau of Economic Research
Miguel E, Satyanath S. 2011. Re-examining economic shocks and civil conflict. American Economic
         Journal: Applied Economics 3: 228-32
Miguel E, Satyanath S, Sergenti E. 2004. Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables
         Approach. Journal of Political Economy 112: 725-53
Moehler DC. 2010. Democracy, Governance, and Randomized Development Assistance. Annals of the
         American Academy of Political and Social Science 628: 30-46
Nagl JA. 2002. Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam: Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife.
         Westport, C.T.: Praeger
Nielsen RA, Findley MG, Davis ZS, Candland T, Nielson DL. 2011. Foreign Aid Shocks as a Cause of Violent
         Armed Conflict. American Journal of Political Science 55: 219-32
Nunn N, Qian N. 2012. U.S. Food Aid and Civil Conflict. American Economic Review 104: 1630-66
Padro I Miquel G, Yared P. 2012. The Political Economy of Indirect Control. Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 127: 947-1015
Pape, R, Bauer, V, Jenkins, G, and Ruby, K. 2014. Unified Theory of Nationalist Militant Targeting.
         Chicago, I.L.: University of Chicago.
Petersen RD. 2002. Resistance and Rebellion: Lessons from Eastern Europe. New York: Cambridge
         University Press
Popkin SL. 1979. The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in Vietnam. Berkeley, C.A.:
         University of California Press
Powell R. 2013. Monopolizing Violence and Consolidating Power. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 807-
         859, 10.1093/qje/qjt003.
Prunier G. 2009. Africa's World War: Congo, the Rwandan Genocide, and the Making of a Continental
         Catastrophe. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Reno W. 1999. Warlord Politics and African States. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Rosenfeld B, Imai K, Shapiro JN. 2014. An Empirical Validation Study of Popular Survey Methodologies
         for Sensitive Questions. Princeton University


                                                   30
Sanaei, Ali. 2014. "Rationally Impatient Citizens: Can Democracies Fight Long Asymmetric Wars?"
        Berkeley, C.A.: University of California, Berkeley.
Shapiro JN. 2013. The Terrorist's Dilemma: Managing Violent Covert Organizations. Princeton NJ:
        Princeton University Press
Shapiro JN, Fair CC. 2010. Understanding support for Islamist militancy in Pakistan. International Security
        34: 79-118
Shapiro JN, Weidmann N. Forthcoming. Is the Phone Mightier than the Sword? Cell Phones and
        Insurgent Violence in Iraq. International Organization
SIGIR. 2012. The Human toll of reconstruction or stabilization operations during Operation Iraqi
        Freedom. Washington: Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction
Staniland, P. 2013. "Losing Control: Militarized Elections and the Politics of Violence in South Asia."
        Chicago, I.L.: University of Chicago.
Staniland P. 2014. Networks of Rebellion: Explaining Insurgent Cohesion and Collapse: Cornell University
        Press
Steele A. 2011. Electing Displacement: Political Cleansing in Apartadó, Colombia. Journal of Conflict
        Resolution 55: 423-45
Swinton ED. 1904. The Defence of Duffer’s Drift: Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and
        General Staff College
Thompson RGK. 1966. Defeating Communist Insurgency: The Lessons of Malaya and Vietnam. New York:
        Praeger
U.S. Army. 2007. Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency Field Manual. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press
Valentino B, Paul Huth, and Dylan Balch-Lindsay. 2004. “Draining the Sea”: Mass Killing and Guerrilla
        Warfare. International Organization 58: 375–407
Vargas G. 2009. Urban Irregular Warfare and Violence Against Civilians: Evidence From a Colombian City.
        Terrorism and Political Violence 21: 110-32
Verwimp P. 2005. An Economic Profile of Peasant Perpetrators of Genocide: Micro-level Evidence from
        Rwanda. Journal of Development Economics 77: 423-42
Walter BF. 2002. Committing to Peace: The Successful Settlement of Civil Wars. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press
West B. 2003. The Village, Pocket Books, New York.
Zhukov YM. 2014. Population Resettlement in War: Theory and Evidence from Soviet Archives. Journal
        of Conflict Resolution




                                                    31
