                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DYNASTIC ENTREPRENEURSHIP, ENTRY, AND NON-COMPETE ENFORCEMENT

                                           James Rauch

                                       Working Paper 21067
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21067


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2015




My thanks to Ayal Chen-Zion and Lindsay Rickey for outstanding research assistance and to Joel
Watson for many helpful discussions. I am responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by James Rauch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Dynastic Entrepreneurship, Entry, and Non-Compete Enforcement
James Rauch
NBER Working Paper No. 21067
April 2015
JEL No. K12,L26

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate entry in a dynastic entrepreneurship (overlapping generations) environment created
by employee spinoffs. Without finance constraints, enforcement of non-compete agreements unambiguously
improves social welfare outcomes, and even increases the rate of spinoffs from original firms. Indeed,
if employers have all the bargaining power vis-à-vis their employees, optimal entry of original firms
and all subsequent employee spinoffs is achieved, despite the fact that the original firm can only negotiate
with the first spinoff. However, if employees are unable to buy out their non-compete contracts, enforcement
of these agreements shuts down socially profitable spinoff firms. Non-enforcement sacrifices entry
of original firms that would be marginally profitable in the absence of employee spinoffs, but otherwise
clearly improves social welfare outcomes over enforcement in the presence of finance constraints.


James Rauch
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jrauch@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction
Employee spinoffs are widely recognized to be a major mode of entrepreneurship in high-tech
manufacturing (Klepper and Sleeper 2005, Franco and Filson 2006). Recognition of their im-
portance in the rest of the economy has been growing (Phillips 2002, Eriksson and Kuhn 2006,
Hvide 2009, Muendler, Rauch, and Tocoian 2012). Muendler, Rauch, and Tocoian were the first
to tabulate employee spinoffs for an entire economy: depending on definition, employee spinoffs
account for between one-sixth and one-third of all new formal private sector firms in Brazil during
the period 1995-2001. They found that, regardless of definition, employee spinoffs perform better
on average than new firms without (identifiable) parents: their sizes at entry are larger and their
survival rates are higher.
    Employee spinoffs often go into direct competition with their parent firms. This is natural since
they build on knowledge of technology, clients/markets, and suppliers acquired during employment
at their parents (Klepper and Sleeper 2005, Franco and Filson 2006, Muendler and Rauch 2014).
Parents therefore have an incentive to prevent spinoffs through enforcement of restrictive employ-
ment clauses such as non-compete covenants (hereafter simply called non-competes). Where these
are not enforceable, employers may try to restrict spinoff opportunities to family members to at
least keep the employee spinoff profits in the family (Shieh 1992).
    A tentative consensus has formed in the literature in favor of not enforcing non-competes (Acs,
Glaeser, Litan, Fleming, Goetz, Kerr, Klepper, Rosenthal, Sorenson, and Strange 2008).           Yet
this consensus is based on narrow empirical evidence, mainly for high-tech industry, where cir-
culation/spillover of ideas through employee mobility is especially important (Fallick, Fleishman,
and Rebitzer 2006, Gilson 1999, Marx, Strumsky, and Fleming 2009). A broadly-based counter-
argument is that enforcement of non-competes gives employers greater incentives to invest in their
employees. It can be objected, however, that non-enforcement gives employees greater incentives
to innovate, or more generally make investments of their own (Motta and Roende 2002, Bac-
cara and Razin 2009, Kräkel and Sliwka 2009). Garmaise (2011) finds evidence that increased
incentives for employees to invest in their general human capital empirically dominate reduced
incentives by employers to invest in their employees’ firm-specific human capital.
    This paper evaluates a very different counter-argument: insofar as employee spinoffs hurt their
parents, failure to enforce non-competes may reduce entry by parent firms. This in turn may reduce
the very spinoff entrepreneurship that the non-enforcement policy was supposed to encourage. I

                                                 1
will investigate entry in a dynastic entrepreneurship (overlapping-generations) world. I find that,
if employees can buy out their non-compete contracts, enforcement of non-compete agreements
unambiguously increases entry of both original (parent) firms and all subsequent spinoffs. Indeed,
if employers have all the bargaining power vis-à-vis their employees, socially optimal entry of
original firms and all subsequent spinoffs is achieved, despite the fact that the original firm can
only negotiate with the first spinoff. However, if employees are finance-constrained and hence
unable to buy out their non-compete contracts, enforcement of these agreements prevents startup
of socially profitable spinoff firms. Non-enforcement sacrifices entry of original firms that would
be marginally profitable in the absence of employee spinoffs, but otherwise clearly improves social
welfare outcomes over enforcement in the presence of employee finance constraints by facilitating
entry of socially profitable spinoff firms.
       Franco and Mitchell (2008) also investigate theoretically the impact of non-compete enforce-
ment on entry of both parent and spinoff firms. My model differs from theirs in several important
respects. First, as already mentioned I recognize that spinoff entrepreneurship implies a dynastic
environment: like any other firm, a spinoff can have a spinoff. The “family tree” spawned by
Fairchild Semiconductor is a famous example.1 Second, agents in my model can differ by their
(commonly known) profitability of entry (driven by differences in their startup costs), rather than
by their (privately known) ability to learn the parent firm technology. Third, I analyze the case
in which finance constraints on employee-entrepreneurs prevent them from buying out their con-
tracts with their employers, without which enforcement of non-competes does not pose a barrier to
(socially beneficial) spinoffs (Rauch and Watson 2015). Interestingly, it is my results with finance
constraints that are consistent with Franco and Mitchell: enforcement leads to more entry of orig-
inal firms and eliminates spinoffs. Without finance constraints, however, enforcement does better
than non-enforcement in all respects, unlike in Franco and Mitchell: there is more entry of both
original firms and spinoffs.2
       Without finance constraints, the importance of a dynastic (overlapping generations) rather than
two-period analysis in my framework becomes especially clear. Enforcement of non-competes
   1
      Systematic investigation of spinoffs of spinoffs is hampered by the fact that the time dimension of a typical firm-
level panel data set is short relative to the length of a typical spinoff “generation.” Klepper and Sleeper (2005) find
that the highest rate of spinoffs in the laser industry is from firms aged 11 to 15. The average age of parents at birth of
(first) spinoff in the Brazilian data set used by Muendler, Rauch, and Tocoian (2012) is 15 years, and the median age
is nine years.
    2
      It follows that whether enforcement increases or reduces spinoffs indirectly reveals the salience of finance con-
straints. I discuss this further in my Conclusions.


                                                            2
is predicted to increase the rate of spinoffs from original entrants relative to non-enforcement,
whereas in a two-period setting enforcement would have no effect on this rate. This positive pre-
diction has corresponding normative consequences: enforcement improves social welfare relative
to non-enforcement because of both increased original firm entry and increased rate of spinoffs,
rather than only because of the former as would be the case in a two-period analysis. The dynas-
tic model also brings out an interesting contrast with the patent literature, specifically Bessen and
Maskin (2009). In their “sequential” model, original innovation, subsequent imitation, and patent
protection play roles similar to original entry, spinoff entry, and non-compete enforcement in my
model. Eliminating patent protection can make both the original innovator and subsequent imitator
better off in their model, whereas elimination of non-compete enforcement always hurts the origi-
nal firm in my model. In my model the gap between the non-enforcement outcome and the social
optimum widens in the dynastic analysis relative to a two-period analysis, whereas it narrows in
their model for the sequential relative to the static case.
    I lay out the basics of my model in the next section of this paper. In section 3 I consider equilib-
ria and the social welfare outcomes they generate when enforcement of non-compete agreements
is impossible. In the following section I consider equilibria and social welfare when non-competes
can be enforced, maintaining the assumption of no finance constraints. Finally, I add employee
finance constraints to the environment with non-compete enforcement in section 5. The results for
sections 3, 4, and 5 are presented in parallel. Propositions 3.1, 4.1, and 5.1 specify the equilibria
that prevail following entry of the original firm under the assumptions of lack of non-compete en-
forcement, non-compete enforcement without finance constraints, and non-compete enforcement
with finance constraints, respectively. Propositions 3.2 - 5.2 work backward from Propositions 3.1
- 5.1 to determine the conditions under which the original firm enters. Propositions 3.3 - 5.3 build
on Propositions 3.1 - 5.1 and 3.2 - 5.2 to find the conditions under which the social optimum is and
is not achieved. I discuss empirical evidence and policy implications in the concluding section.



2    The model
We consider parent and spinoff entry in a stationary, overlapping generations environment. At
the beginning of time (period 0), a firm enters that we will call the original firm. In period 1,
an employee spinoff from the original firm may enter. In period 2, the original firm exits, and


                                                   3
a second generation spinoff firm may enter. The model continues in this way indefinitely, with
each entrant surviving for two periods and generating a potential spinoff in its second period of
operation. It follows that, starting in period 1, any entrant is a spinoff, and any incumbent firm is
a potential parent. Also starting in period 1, if entry fails to occur in a period the line of firms dies
out at the end of that period.3
       We can also specify the timing of firm actions within any given period. An entering firm sinks
costs at the beginning of the period. After entering, the new firm hires labor, produces, and earns
profits during the period. At the end of the period one of its employees, selected at random, gets
an idea for a spinoff firm. This employee can enter by sinking costs at the beginning of the next
period. Like an entering firm, an incumbent firm hires labor, produces, and earns profits during
the period. Unlike an entering firm, an incumbent firm exits at the end of the period.
       Finally, we assume that if the potential entrant is a spinoff, the employee informs his employer
of his intention to resign and start a new firm, at which point employer and employee try to reach
an agreement. They bargain under complete information regarding profits and sunk costs. If
they agree, any compensating transfers are made immediately. The subject of the bargaining and
especially the threat points in the event of disagreement will be influenced by the legal environment
and will be specified below.
       The labor market is frictionless in the sense that, if the employer and employee separate, the
employer can costlessly replace him, and the employee can also costlessly find new employment
if he does not found a spinoff firm. Whether the employee separates from the incumbent firm to
found his own firm or to be employed elsewhere, the value of the firm-specific human capital he
accumulated through his experience at the incumbent firm (not through a costly investment by the
firm) is lost to it. The payoff to the employee of alternative employment is normalized to zero.
We follow Franco and Mitchell (2008, p. 592) by assuming that this market wage is what every
employee earns during the first period of his employment.4
   3
      Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988) find (Table 11) that the exit rate for new U.S. manufacturing firms after
only five years ranges between 57 and 64 percent, depending on entry cohort.
    4
      Our approach does not allow for the possibility, explored in Franco and Filson (2006), that parent firms could
capture the entire values of employee spinoffs through payment of below-market wages to their employees. Even
setting aside the possibility of employee finance constraints (which we take up in section 5 below), such an equilibrium
may not obtain in the real world. For example, employees can differ in their propensities to found spinoff firms. If,
as seems reasonable, these propensities are private information, there may not exist a separating equilibrium in which
employees with high propensities accept lower wages than employees with low propensities, particularly if the former
are in the minority. Employees with high propensities will have incentives to report low propensities, and the cost
to an employer of distorting the contract for the majority of workers so as to make its refusal incentive compatible


                                                           4
    Now focus on a given period in which a spinoff has entered, and consider the interaction be-
tween the parent and spinoff in that period. If the presence of the spinoff does not reduce the
profits of the incumbent in that period, this presence cannot deter parent entry, making this case
uninteresting for our analysis. When the presence of the spinoff reduces incumbent profits in the
period, joint profits may be higher or lower than incumbent profits without the spinoff. Higher is
the natural outcome to consider when the parent and spinoff produce varieties of goods or services
that are imperfect substitutes and thus attract a higher collective proportion of consumer expendi-
ture. Higher joint profits can be derived, for example, in a model with CES utility and Bertrand
competition. Lower joint profits seem natural if the parent and spinoff produce perfect substitutes,
and would be the outcome if, for example, they engage in Cournot competition. Our analysis is
qualitatively unaffected by which case prevails.5
    To facilitate welfare analysis in our dynastic setting, we will not model labor or product markets
explicitly. We therefore measure the contributions of firms to social welfare solely by their profits.
This greatly simplifies the analysis of policy below.
    We will use π to denote the profits of a firm in any given period. Specifically, we let πT denote
the profits of an incumbent firm when the employer (firm) and employee stay together, πS denote
the profits of a spinoff entrant, and πP denote the profits of a parent firm, i.e., an incumbent firm in
competition with a spinoff. When the employee separates from an incumbent firm, the loss of the
firm-specific human capital of this experienced employee reduces the incumbent’s profits by h. By
definition, the employee has separated from a parent firm, so we can write πP ≡ πP T − h, where
πP T equals the hypothetical profits an incumbent firm would earn in competition with a spinoff if
it were still together with the employee. In contrast, an incumbent firm that is not a parent may
earn πT or πT − h, depending on whether or not the employee has separated. Finally, we denote
by π0 the profits of the original firm in its first period of operation.
    Following the discussion above, we assume πT > πP T or πT − h > πP . It would also be
reasonable to assume that old, experienced firms earn greater profits than young, inexperienced
firms, so that πP > πS and πT > π0 , but we do not impose these restrictions.
    We denote by K0 and KS the costs sunk at entry by the original firm and by all subsequent
for a minority may be too high for him to offer a separate contract directed at the latter, a phenomenon known as
”non-responsiveness” in the literature (see, e.g., Laffont and Martimort 2001, section 2.11.2).
    5
      It might seem that efficient bargaining between employer and employee would always eliminate spinoffs when
joint profits are lower, but this conclusion would not take into account the fact that the spinoff continues to earn profits
in the future after the parent has exited.


                                                             5
entrants (spinoffs), respectively. Empirically, we expect KS < K0 , but we do not impose this
restriction. A spinoff entrepreneur should have the advantage of having already learned on the
job, and thus needs to invest less time in developing his business idea, should make fewer mistakes
in setting up his business, etc.   In each of Figures 3.2, 4.2, and 5 below, we place K0 on the
horizontal axis and KS on the vertical axis, and the reader can imagine a 45◦ line below which lies
the more empirically relevant parameter space.
    Our notation for profits and costs lacks time subscripts, reflecting the stationary environment of
our model. This stationary environment facilitates a simple computation of the maximum possible
contribution to social welfare (maximum discounted sum of total profits less entry costs) resulting
from entry of an original firm:

Proposition 2. The maximum contribution to social welfare generated by entry of an original firm
is given by π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) − K0 if KS < πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT and by π0 + δπT − K0
otherwise.

Proof. Entry of an original firm necessarily yields π0 −K0 in period 0. In period 1, if the employer
and employee stay together profits equal πT in that period and zero in every subsequent period.
Spinoff entry in period 1 yields πP + πS − KS and an identical choice between entry and no
entry in period 2. Thus if spinoff entry is best for society in period 1 it must also be best for
society in period 2, and in every subsequent period as well. The maximum contribution to social
welfare generated by entry of an original firm is therefore given by either π0 + δπT − K0 or
π0 + ∞      t
     P
       t=1 δ (πP + πS − KS ) − K0 = π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) − K0 . Finally, the inequality

π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) − K0 > π0 + δπT − K0 reduces to KS < πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT .           

Proposition 2 establishes the standard to which the equilibria in the following three sections will
be compared.




3    Equilibria and social welfare without non-compete
     enforcement
    In this section we consider equilibria and the social welfare outcomes they generate when
enforcement of non-compete agreements is impossible. The timing of the model without non-


                                                  6
compete enforcement is shown in Figure 3.1.6 At the beginning of period 1 the employer and the
employee with the idea for a spinoff firm negotiate over whether or not they will stay together. In
an abuse of notation, in Figure 3.1 the employer is denoted by P (for parent) and the employee is
denoted by S (for spinoff), even though these labels only apply if the employee founds a spinoff
firm.     If the employer and employee agree to stay together there will be a transfer τ between
them.7 Either party can unilaterally compel separation (disagreement). If they separate (fail to
agree), then the employee has a choice as to whether to found a spinoff firm or take a job with
another firm. In a parallel abuse of notation, the continuation value of the employee who founds a
spinoff is denoted by vP , even though the employee does not become a parent in the next period in
every equilibrium of the game. The timing of period 1 repeats itself indefinitely in future periods;
only the identities of the employer and employee change, with the employee in each period taking
over the role of employer in the next period.


                         τ
                 P, S
                         Agree         πT − τ, τ                       END




                                                                                         Cont.
                                                                πP , πS + δvP − KS
                   Separate
                                               Spinoff
                                               S


                                            Other Job
                                                                                    END
                                                                πT − h, 0

            Figure 3.1: One period of the extensive form without non-compete enforcement

       We will search for Markov perfect equilibria of the game described by our model. The Markov
assumption is a weak one in our setting because, although the game has a history in every period
   6
    This figure follows the conventions for extensive-form representation used in Watson (2013).
   7
    The employer also negotiates with any other employees who acquired bargaining power in the form of firm-
specific human capital, but do not have ideas for spinoff firms. We assume that bargaining is unrelated across em-
ployees. It is then easily shown that the outcome of these negotiations will always be to stay together. The profit
expressions πT and πP are net of the resulting transfers.


                                                         7
following period zero, in no period do the agents have a history of play with each other. Moreover,
in no period does the employer have a history of play with other employees, nor does the employee
have a history of play with other employers.
   We will show that, in an environment without enforcement of non-compete contracts, there
exist two Markov perfect equilibria. In the spinoff equilibrium, the two parties always separate and
the employee always founds a spinoff firm. In the no-spinoff equilibrium, the two parties always
agree to stay together.
   We first establish the threat points of the parties in the spinoff equilibrium. If the employee
founds a spinoff firm when the two parties separate, his continuation value vP in the next period
is the profit of a parent firm, because one of his employees will have founded a spinoff. If the
employee takes another job, his continuation value is zero. After separation, therefore, the em-
ployee compares πS + δπP − KS to zero, where δ denotes the discount rate. The threat point of
the employee is then πS + δπP − KS , KS < πS + δπP , and zero otherwise. It follows that the
threat point of the employer is πP , KS < πS + δπP , and πT − h otherwise.
   Computation of the threat points of the parties in the no-spinoff equilibrium is more involved.
If the employee founds a spinoff firm when the parties separate, the threat point of the employer
is πP as before. The continuation value for the employee vP is now the payoff to an incumbent
firm that has agreed to stay together with its own employee.      Since there is no spinoff in this
equilibrium, we denote this continuation value by vN S . We have vN S = πP + (1 − λ)(πT −
πP − πS − δvN S + KS ), where λ and 1 − λ are the weights in the generalized Nash bargaining
solution assigned to an employee and an employer, respectively. We can solve this equation to
obtain vN S = [λπP + (1 − λ)(πT − πS + KS )]/[1 + (1 − λ)δ]. The threat point of the employee if
he founds a spinoff firm when the parties separate is then πS + δvN S − KS . On the other hand, the
threat point of the employee when he takes another job is zero, and the threat point of the employer
in this case is πT − h.
   Using this information, we are able to prove the following in the Appendix:

Proposition 3.1. Consider an environment without enforcement of non-compete contracts. As-
sume entry of the original firm in period 0. Given KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP , a unique Markov
perfect equilibrium exists in which there is spinoff entry in period 1 and every subsequent period.
Given KS ≥ (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP , a unique Markov perfect equilibrium exists in which the
employer and employee agree to stay together in period 1 (and would agree to stay together in


                                                 8
every subsequent period if the game continued).

Proposition 3.1 shows that the spinoff and no-spinoff equilibria obtain for a mutually exclusive
and exhaustive partition of the possible values of KS . As one would expect, low values of spinoff
startup costs lead to the spinoff equilibrium and high values lead to the no-spinoff equilibrium.
       Using Proposition 3.1, we can work backwards to the entry decision of the original firm. When
the spinoff equilibrium obtains, the original firm anticipates earning π0 + δπP − K0 .                        When
the no-spinoff equilibrium obtains, the original firm anticipates earning π0 + δvN S − K0 , where
vN S = [λπP + (1 − λ)(πT − πS + KS )]/[1 + (1 − λ)δ] if KS < πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )], and
πT − λh otherwise. We thus have8

Proposition 3.2. When the spinoff equilibrium obtains, the original firm enters if and only if π0 +
δπP > K0 .        When the no-spinoff equilibrium obtains, the original firm enters if and only if
π0 + δ[λπP + (1 − λ)(πT − πS + KS )]/[1 + (1 − λ)δ] > K0 , when KS < πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )],
or π0 + δ(πT − λh) > K0 , when KS ≥ πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )].

       Figure 3.2 shows the regions of K0 , KS space in which the spinoff equilibrium, no-spinoff
equilibrium, or neither obtains. The figure is drawn under the assumption that (πP − πT ) + πS +
δπP > 0. A sufficient condition for this inequality to hold is that the joint profits of the parent
and spinoff in any period exceed the profits the incumbent would receive if there were no spinoff
and the employer and employee stayed together. We do not consider values of K0 for which it is
infeasible for entry of the original firm to generate benefits for society. This boundary in the figure
is drawn using Proposition 2.
       Clearly the social optimum is not achieved when the original firm does not enter even though
it is feasible for its entry to generate benefits for society. When the original firm does enter, the
spinoff equilibrium yields the discounted sum of profits π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) − K0 and
the no-spinoff equilibrium yields the discounted sum of profits π0 + δπT − K0 . Proposition 3.3
then follows from a comparison of Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 with Proposition 2:

Proposition 3.3. When the spinoff equilibrium obtains, the social optimum is achieved. When the
no-spinoff equilibrium obtains, the social optimum is achieved when KS ≥ πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT ,
but not for πP + πS − πT + δπP ≤ KS < πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT , when the social optimum would be
   8
     If the employee is able to commit to a course of action upon separation as described in the Appendix footnote, we
would replace the bounds for KS that divide the cases when the no-spinoff equilibrium obtains with the bounds that
divide cases (a) and (b) specified in the Appendix footnote.


                                                          9
             achieved if there were spinoff entry. When the original firm does not enter and K0 < π0 + δπT for
             KS > πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT or K0 < π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) for KS ≤ πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT ,
             the social optimum is not achieved.


                  Spinoff Equilibrium              No-Spinoff Equilibrium                Social Optimum achieved



                       KS

πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )]




                                                                                     δ[λπP +(1−λ)(πT −πS +KS )]
                                                                              π0 +            1+(1−λ)δ
   πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT



    πP + πS − πT + δπP
                                                                                                              δ(πP +πS −KS )
                                                                                                    π0 +           1−δ


                                                                                                         K0
                                                                         π0 + δπT                δ(πP +πS )
                                       π0 + δ(πP )                               π0 +               1−δ
                                                           π0 + δ(πT − λh)


                  Figure 3.2: Equilibria and social optimum without enforcement of non-compete contracts

                 Propositions 3.2 and 3.3 are illustrated in Figure 3.2. We see from Figure 3.2 that an original
             firm fails to enter when it would be socially profitable for it to do so when its profits in the absence
             of spinoffs would be low or negative. This occurs because the lack of non-compete enforcement
             leaves the original firm with no means of extracting profits from the spinoff firms that would not
             exist without its entry.9 Ironically, the same problem arises for spinoffs themselves when their
             profitability is low, because they are unable when they become parents to extract profits from
             subsequent spinoffs.
                9
                  The firm could ask each of its workers to post a bond that would be forfeit if he founds a spinoff. However, it is
             hard to see why a court would enforce payment of this bond if it does not enforce non-compete agreements.


                                                                      10
         We conclude this section by noting that there is legitimate cause for concern that the threat of
spinoff entry deters parent (original) firm entry when the latter is socially profitable. In a world
without employee spinoffs, it is clear that the original firm should enter when π0 + δπT − K0 > 0,
yet it may not because entry or negotiation is the best response of its employee with an idea for a
new firm, which decreases the original firm’s expected profits.




4         Equilibria and social welfare with non-compete enforcement
          and no finance constraints
         We now add to our model the possibility that an incumbent firm will block entry of a spinoff
firm by petitioning a court to enforce a non-compete agreement that the potential spinoff en-
trepreneur has signed. (We assume that firms are able to compel employees to sign such agree-
ments as a condition of being hired.) We therefore amend our specification of the nature and timing
of employer and employee actions. The employer and employee now negotiate over whether or
not they will stay together and, if not, whether they will renegotiate the employee’s contract to re-
lease him from the non-compete agreement. If they reach an agreement there will be an immediate
transfer between them. If they fail to agree, then as before they separate and the employee has a
choice as to whether to found a spinoff firm or take a job with another firm. If the employee goes
ahead with his plan to found a spinoff firm and sinks KS , the employer files suit to block operation
of his business.10 The payoff to the employee is then −KS .
         The timing of the model with non-compete enforcement is shown in Figure 4.1, which uses
the same notation and conventions as Figure 3.1. It is clear from the bottom of the figure that,
when the employer (P ) and the employee (S) separate, the employee will choose to take a job with
another firm rather than found a spinoff. The separation branch therefore reduces to the payoffs
πT − h, 0 for the employer and employee, respectively, which therefore become their threat points
in negotiations. At the top of Figure 4.1 we see that the employer and employee can either agree to
stay together, in which case the game ends, or agree to release the employee from his non-compete
agreement,11 in which case the employee founds a spinoff firm and the game continues in the next
    10
      The employer may incur court costs. As long as these are less than the loss in profits πT − h − πP the incumbent
firm would suffer as a result of the spinoff, the employer will still choose to block the entry of the spinoff firm and our
results would be unchanged.
   11
      Along this branch not releasing the employee from the non-compete agreement is strictly dominated and hence


                                                           11
                                                                            Cont.
                                     t     πP + τ, πS + δvP − KS − τ
                          τ      you
                              Bu
                 P, S
                               τ
                              Tog
                                  eth
                                      er                           END
                                           πT − τ, τ

                                                                               END
                                                             πT − h, −KS
                    Separate
                                                 Spinoff
                                                 S


                                               Other Job
                                                                             END
                                                             πT − h, 0

             Figure 4.1: One period of the extensive form with non-compete enforcement

period with the same timing and the employee now in the role of employer.
    We can quickly see that, unlike in the previous section, there will not exist any Markov perfect
equilibrium in which the two parties disagree in every period.           They can always agree to stay
together and divide a surplus from agreement h, making the employer better off by (1−λ)h and the
employee better off by λh relative to the disagreement point. The candidates for Markov perfect
equilibria are therefore an equilibrium in which the employer and employee agree to stay together
in period 1 (and would agree to stay together in every subsequent period if the game continued),
and an equilibrium in which the employer agrees to release the employee from the non-compete
agreement in period 1 and every subsequent period. We will call the former equilibrium a together
equilibrium and the latter equilibrium a buyout equilibrium. The reason for the latter name is
that, with a threat point of zero, the employee will have to transfer some of the profits from his
spinoff firm to his former employer, in effect buying out the non-compete clause in his employment
contract.
    Considering the buyout equilibrium first, the surplus from agreement is πP + πS + δvB − KS −
(πT − h), where vB is the continuation value for the employee and is given by the payoff to the
incumbent firm in the buyout equilibrium. We have vB = πT − h + (1 − λ)[πP + πS + δvB −
omitted from the figure for simplicity.



                                                       12
KS − (πT − h)], or vB = [λ(πT − h) + (1 − λ)(πP + πS − KS )]/[1 − (1 − λ)δ]. Turning to the
together equilibrium, the surplus from agreement is h, as we have seen. The parties then prefer the
buyout equilibrium when πP + πS + δvB − KS − (πT − h) > h or πP + πS + δvB − KS − πT > 0,
and prefer the together equilibrium otherwise. This condition reduces to KS < πP + πS − (1 −
δ)πT − δλh. In other words, the buyout equilibrium is the unique Markov perfect equilibrium for
KS < πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT − δλh, and the together equilibrium is the unique Markov perfect
equilibrium otherwise.
   We have now established
Proposition 4.1. Consider an environment with enforcement of non-compete contracts and no
finance constraints. Assume entry of the original firm in period 0. Given KS < (πP − πT ) +
πS + δ(πT − λh), a unique Markov perfect equilibrium exists in which, in period 1 and every
subsequent period, the employee buys out his non-compete contract and founds a spinoff firm.
Given KS ≥ (πP − πT ) + πS + δ(πT − λh), a unique Markov perfect equilibrium exists in which
the employer and employee agree to stay together in period 1 (and would agree to stay together in
every subsequent period if the game continued).

   Comparing Proposition 4.1 with Proposition 3.1, it follows from πT −h > πP that enforcement
of non-compete contracts actually supports spinoff entry (and does not keep the employer and
employee together) for a higher level of spinoff entry cost than non-enforcement of non-compete
contracts. This occurs because the employer and employee, when agreeing to release the latter
from his non-compete contract so he can found a spinoff firm, are able to collectively extract
profits from future spinoff firms.
   Using Proposition 4.1, we can again work backwards to the entry decision of the original firm.
When the buyout equilibrium obtains, the original firm anticipates earning π0 + δvB − K0 =
π0 + δ[λ(πT − h) + (1 − λ)(πP + πS − KS )]/[1 − (1 − λ)δ] − K0 . When the together equilibrium
obtains, the original firm anticipates earning π0 + δ(πT − λh) − K0 . We thus have

Proposition 4.2. When the buyout equilibrium obtains, the original firm enters if and only if π0 +
δ[λ(πT − h) + (1 − λ)(πP + πS − KS )]/[1 − (1 − λ)δ] > K0 . When the together equilibrium
obtains, the original firm enters if and only if π0 + δ(πT − λh) > K0 .

   The same reasoning that leads to Proposition 3.3 then yields



                                                13
            Proposition 4.3. When the buyout equilibrium obtains, the social optimum is achieved. When the
            together equilibrium obtains, the social optimum is achieved when KS ≥ πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT , but
            not for πP +πS −πT +δ(πT −λh) ≤ KS < πP +πS −(1−δ)πT , when the social optimum would be
            achieved if there were spinoff entry. When the original firm does not enter and K0 < π0 + δπT for
            KS > πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT or K0 < π0 + δ(πP + πS − KS )/(1 − δ) for KS ≤ πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT ,
            the social optimum is not achieved.

               Propositions 4.2 and 4.3 are illustrated in Figure 4.2. A comparison of Figure 4.2 with Figure
            3.2 shows that enforcement of non-compete contracts with no finance constraints unambiguously
            dominates non-enforcement. The combinations of original firm and spinoff entry costs for which
            the original firm enters and for which the social optimum is achieved without enforcement of
            non-competes are strict subsets of those respective combinations with enforcement and no finance
            constraints.

                     Buyout Equilibrium           Together Equilibrium        Social Optimum achieved



                           KS




      πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT


                                                                                 δ[λ(πT −h)+(1−λ)(πP +πS −KS )]
πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT − δλh                                                 π0 +              1−(1−λ)δ



                                                                                                δ(πP +πS −KS )
                                                                                         π0 +        1−δ


                                                                                              K0
                                        π0 + δ(πP )            π0 + δπT                      π0 +  δ(πP +πS )
                                                                                                      1−δ
                                            π0 + δ(πT − λh)                  π0 +    δ[λ(πT −h)+(1−λ)(πP +πS )]
                                                                                             1−(1−λ)δ



                  Figure 4.2: Equilibria and social optimum with enforcement of non-compete contracts


                                                             14
    We conclude this section by noting that, if the employer has all the bargaining power in negoti-
ations with the employee, the social optimum is achieved for all combinations of original firm and
spinoff entry costs.
Corollary. Consider an environment with enforcement of non-compete contracts and no finance
constraints. If λ = 0, the social optimum is achieved for all (K0 , KS ).

Proof. From Proposition 4.3, we see that the range of KS for which the social optimum is not
achieved is eliminated when λ = 0, i.e., the partition of the values of KS into those where the
buyout or together equilibrium obtains is now socially optimal. From Propositions 4.2 and 4.3, we
see that when λ = 0 the original firm always enters when it is socially optimal for it to do so, i.e.,
the cases where the social optimum is not achieved because the original firm does not enter have
been eliminated.                                                                                   

    Once it has all the bargaining power and is able to enforce non-compete contracts with its
employees, it is to be expected that the original firm is able to capture all profits generated by the
first-generation spinoff. It may be surprising, however, that the original firm is able to capture
all profits generated by the infinite stream of future spinoffs, given that these spinoffs are not
parties to the negotiations between the original firm and its employee. The key is that these firms
are brought into the negotiations implicitly through the continuation value of the employee in a
Markov perfect equilibrium. The result is analogous to “Ricardian equivalence” in an overlapping
generations model with bequests (Barro 1974), that is, overlapping generations of consumers in
such a model can generate behavior equivalent to that of an infinitely-lived consumer.




5    Equilibria and social welfare with non-compete enforcement
     and employee finance constraints
    Enforcement of non-compete contracts supports entry of both original firms and spinoff firms
when high entry costs prevent their entry without such enforcement. The key to these improved
outcomes is the ability of employers to extract transfers from employee-entrepreneurs to release
them from their non-compete agreements. Of the various equilibria we have considered in the pre-
vious two sections, only in the buyout equilibrium are payments made by employees to employers.



                                                 15
       Unlike the sunk cost of entry KS , which can be paid in “sweat equity,”12 it is reasonable to
assume that the contract buyout must be made in cash. Paying the employer by working for free
after informing the employer of his intention to resign is likely to cause the employee to forfeit
his business opportunity, leaving him worse off (or at least no better off) than if he agreed to stay
together with the employer.
       There are several barriers that limit the ability of the employee to make a monetary transfer
to his employer.13 First, workers typically do not have the resources to internally (out of pocket)
finance a large payment.         Second, external financing generally is limited due to informational
asymmetries between the employee and outside lending institutions. If profits from the future
spinoff are not verifiable, the (former) employee can hide his income and declare that his new firm
has failed. Similarly, promises by the employee to pay his employer in the future, after earning
the profits from his new firm, may not be enforceable.
       In this section we will explore the implications of the assumption that employees in our model
are finance constrained.        The finance-constraint assumption is consistent with the stories that
workers tell.14 Industry observers with whom we have spoken agree that buyouts of non-compete
contracts are rare except at the highest level, such as star CEOs. Unfortunately, we are unaware of
any survey data on the subject.
       It is easily shown that a worker finance constraint would never be binding and would not affect
our analysis when non-compete agreements are not enforced. We therefore confine our analysis
in this section to the case where non-compete agreements are enforced. In this case, as we saw in
the previous section, the employer (incumbent) has the power to unilaterally compel disagreement
and obtain πT − h. Since the incumbent earns πP when an employee spinoff enters, the employee
will have to transfer at least πT − h − πP to get the employer to release him from his non-compete
contract.15 If the employee’s wealth is smaller than that amount, he will do better to stay together
  12
      Djankov, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) find that the monetary cost of satisfying government
regulatory requirements to establish a new business in the United States is less than one-half of one percent of per
capita GDP.
   13
      Some of the discussion in this paragraph and the next is based on Rauch and Watson (2015).
   14
      Workers we have interviewed do not consider borrowing to buy out their non-compete contracts to be a viable
option. Several workers with a major international market research firm, disgruntled with a change in management
following a merger, told us they thought they could better serve their clients by setting up their own firms but felt
trapped by their non-competes and lacked the cash to buy them out.
   15
      It is easy to show that the employee always pays at least πT − h − πP to the employer in the buyout equilibrium.
The transfer from the employee to the employer in the buyout equilibrium equals the difference between the incumbent
firm’s payoff vB and πP , which is given by [λ(πT −h)+(1−λ)(πP +πS −KS )]/[1−(1−λ)δ]−πP . This expression
is decreasing in λ and in KS , so it reaches its minimum when λ = 1 and KS = (πP − πT ) + πS + δ(πT − λh) (at this


                                                         16
with the employer and earn λh instead of zero. We assume that an incumbent firm has an estab-
lished line of credit and hence does not encounter a finance constraint in making this payment to
the worker immediately upon conclusion of negotiations.
    It follows that when an employee with little wealth cannot borrow against future income, the
buyout equilibrium of the previous section ceases to exist, and the together equilibrium of the
previous section becomes the unique Markov perfect equilibrium regardless of the value of KS .
We have thus established
Proposition 5.1. Consider an environment with enforcement of non-compete contracts in which
the employee cannot borrow against future income. Assume entry of the original firm in period
0. If the employee has wealth < πT − h − πP , then for any value of KS a unique Markov perfect
equilibrium exists in which the employer and employee agree to stay together in period 1 (and
would agree to stay together in every subsequent period if the game continued).

    From Proposition 5.1 it follows that, when employees are finance constrained, an original firm
that enters can always anticipate earning π0 + δ(πT − λh) − K0 . We thus have

Proposition 5.2. Consider an environment with enforcement of non-compete contracts in which
the employee cannot borrow against future income. If the employee has wealth < πT − h − πP ,
the original firm enters if and only if π0 + δ(πT − λh) > K0 .

    The same reasoning that led to Propositions 3.3 and 4.3 then yields

Proposition 5.3. Consider an environment with enforcement of non-compete contracts in which
the employee cannot borrow against future income. If the employee has wealth < πT − h − πP ,
the social optimum is achieved only when K0 < π0 + δ(πT − λh) and KS ≥ πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT .

Since finance constraints prevent employee spinoffs, the social optimum can only be achieved
when the original firm enters and spinoffs are not socially profitable.

    Propositions 5.2 and 5.3 are illustrated in Figure 5. The interesting comparison is between Fig-
ure 5 and Figure 3.2, both of which illustrate outcomes that are weakly inferior to those obtained
when non-compete contracts are enforced without finance constraints. If we were to restrict our at-
tention to consideration of original firms with K0 < π0 +δπP , we could state that the combinations
value of KS the parties switch from the buyout to the together equilibrium). Plugging these values into the expression
yields πT − h − πP .


                                                         17
             Buyout Equilibrium        Together Equilibrium           Social Optimum achieved



                KS




πP + πS − (1 − δ)πT




                                                                                          δ(πP +πS −KS )
                                                                                π0 +           1−δ


                                                                                     K0
                                                            π0 + δπT         δ(πP +πS )
                             π0 + δ(πP )                            π0 +        1−δ
                                              π0 + δ(πT − λh)

            Figure 5: Equilibria and social optimum with enforcement of non-compete contracts and finance
            constraints

            of original firm and spinoff entry costs for which the social optimum is achieved with enforcement
            of non-compete contracts and finance constraints is a strict subset of those combinations for which
            the social optimum is achieved without enforcement of non-competes. This occurs because lack
            of enforcement allows profitable spinoff entry to follow entry of a profitable original firm. We
            would then have an example of the theory of the second best: eliminating one distortion (inability
            to enforce non-compete contracts) in the presence of another (finance constraints) makes society
            worse off. However, because πT − λh > πP , when KS is low some marginally profitable original
            firms enter with enforcement of non-compete contracts and finance constraints that do not enter
            without enforcement of non-compete contracts. Thus we cannot say that non-enforcement weakly
            dominates enforcement with finance constraints for all combinations of original firm and spinoff
            entry costs.




                                                            18
6         Conclusions
As new data reveal the ubiquity of employee spinoffs as a mode of entry, the importance of un-
derstanding the impact of policy on entry of both parent and spinoff firms becomes increasingly
evident. Since spinoffs can and do become parents themselves, we have taken a dynastic (over-
lapping generations) modeling approach to this investigation, focusing on enforcement of non-
compete agreements as the key policy specific to spinoff entry.                  We find that, without finance
constraints, enforcement of non-compete agreements unambiguously improves social welfare out-
comes. Indeed, enforcement not only encourages original (parent) firm entry but even stimulates
spinoff entry, because each spinoff generation is able to capture some of the profit of the next gen-
eration when the entrepreneurial employee is forced to buy out his non-compete contact. However,
if employees are unable to buy out their non-compete contracts due to finance constraints, enforce-
ment of these agreements shuts down entry of socially profitable spinoff firms. Non-enforcement
sacrifices entry of original firms that would be marginally profitable in the absence of employee
spinoffs, but otherwise clearly improves social welfare outcomes over enforcement in the presence
of finance constraints, by allowing entry of socially profitable spinoff firms.
         Since enforcement of non-competes increases the rate of spinoffs from original firms without fi-
nance constraints but non-enforcement of non-competes increases the spinoff rate with finance con-
straints, the impact of non-compete enforcement on spinoff entrepreneurship can provide indirect
evidence regarding the relevance of finance constraints. We cannot rely on evidence of whether fi-
nance constraints affect business startups in general,16 because the typical business startup does not
require buying out a non-compete contract. Lenders may be more reluctant to lend for this purpose
since there are obviously no tangible assets to collateralize such a loan. Unfortunately, evidence
on the impact of non-compete enforcement on spinoff entrepreneurship is too weak at this point to
support any conclusion.17 In the legal services industry, where the norm that clients have the right
to choose who represents them has always prohibited enforcement of non-compete contracts, anec-
    16
      In any case, influential studies using U.S. data support both positions: for example, Evans and Jovanovic (1989)
provide evidence that finance constraints matter and Hurst and Lusardi (2004) provide evidence they do not.
   17
      The natural experiment described by Marx, Strumsky, and Fleming (2009), in which Michigan inadvertently
switched from non-enforcement to enforcement of non-competes, could in principle be used to generate stronger
evidence. The difficulty is in distinguishing employee spinoffs from other startups, which is especially important
given that our model predicts opposite effects of the switch to enforcement on spinoff and original firm startups in
the presence of finance constraints. Unfortunately the quality of the data available for this purpose for the United
States has not yet caught up with the quality of the data available for Denmark (Eriksson and Kuhn 2006) or Brazil
(Muendler, Rauch, and Tocoian 2012), but may do so in the near future.


                                                         19
dotal evidence on the frequency of “grabbing and leaving” supports the view that non-enforcement
promotes employee spinoffs (Rebitzer and Taylor 2007), but no systematic comparison of legal
services with other business and professional services has been done to our knowledge.
   If, as we suspect, finance constraints do indeed prevent employees from buying out their non-
compete agreements, is the appropriate policy response to stop enforcing non-competes, as in
California? The wide variation in non-compete enforcement policy across U.S. states provides an
opportunity for relatively low-cost experiments. For example, the U.S. Small Business Admin-
istration could start a program of lending targeted at non-compete buyouts in a U.S. state where
non-competes are vigorously enforced. Given our result that enforcement of non-competes domi-
nates non-enforcement in the absence of finance constraints, an experiment along these lines seems
warranted.




                                               20
References
ACS , Z. J., E. L. G LAESER , R. E. L ITAN , L. F LEMING , S. J. G OETZ , W. R. K ERR , S. K LEPPER , S. S.
  ROSENTHAL , O. S ORENSON , AND W. C. S TRANGE (2008): “Entrepreneurship and urban success:
  toward a policy consensus,” Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.

BACCARA , M., AND R. R AZIN (2009): “Innovation and Corporate Conservatism,” NYU Stern School of
  Business Working Paper.

BARRO , R. J. (1974): “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” The Journal of Political Economy, 82(6),
  1095–1117.

B ESSEN , J., AND E. M ASKIN (2009): “Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation,” The RAND Journal
   of Economics, 40(4), 611–635.

D JANKOV, S., R. L A P ORTA , F. L OPEZ DE S ILANES , AND A. S HLEIFER (2002): “The Regulation of
   Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 1–37.

D UNNE , T., M. J. ROBERTS , AND L. S AMUELSON (1988): “Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in U.S.
  Manufacturing Industries,” RAND Journal of Economics, 19(4), 495–515.

E RIKSSON , T., AND J. M. K UHN (2006): “Firm Spin-Offs in Denmark 1981-2000: Patterns of Entry and
   Exit,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(5), 1021–1040.

E VANS , D., AND B. J OVANOVIC (1989): “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under Liquidity
   Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 808–827.

FALLICK , B., C. A. F LEISHMAN , AND J. B. R EBITZER (2006): “Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
  Evidence Concerning the Midro Foundations of a High-technology Cluster,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 80(3), 472–481.

F RANCO , A. M., AND D. F ILSON (2006): “Spin-Outs: Knowledge Diffusion through Employee Mobility,”
   RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4), 841–860.

F RANCO , A. M., AND M. F. M ITCHELL (2008): “Covenants Not to Compete, Labor Mobility, and Industry
   Dynamics,” Journal of Economics and Managemnet Strategy, 17, 581–606.

G ARMAISE , M. J. (2011): “Ties That Truly Bind: Noncompetition Agreements, Executive Compensation,
  and Firm Investment,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 27, 376–425.

G ILSON , R. J. (1999): “The Legal Infrastructure of High Technology Industrial Districts: Silicon Valley,
   Route 128, and Covenants Not To Compete,” New York University Law Review, 74(3), 575–629.

H URST, E., AND A. L USARDI (2004): “Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneurship,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 319–347.

H VIDE , H. K. (2009): “The Quality of Entrepreneurs,” Economic Journal, 119(539), 1010–1035.

K LEPPER , S., AND S. S LEEPER (2005): “Entry by Spinoffs,” Management Science, 51(8), 1291–1306.

K R ÄKEL , M., AND D. S LIWKA (2009): “Should You Allow Your Employee to Become Your Competitor?
   On Noncompete Agreements in Employment Contracts,” International Economic Review, 50, 117–141.

                                                    21
L AFFONT, J.-J., AND D. M ARTIMORT (2001): The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent Model.
   Princeton University Press.

M ARX , M., D. S TRUMSKY, AND L. F LEMING (2009): “Mobility, Skills, and the Michigan Non-Compete
  Experiment,” Management Science, 55, 875–889.

M OTTA , M., AND T. ROENDE (2002): “Trade Secret Laws, Labour Mobility, and Innovations,” Discussion
  Paper No. 3615, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

M UENDLER , M.-A., AND J. E. R AUCH (2014): “What Do Employee Spinoffs Learn from Their Parents?
  Evidence from International Trade,” University of California, San Diego, unpublished manuscript.

M UENDLER , M.-A., J. E. R AUCH , AND O. T OCOIAN (2012): “Employee Spinoffs and Other Entrants:
  Stylized Facts from Brazil,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(5), 447–458.

P HILLIPS , D. J. (2002): “A Genealogical Approach to Organizational Life or Chances: The Parent-progeny
   Transfer Among Silicon Valley Law Firms, 1946-1996,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(3), 474–
   506.

R AUCH , J. E., AND J. WATSON (2015): “Client-Based Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Law, Economics, and
   Organization, 31(1), 30–60.

R EBITZER , J. B., AND L. J. TAYLOR (2007): “When Knowledge is an Asset: Explaining the Organizational
   Structure of Large Law Firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25, 201–229.

S HIEH , G. (1992): “Boss” island: The subcontracting network and microentrepreneurship in Taiwan’s
   development. Peter Lang, New York.

WATSON , J. (2013): Strategy: An Introduction to Game Theory. W. W. Norton and Company, New York,
 third ed.




                                                  22
Appendix: Proof of Proposition 3.1
Proof. Given the stationary environment, without enforcement of non-compete contracts only three Markov
perfect equilibria are possible. In the no-spinoff equilibrium, the employer and employee stay together in
period 1, and would agree to stay together in every subsequent period if the game continued. In the spinoff
equilibrium, the employer and employee separate in period 1 and the employee founds a spinoff firm; this
repeats in every subsequent period. In the other possible equilibrium, the employer and employee sep-
arate in period 1 and the employee takes a job with another firm; this would occur in every subsequent
period if the game continued. Proposition 3.1 states that, following entry of the original firm in period
0, the spinoff equilibrium is the unique Markov perfect equilibrium when KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP
and the no-spinoff equilibrium is the unique Markov perfect equilibrium when KS ≥ (πP −πT )+πS +δπP .

    First consider the spinoff equilibrium. In the text, it was shown that in the case KS < πS + δπP , the
threat point of the employee is πS + δπP − KS , and the threat point of the employer is πP . If the two
parties stay together, their combined payoff is πT . Let us provisionally restrict our attention to the case
KS < πS + δπP . In this case, the two parties fail to agree (separate) if πP + πS + δπP − KS > πT , or
KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP < πS + δπP , since πT > πP . This establishes the existence of the spinoff
equilibrium given KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP .

    Next consider the no-spinoff equilibrium. In the text, it was shown that if the employee founds a spinoff
firm when the parties separate, the threat point of the employer is πP , and the threat point of the employee
is πS + δvN S − KS , where vN S = [λπP + (1 − λ)(πT − πS + KS )]/[1 + (1 − λ)δ]. If the employee takes
another job when the parties separate, his threat point is zero, and the threat point of the employer is πT − h.

     It is easily seen that πS + δvN S − KS decreases with KS . It follows that, for KS high enough, the
employee’s best action after separation is to take another job. For KS in this range, a Markov perfect equi-
librium in which the two parties always agree to stay together clearly exists: staying together yields a joint
payoff of πT and separation yields a joint payoff of πT − h. Does this equilibrium exist for lower values
of KS , for which the employee’s best action after separation is to found a spinoff? The employee founds a
spinoff after separation if πS + δvN S − KS > 0, or KS < πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )]. The surplus from
agreement in this case is πT − πP − πS − δvN S + KS , which is nonnegative if KS ≥ (1 + δ)πP + πS − πT .
Simple manipulation then shows that (1 + δ)πP + πS − πT < πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )] follows from
πT > πP . We conclude that a Markov perfect equilibrium exists in which the employer and employee
agree to stay together for all KS ≥ (1 + δ)πP + πS − πT .18 This establishes the existence of the no-spinoff
equilibrium given KS ≥ (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP .

  18
     Suppose that, when negotiating with the employer, the employee could commit to a course of action upon sep-
aration. That is, the employee can choose between (a) separate and found a spinoff firm and (b) separate and
take another job. The employee is then indifferent between (a) and (b) when πS + δvN S − KS + λ(πT − πP −
πS − δvN S + KS ) = λh, or KS = πS + δπT + λ[(πT − πP ) − h(1 + δ(1 − λ))]/(1 − λ). Simple manip-
ulation shows that (1 + δ)πP + πS − πT < πS + δπT + λ[(πT − πP ) − h(1 + δ(1 − λ))]/(1 − λ) reduces to
πP < πT − λh, which follows from πT − h > πP . Hence the range of KS for which the no-spinoff equilibrium
obtains is unchanged in this commitment case. However, examining the condition for indifference between (a) and
(b), we can see that πT − h > πP also implies that the employee chooses to take another job rather than found
a spinoff for a higher value of KS when commitment is possible than when it is not possible. Thus, in the range
πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )] ≤ KS < πS + δπT + λ[(πT − πP ) − h(1 + δ(1 − λ))]/(1 − λ), the ability to commit to
a course of action makes the employee better off (and the employer worse off).



                                                      23
     Having established existence of the spinoff and no-spinoff equilibria in the specified, mutually exclusive
and exhaustive ranges for KS , we complete the proof of Proposition 3.1 by showing for each of these equi-
libria that existence of either of the other two equilibria in the specified range for KS leads to a contradiction.

    We first prove that the spinoff equilibrium is the unique equilibrium when KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP .
Consider the equilibrium in which the employee takes a job with another firm. It is sequentially rational for
the employee to take another job rather than found a spinoff firm after separation only if KS ≥ πS + δπP .
But this contradicts the parameter values for the spinoff equilibrium, since KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP <
πS + δπP . Now consider the equilibrium in which the employer and employee agree to stay together.
Since (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP < πS + δ[πT − λ(πT − πP )], the threat point for their negotiations
is determined by the employee founding a spinoff firm. It follows that they would divide the surplus
πT − πP − πS − δvN S + KS = [KS + πT − (1 + δ)πP − πS ]/[1 + (1 − λ)δ]. But simple manipulation
shows this to be negative if KS < (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP , hence agreement to stay together (the no-spinoff
equilibrium) leads to a contradiction for the parameter values under which the spinoff equilibrium obtains.

     We next prove that the no-spinoff equilibrium is the unique equilibrium when KS ≥ (πP − πT ) + πS +
δπP . Under these parameter values, if the parties always disagree the employee will found a spinoff firm if
KS < πS + δπP , and will take another job otherwise. In the former case the spinoff equilibrium obtains,
and in the latter case the equilibrium in which the employee takes a job with another firm obtains. In the
spinoff equilibrium, the joint payoff to the two parties is πP + πS + δπP − KS . Were the two parties to
agree, their joint payoff would be πT . It follows immediately from KS ≥ (πP − πT ) + πS + δπP that there
is a nonnegative surplus from agreement, hence existence of the spinoff equilibrium leads to a contradiction
for these parameter values. If the equilibrium in which the employee takes another job obtains, the joint
payoff to the two parties is πT − h. Were the two parties to agree, their joint payoff would again be πT .
There is a positive surplus from agreement given by h, hence existence of an equilibrium in which the two
parties disagree (separate) and the employee takes a job with another firm leads to a contradiction.      




                                                        24
