NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT AND THE CROSS-SECTION OF EQUITY RETURNS
Gian Luca Clementi
Berardino Palazzo
Working Paper 21064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21064

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015, Revised April 2018

We thank the Editors, Kenneth Singleton and Stefan Nagel, one associate editor, and two
anonymous referees for suggestions that greatly improved the paper. We are also grateful to
Frederico Belo, Martin Boileau, Andrea Buffa, Ilan Cooper, João Gomes, Dirk Hackbart, Xiaoji
Lin, Lars Lochstoer, Sydney Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, as well as seminar
attendants at NHH Bergen, Bank of Italy, Boston University, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
NYU, University of Minnesota, University of Southern California, Wharton, University of
Wisconsin, CAPR Workshop (Oslo), CIREQ Workshop (Montreal), Duke-UNC Asset Pricing
Conference, “Firm Dynamics and the Aggregate Economy” at the Becker-Friedman Institute,
ENSAI Economic Day (Rennes), EUI Macro Conference (Florence), Midwest Macro Meeting,
NY/Philly Workshop on Quantitative Macroeconomics, and meetings of American Finance
Association, European Finance Association, Canadian Macro Study Group, and Society for
Economic Dynamics for their comments and insights. Marco Casiraghi and Peifan Wu provided
excellent research assistance. Neither of us has relevant or material financial interests that relate
to the research described in this paper. All remaining errors are our own responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gian Luca Clementi and Berardino Palazzo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment and The Cross-Section of Equity Returns
Gian Luca Clementi and Berardino Palazzo
NBER Working Paper No. 21064
April 2015, Revised April 2018
JEL No. D24,D92,G12
ABSTRACT
We confront the one-factor production-based asset pricing model with the evidence on firm-level
investment, to uncover that it produces implications for the dynamics of capital that are seriously
at odds with the evidence. The data shows that, upon being hit by adverse profitability shocks,
large public firms have ample latitude to divest their least productive assets and downsize. In
turn, this reduces the risk faced by their shareholders and the returns that they are likely to
demand. It follows that when the frictions to capital adjustment are shaped to respect the evidence
on investment, the model–generated cross–sectional dispersion of returns is only a small fraction
of what documented in the data. Our conclusions hold true even when either operating or labor
leverage are modeled in ways that were shown to be promising in the extant literature.

Gian Luca Clementi
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
clem@nyu.edu
Berardino Palazzo
Boston University
bpalazzo@bu.edu

1

Introduction

A noteworthy goal of modern applied economics is to devise internally consistent theories
of choice, production and exchange, whose predictions for both quantities and prices are
consistent with the evidence. For example, much of the research in macroeconomics and
asset pricing over the last twenty-five years has been guided by the objective to conceive
a unified model of the business cycle, able to generate empirically appealing time–series
behavior of both aggregate quantities – output, consumption, investment, and employment
– and financial assets returns.1
Coming to the cross–sectional evidence on investment and financial asset returns, it is
the broadly intended neoclassical model of firm optimization that has become the analytical framework of choice for scholars interested in rationalizing either one or the others.
On the one hand, Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), among others, have shown us how
plant–level investment data restricts modeling choices on capital adjustment costs. On
the other, a series of papers that started with Carlson et al. (2004), Zhang (2005), and
Cooper (2006) have investigated the restrictions on the same choices coming from equity
returns. The upshot of these distinct strands of literature is that the same theoretical
framework, when appropriately specified, has empirically sensible implications for quantities (investment rate) and prices (equity returns).
Our interest lies in establishing whether the parametric restrictions imposed by investment data are compatible with those deriving from equity returns data. We find that, for
a large class of one–factor models, they are not. Loosely speaking, the capital adjustment
costs implied by the investment data are too small to justify the observed dispersion in
returns.
To judge the relevance of our finding, consider that over the last decade or so the
one-factor investment–based model has been the dominating paradigm in the quest to
understand the drivers of cross–sectional heterogeneity in returns. For example, Livdan
et al. (2009) used it to study the effect of financial constraints on stock returns, Gomes
and Schmid (2010) adopted it to investigate the role of financial leverage, Schmid and
Kuehn (2014) assessed its ability to rationalize credit spreads, while Tuzel and Zhang
(2017) argued that it can rationalize the impact of local factors on asset prices.
We start by documenting investment behavior among publicly traded US firms, i.e.
the subset of firms at the attention of asset pricing scholars. This exercise is akin to
1

See Rouwenhorst (1995) for a diagnosis of the inability of the prototypical real business cycle model
to generate sensible predictions for asset returns, and Jermann (1998) for an early attempt to write down
a model that came to terms with the evidence on both quantity and asset return dynamics.

1

that conducted by Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) on manufacturing plants. The data
displays a substantial cross–sectional dispersion of the investment rate – 28.5% at the
annual frequency, almost twice the unconditional mean. Furthermore, every quarter an
average 18.2% of firms record negative gross investment. We take the latter as strong
evidence against the assumption of irreversibility.
We then consider a variant of the neoclassical investment model, very close to that
entertained by Zhang (2005).

Our environment features decreasing returns to scale,

mean–reverting idiosyncratic shocks to profitability, and a flexible formulation of capital adjustment costs. We select parameters to match the cross–sectional dispersion and
autocorrelation of the investment rate, as well as the fraction of firms undertaking negative
investment. Future cash-flows are priced by means of an exogenous stochastic discount
factor parameterized to replicate the first two unconditional moments of the risk-free rate
and the Sharpe ratio.
In the cross–section, risk and returns are decreasing in productivity. Because of mean–
reversion, low–productivity firms derive most of their value from cash-flows with long
maturity, which in this framework are riskier. Conversely, the value of high–productivity
firms comes mostly from short–run cash flows, which are less risky. This rationalizes the
size premium, i.e. the finding that firms with small market capitalization (low productivity, in this environment) elicit higher returns.
Due to decreasing returns to scale, on average value firms (high book–to–market) feature higher idiosyncratic productivity than growth firms (low book–to–market). Therefore, the model produces a value discount. The equilibrium association between productivity and book–to–market is inverted by assuming that firms incur operating costs
(invariant to firm size) that are large enough.
When calibrating the operating cost to match the unconditional mean firms’ exit rate,
we find that indeed the unconditional cross-sectional correlation between productivity and
book–to–market turns negative. A value premium obtains.
However, value firms are saddled with a large capital stock, resulting from a recent
history of good shocks. The ability to relinquish capital – disciplined by the evidence
on investment – makes them less risky than small firms. Growth firms feature high
productivity but, thanks to a recent history of bad shocks, a relatively low capital. The
ability to quickly grow their operating assets – once again disciplined by the evidence on
investment – makes them riskier than large firms.
It follows that the resulting value premium is smaller than the size premium and, in
response to our research question, equal to only 1/3 of the value we estimate from the

2

data. A higher dispersion of equity returns can be obtained by raising the adjustment
cost of capital, but at the cost of a counterfactually lower volatility of investment.
This is the tension we focus upon. We show that for the value premium to get close
to its empirical counterpart, both the volatility of investment and the fraction of firms
undertaking negative investment must be very close to zero. Consistent with these results,
we document that for the model in Zhang (2005) to generate a non–trivial value premium,
the implied investment process must be counterfactual. In particular, the unconditional
standard deviation of investment is one order of magnitude lower than in the data.
Zhang (2005), Carlson et al. (2004) and Obreja (2013) among others, emphasize the
amplification role of operating leverage. In our baseline model, the magnitude of the
operating cost is disciplined by matching the exit rate. Raising the cost to levels associated
with counterfactually higher exit rates has two countervailing effects on the dispersion of
returns: On the one hand, it raises the variation among firms that stay in the sample.
On the other hand, the enhanced exit selection compresseses the distribution. In our
environment, the two effects cancel each other out.
We then go on to assume that operating costs rise with firm size. Using COMPUSTAT
data, we estimate such costs to be increasing and concave in installed capital, with an
elasticity of about 0.65. Consistent with Carlson et al. (2004), we find that – everything
else equal – scaling up operating costs by a multiplicative factor leads to a wider variation
in returns. However, such modification also raises the dispersion of the marginal cost of
investment, leading to a counterfactually higher variation in investment rates. Recalibrating the model to hit the investment rate targets has the effect of reducing the variation
in returns to the starting level.
A direct comparison with the results in Carlson et al. (2004) is not possible, since they
estimate the adjustment costs parameter by matching equity returns and do not report
the implications for investment. Key assumptions of their framework, however, indicate
that their investment process is at odds with the evidence. In their first model, they
assume complete investment irreversibility. In their quantitative framework, investment
expenditures are completely sunk.
In recent years, Marfè (2017), Donangelo et al. (2018), and Favilukis and Lin (2016)
have argued that labor leverage may play an important role in shaping the cross–sectional
variation of equity returns. It is not known, however, what is the role of labor leverage
under our requirement that the model be consistent with the evidence on investment.
In the first two papers capital is constant by assumption. The latter allows for variation in capital, but unfortunately does not report the model’s implications for firm–level

3

investment.
To find out, we relax the Cobb–Douglas assumption to allow capital and labor to
be complement in production. This leads the labor share to covary negatively both with
aggregate productivity in the time–series and with idiosyncratic productivity in the cross–
section. Notice that these are also the necessary conditions for labor leverage to matter
for equity returns.
Wages and aggregate productivity follow a joint VAR(1) process, whose parameter we
estimate from the data. For an elasticity of substitution equal to 0.6, the model generates
a very limited cross–sectional variation of the labor share and a counterfactually low value
premium. Once more, this result suggests that ignoring the adjustment of capital is not
without loss of generality.
Lowering the elasticity of substitution to 0.4 leads to a substantially higher value
premium, but only because the aggregate labor share is 13 percentage points higher than
in the data. Reducing the capital intensity to reign in the labor share also reduces the
value premium to the same level obtained for an elasticity of 0.6.
The path–breaking contributions by Berk et al. (1999) and Gomes et al. (2003) first
highlighted that firm choice can be reconciled with a range of cross–sectional regularities
for risk and returns. A long series of quantitative studies inspired by Zhang (2005) and
Carlson et al. (2004) singled out assumptions on functional forms and parameter values
under which the one-factor investment-based models delivers an empirically sensible crosssectional variation of asset returns.
Our main contribution is to show that this happens at the expense of the model’s ability to rationalize investment behavior. The investment–based one-factor model does not
explain investment, because it requires heroic level of capital adjustment costs. Contrary
to what required by this framework, public firms have a relatively easy time disposing of
assets when hit by persistent shocks to their profitability. This substantially reduces their
risk and the financial returns they elicit, along the lines suggested by Guthrie (2011).
Fiddling further with this framework does not look promising. The reason is that, as
hinted by our analysis of the roles played by operating and labor leverage, any friction
introduced with the goal of limiting firms’ chances to adjust to shocks is likely to have
empirically implausible consequences for investment behavior.
In general, our conclusions do not extend to two–factor models such as those considered
by Papanikolaou (2011), Kogan and Papanikolaou (2014), Belo et al. (2014), and Garlappi
and Song (2017).

4

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our
evidence on investment across public companies. The baseline model and the calibration
procedure are introduced in Section 3. The roles of operating and labor leverage are
analyzed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Section 6 concludes.

2

Evidence on investment at U.S. public companies

Studies of the plant–level investment process such as Doms and Dunne (1998) and Cooper
and Haltiwanger (2006) provide the empirical evidence needed to discipline quantitative
studies of the role of cross–sectional heterogeneity in macroeconomic models. In an analogous fashion, in this section we carefully describe investment at U.S. public companies,
for the purpose of informing modeling choices in the quantitative analysis of production–
based asset pricing models.
Casual observation as well as academic studies (see Doms and Dunne (1998)) hint that
capital accumulation at public firms is likely to be very different from that emerging from
the analysis of a representative sample of manufacturing establishments. Most public firms
are very large entities, are often multi–plants, and operate in a variety of industries. While
comprehensive, our study emphasizes features, such as the volatility and reversibility of
investment, that play a particularly important role in the class of models considered below.

2.1

Description of the data

Our data is from the quarterly Compustat database for the period 1975q1–2016q4. We
start in 1975, because quarterly data on capital expenditures is sparse in earlier years.
We exclude financial firms (SIC codes 6000 to 6999), utilities (SIC codes 4900 to 4999),
and other unclassified firms (SIC codes greater or equal to 9000), as well as firms not
incorporated in the United States or not traded on either NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ.
We proxy the capital stock with the item PPENTQ, defined as the net value of property, plant, and equipment. Net quarterly investment is the difference between two consecutive values of that variable.2
Our convention amounts to assume that accounting depreciation is an accurate proxy
for economic depreciation. This is short of ideal. One would rather recover gross investment, and then subtract the best estimate of economic depreciation. We do not follow
this route, because it would entail a loss of about 35% of our observations.3 The gross
2
We replace missing observations for P P EN T Q with a linear interpolation if values of that variable
in the immediately contiguous quarters are available. Imputed entries account for 0.6% of the total.
3
The reason lies in the very large number of missing observations for the variables P P EGT Q and
DP ACT Q – the gross value of PPE and the change in accumulated depreciation, respectively.

5

investment rate is set equal to
PPENTQ t − PPENTQ t−1
+ δj ,
PPENTQ t−1
where δj is the average depreciation rate of industry j estimated using data from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis.4
We further exclude (i) companies that have less than 12 quarters of data, so that
our observations effectively start in 1978q1, (ii) firm-quarter observations associated with
acquisitions larger than 5% of assets in absolute value and those yielding investment rates
in the top or bottom 0.5% of the distribution, and (iii) observations with missing values for
the investment rate or the book-to-market ratio. Our cleaned dataset consists of 296,218
firm–quarter observations.

2.2

Results

Figure 1 below illustrates the pooled distribution of gross investment rates. The data
displays a substantial amount of cross–sectional variation, right–skewness, and a large
fraction of negative observations:
- The time–series average of the cross–sectional standard deviation is 9.5%, close to
three times the pooled mean investment rate of 3.5%. The average autocorrelation
coefficient is 0.26.5
- In an average quarter, 16% of firms report a gross investment rate in absolute value
lower than 1%. In line with the convention established by Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006), we call such firms inactive.
- A further 18% of firms have an investment rate lower than -1%. It turns out that
plenty of firms downsize, at all times.
The latter finding corroborates the ample evidence against investment irreversibility. For
example, Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) find that every year the average firm in their dataset
sells physical assets for 9.16 million in 1996 dollars, or about 10% of capital expenditures.
According to Eckbo and Thorburn (2008), in 2006 alone U.S. corporation announced 3,375
4

The data consists of the total values of the stock of private fixed assets and its depreciation, across
3–digit SIC industries. If a company is assigned by COMPUSTAT only a 2–digit (1–digit) SIC code, we
use the average depreciation rate at the 2–digit (1–digit) level.
5
The cross-sectional autocorrelation at time t (t = 1, ..., T ) is the estimate of α1t in the equation
xi,t = α0t + α1t xi,t−1 + εi,t , i = 1, ..., Nt , where xi,t is the investment rate of firm i at time t and Nt is
the total number of firms for which we have data for both xi,t and xi,t−1 . Pooled ordinary least squares
deliver a very similar result.

6

8
6
Percentage
4
2
0
−.2

−.1

0
Investment Rate

.1

.2

Figure 1: Cross–sectional Distribution of Gross Quarterly Investment Rates.
divestitures – sales of a portion of firm’s assets to a third party – for a total value of $342
billion.6
In order to facilitate the comparison between our results and the available evidence,
in the right column of Table 1 we report the annual versions of our summary statistics.
The mean investment rate is close to the values reported by Gomes (2001), 0.145, Barnett
and Sakellaris (1998), 0.16, and Kogan et al. (2018), 0.175. The same is true for the serial
correlation. The three studies report values of the autocorrelation coefficient of 0.239,
0.22, and 0.223, respectively.
Larger are the differences when considering measures of volatility and negative investment. Gomes (2001) and Barnett and Sakellaris (1998) report standard deviations of 0.14
and 0.24, respectively. The fractions of firms reporting negative investment in the two
studies are instead 8% and 3%, respectively.7 To the extent that our results differ from
those reached in the extant literature, they do largely because of the different approach to
measuring investment. In Gomes (2001), investment is CAPX net of capital retirements
(item PPEVR ). For Barnett and Sakellaris (1998), it is CAPX net of the sale of property, plant, and equipment (item SPPE ). Kogan et al. (2018) measure investment as the
percentage change in the gross value of plant, property, and equipment.
The variable PPEVR employed by Gomes (2001) is available only through 1997. The
6
Eckbo and Thorburn (2008) report that the number of transaction was relatively stable between 1980
and 2005, but grew at a fast pace until the start of the Great Recession.
7
Kogan et al. (2018) omit to report both values.

7

Table 1: Gross Investment Rate: Summary statistics.
Quarterly

Annual

Mean investment rate

0.035

0.156

Standard deviation

0.095

0.285

Autocorrelation

0.262

0.276

Negative investment

0.182

0.190

Inaction rate

0.165

0.039

Positive spikes

0.038

0.295

Negative spikes

0.012

0.045

296,218

65,724

Observations

reason for not limiting ourselves to netting SPPE from CAPX , as in Barnett and Sakellaris (1998), is that SPPE understates the value of divested assets, as it only captures
alienations that originate cash inflows. However, firms often exchange assets for equity or
debt. See Slovin et al. (2005). A further issue is that SPPE only imperfectly accounts for
capital retirements.8
To gain some insight into the shortcoming caused by measuring investment as the
difference between CAPX and SPPE , consider the case of ADC Telecommunications, a
Minneapolis–based company that operated independently until 2010. At the end of fiscal
2002, its reported value for net property plant and equipment was about $408 million
short of its 2001 value. The 2002 10-K form9 reveals that such decline resulted from
a substantial downsizing that included (i) the sale or closure of product lines, (ii) the
disposition of equipment, and (iii) a reduction in the workforce from 12,042 to 7,600.
Unfortunately, however, CAPX net of SPPE was only $25.6 million!
The extent of winsorization also matters. To be consistent with the algorithm used
in constructing the quarterly investment rate, when computing the moments in the right
column of Table 1 we rule out observations of the annual investment rate in the top
and bottom 0.5% of the distribution. When trimming the distribution at the top and
bottom 1%, our annual volatility declines to 24%, the same value reported by Barnett
and Sakellaris (1998).
In summary, our empirical analysis indicates that for US public firms, investment
displays substantial volatility and no sign of irreversibility. In fact, in every quarter a
8
9

See Bayraktar (2002) for a careful discussion.
Available on the SEC’s website: https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html

8

large fraction of firms reduce their deployment of plant, property, and equipment. In
the remainder of the paper, we will require that the investment process implied by the
asset-pricing models under consideration conforms closely with this evidence.

3

The Baseline Model

Time is discrete and is indexed by t = 1, 2, .... The horizon is infinite. At every time t, a
positive mass of firms produce an homogenous good by means of the production function
yt = ezt +st [ktα lt1−α ]ν , α, ν ∈ (0, 1). Here kt denotes physical capital and lt measures

employment.

The supply of labor is infinitely elastic at the wage rate wt . Capital depreciates at the
random rate δt , distributed over the open interval (0,1) according the the time–invariant
c.d.f. Q. The variables zt and st are aggregate and idiosyncratic random disturbances,
respectively. They are orthogonal to each other.
The common component of productivity zt is driven by the stochastic process
zt+1 = ρz zt + σz εz,t+1 ,
where ρz ∈ (0, 1), σz > 0, and εz,t ∼ N (0, 1) for all t ≥ 0. The conditional distribution of
zt+1 will be denoted as J(zt+1 |zt ).

The idiosyncratic component st evolves according to
st+1 = ρs st + σs εs,t+1 ,

where ρs ∈ (0, 1), σs > 0, and εs,t ∼ N (0, 1) for all t ≥ 0. The conditional distribution of
st+1 will be denoted as H(st+1 |st ).

When gross investment is limited to replacing depreciated capital, i.e. xt ∈ [0, δt kt ], we

refer to it as maintenance investment. We assume that its installation involves no further
costs beyond the acquisition of the new equipment at the unit price of 1. Alternatively,
when either xt > δt kt or xt < 0, firms incur an adjustment cost
 2
xt
kt , φ1 ≥ 0.
g(x, kt ) ≡ φ1
kt
We further assume that the purchase of capital goods in excess of maintenance investment, i.e. xt > δt kt , occurs at the unit price 1 + φ0 , with φ0 > 0. Conversely, the sale of
capital equipment (the scenario for xt < 0) yields a unit revenue 1 − φ0 . The net payment
induced by a given level of gross investment is pictured in Figure 2.

By assuming – along the lines of Abel and Eberly (1994) and Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006) – that the selling price of capital is lower than the buying price, we allow our model
9

^

k

Gross Investment
0

k

>

Figure 2: Total expenditures implied by different levels of gross investment.
the flexibility to generate an empirically plausible value for the fraction of observations
with negative gross investment, a key indicator of investment reversibility.
In Abel and Eberly (1994), the gap between buying and selling price of capital induces
a discontinuity in the marginal cost of adjusting capital at x = 0. Compared to a scenario
with only convex adjustment costs, the simulation of their model generates greater inaction, i.e. more observations with identically zero gross investment, and correspondingly
less observations with either negative or positive investment.
We depart slightly from Abel and Eberly (1994), because in our data inaction takes the
shape of a large fraction of observation with small, but strictly positive gross investment.
By assuming no adjustment cost for maintenance investment, our model can reproduce
this evidence.
Firms evaluate future cash flows by means of the discount factor M (zt , zt+1 ). Similarly
to Gomes and Schmid (2010), we posit that
log M (zt , zt+1 ) ≡ log β + γ0 zt + γ1 zt+1 ,
where β > 0 is the time discount factor, γ0 > 0, and γ1 < 0. This specification implies
that the conditional risk–free rate equals
Rf,t =

1 [−zt (γ0 +ρz γ1 )− 1 γ12 σz2 ]
2
e
.
β

Notice that Rf,t is counter–cyclical if and only if γ0 > −ρz γ1 . The price of risk is constant,

as

std(Mt+1 )
=
Et (Mt+1 )

q

10

2 2

eγ1 σz − 1.

Productivity Values (st , zt )
Become known

Production
takes place

❄
r

Investment
takes place

❄
r

r

r

✻

❄
r

✲

✻
Depreciation (δt )
Becomes known

Hires
Labor

Figure 3: Timing.
The timing is summarized in Figure 3.

3.1

Optimization

For the sake of clarity, we abandon the time notation. State variables are capital in
place and the current realizations of aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity, respectively.
Conditional on a realization of the depreciation rate δ and a continuation value function
V (z, k, s), a firm that grows its capital stock will have a value

V (z, k, s, δ) = max φ0 δk − x(1 + φ0 ) − g(x, k) +
x>δk

Z Z
ℜ

ℜ

M (z, z ′ )V (z ′ , k ′ , s′ )dH(s′ |s)dJ(z ′ |z),
(1)

′

s.t. k = k(1 − δ) + x.
The first term to the right of the max operator reflects our assumption that maintenance
investment occurs at price 1. Conditional on relinquishing capital, firm value will be
Z Z
V (z, k, s, δ) = max −x(1 − φ0 ) − g(x, k) +
M (z, z ′ )V (z ′ , k ′ , s′ )dH(s′ |s)dJ(z ′ |z),
x<0

ℜ

ℜ

(2)

s.t. k ′ = k(1 − δ) + x.
Finally, the value of firms limiting themselves to maintenance investment can be written
as
Vm (z, k, s, δ) = max −x +
x∈[0,δk]

Z Z
ℜ

ℜ

M (z, z ′ )V (z ′ , k ′ , s′ )dH(s′ |s)dJ(z ′ |z),

(3)

s.t. k ′ = k(1 − δ) + x.
The conditional firm value V (z, k, s) is the fixed point of the functional equation

11

defined by (1), (2), (3), and
V (z, k, s) = max es+z (k α l1−α )ν −wl+
l

Z

0

1


max V (z, k, s, δ), Vm (z, k, s, δ), V (z, k, s, δ) dQ(δ).
(4)

Our main object of interest is the expected return on equity, defined as the ratio of
expected cum-dividend value at the next date to the current ex-dividend value. With
some abuse of notation, let k ∗ (δ) denote the optimal choice of capital conditional on the
quadruplet (z, k, s, δ). Then, the conditional return writes as
R R
V (z ′ , k ∗ (δ), s′ )dH(s′ |s)dJ(z ′ |z)
Re (z, k, s, δ) = R R ℜ ℜ ′
.
′ ∗
′
′
′
ℜ ℜ M (z, z )V (z , k (δ), s )dH(s |s)dJ(z |z)

3.2

Calibration

We approximate the policy function for capital by means of an algorithm based on the
value function iteration method. Together with the stochastic processes of idiosyncratic
and aggregate productivity, the policy function is deployed to generate a 5,000-quarter
long time-series of the distribution of firms. Except for the first 500 periods of the simulation, that are discarded, the resulting panel is our approximation of the model’s ergodic
distribution.
Our calibration strategy sets our study apart from any other investigation of equity
prices in production-based models, as we do not target any feature of the cross–section of
returns. Rather, we require the model to be consistent with our evidence on investment
and we evaluate its implications for equity returns. Key moments are listed in Table 2
along with their empirical counterparts. All parameter values are listed in the column
labeled “CD” in Table 3.10
One period is assumed to be one quarter. Unless noted otherwise, all magnitudes
reported below are expressed at the quarterly frequency.
The wage rate is normalized to 1. Following Basu and Fernald (1997), the span–of–
control parameter ν is set to equal to 0.87. We also posit α = 0.3, implying a labor
share of approximately 0.6, a value very close to that recovered from the Flow–of–Funds
data for the nonfinancial corporate business sector.11 The stochastic process driving the
common productivity component is parameterized based on Cooley and Prescott (1995),
who set ρz = 0.95 and σz = 0.007.
10

The column CES lists the parameters of the model considered in Section 5.
Over the period 1976q1-2016q4, the ratio of compensation of employees to gross value added exhibits
a quarterly mean of 0.62.
11

12

Table 2: Moments
Data

Model

Labor share

0.62

0.61

Investment rate
Standard Deviation
Autocorrelation
Negative

0.095
0.261
0.182

0.097
0.262
0.180

Risk–free rate
Average (%)
Standard Deviation (%)

0.4
0.9

0.5
0.8

Sharpe ratio

0.22

0.22

0.035
0.165
0.811

0.049
0.306
0.612

Targeted

Not targeted
Average investment rate
Inaction
Book-to-Market

The parameters of the stochastic discount factor are set to match the first two unconditional moments of the risk–free, as well as the mean Sharpe ratio. Because of non–
linearities in the map between parameters and moments, there are two distinct sets of
values for the triplet {β, γ0 , γ1 } that match the targets. One produces a counter–cyclical

risk-free rate, while the other generates a pro–cyclical rate. To be consistent with the
evidence,12 we decide to go with the former.
The discrete representation of Q, reported at the bottom of Table 3, was constructed
to approximate the frequency distribution of depreciation rates in our sample of firms.13
The mean quarterly depreciation rate implied by our calibration equals its empirical counterpart of 2.5%. The standard deviation is 0.96%, a value only slightly smaller than the
empirical value of 0.98%. We verified that neither the moments of investment growth nor
the asset pricing implications described below change in any appreciable way when we
posit a constant depreciation rate equal to its mean. The added heterogeneity has the
12

See Beaudry and Guay (1996) and Cooper and Willis (2014) among others.
The BEA’s depreciation rates employed in Section 2 range between 0.575% and 4.425%. We partition
the interval between the two values into five equally sized sub-intervals. The average values within each
sub-interval are selected as grid points and the fractions of observations as the corresponding probabilities.
13

13

Table 3: Parameters
Symbol

CD

CES

ν
ϕ
ρz
σz
ρw
σw
ρzw
σzw
σz σw

0.87
0.95
0.007
-

0.87
-0.67
0.95
0.007
0.90
0.008
0.07
0.27

ρs

0.97

0.97

α
ζ
σs
φ0
φ1
β
γ0
γ1

0.30
0.017
0.0023
0.00066
0.969
31.70
-33.00

0.70
0.017
0.0022
0.00056
0.969
31.70
-33.00

Not Calibrated
Span of control
Elasticity of substitution
Autocorrelation aggregate productivity
Standard deviation aggregate productivity
Autocorrelation wage process
Standard deviation wage process
Loading of wage on productivity
Correlation aggregate shock with wage shock
Autocorrelation idiosyncratic productivity
Calibrated
Capital elasticity
Capital intensity
Standard deviation idiosyncratic productivity
Investment price wedge
Capital adjustment cost
Parameter pricing kernel
Parameter pricing kernel
Parameter pricing kernel

Distribution of depreciation rate δ
Value
Probability

0.0113
0.11

0.0180
0.30

14

0.0247
0.32

0.0322
0.05

0.0408
0.22

only effect of getting rid of gaps in the simulated distribution of investment rates, which
are caused by the discreteness of our numerical representation for productivity, together
with our assumption about the asymmetry in capital prices.
It is left to parameterize the stochastic process driving idiosyncratic productivity and
the capital adjustment costs. Given our methodological approach, the ideal targets are
mean, standard deviation and autocorrelation of the investment rate, along with the
fraction of firms that disinvest. However, as illustrated by Clementi and Palazzo (2016) for
a simplified version of the model considered here, the log-normal neoclassical framework
does not allow to independently pin down mean and standard deviation of the investment
rate.14
This is why we resort to setting ρs arbitrarily and then find the triplet {σs , φ0 , φ1 } that

matches all targets except the mean investment rate. This is always a feasible strategy.

We set the autocorrelation coefficient to 0.97, as in Zhang (2005). To our knowledge,
this value is larger than any available direct estimates. Our rationale for selecting it is to
give the model the chance to generate a large cross–sectional variation in productivity. In
turn, as will become clear below, this will allow us to interpret the implications for the
variation in returns as upper bounds. The implied mean investment growth rate is 4.9%,
higher than then its empirical counterpart of 3.5%.

3.3

Results

We illustrate the model’s implications for equity returns by means of a simple methodology commonly used in the empirical asset pricing literature. In every quarter, we form
portfolios of firms based on the values assumed by size (ex–dividend firm value) and
book–to–market (ratio of current capital to firm value), respectively, and we compute
their realized returns. We then compare the time–series means of the returns earned by
the different portfolios. These moments are reported in Table 4, along with mean values
of size, book–to–market, investment rate, capital in place, and idiosyncratic productivity.
When sorted according to size, stocks in the bottom category are those that fall in the
two bottom deciles of the distribution in the period of portfolio formation. We will refer
14
Clementi and Palazzo (2016) show analytically that in the absence of capital adjustment costs, (i)
the standard deviation of the investment rate is a simple non–linear function of the mean, which only
depends on the depreciation rate, and that (ii) there exists an uncountable set of pairs {σs , ρs } consistent
with a given value of the standard deviation of the investment rate. It follows that that framework,
once set the depreciation rate, cannot replicate any arbitrary first and second moments of investment
growth. Furthermore, the two moments of investment growth do not identify the pair {σs , ρs }. While
these properties do not hold exact in our model, numerical results reveal that similar restrictions apply.

15

Table 4: Portfolio Sorts
Size Sorted

Book-to-Market Sorted

Excess Returns (%)
Bottom
Medium
Top

1.058
0.874
0.694

0.933
0.848
0.780

Top-Bottom

-0.364

-0.153

Top-Bottom (Data)

-1.248

1.374

Size
Bottom
Medium
Top

0.034
0.059
0.109

0.042
0.061
0.095

Book–to–Market
Bottom
Medium
Top

0.511
0.616
0.704

0.486
0.612
0.741

Investment Rate
Bottom
Medium
Top

0.045
0.048
0.056

0.121
0.048
-0.018

Capital
Bottom
Medium
Top

0.021
0.042
0.085

0.024
0.043
0.077

Idiosyncratic Shock
Bottom
Medium
Top

-0.096
0.000
0.097

-0.072
0.002
0.067

16

to them as small. Stocks in the top category, labeled as large, are those falling in the top
two deciles.
Consistent with the empirical evidence, on average small firms earn higher returns.
The key driver of size heterogeneity is idiosyncratic productivity. Firms can be conceived
as portfolios of assets with different systematic risk. Idiosyncratic productivity becomes
relevant for risk, because it pins down the loadings of the different assets, exactly as in
Babenko et al. (2016).
Since idiosyncratic productivity is persistent, firms characterized by a low value of s
will choose a low capital stock and will have lower value. Firms with high s will have
higher capital and large market size. Since s is also mean–reverting, small firms derive
most of their value from cash-flows to accrue far in the future. Conversely, the value of
large firms is mostly due to cash-flows with very short maturity. The size premium follows
from the finding that the risk of cash flows is increasing in their maturity.
We refer the reader interested in a more punctual description of this mechanism to
appendix B, where we lay out a three–period version of our model that is amenable to
analytical characterization. That analysis suggests that as long as aggregate productivity
is persistent and returns to scale are reasonably close to constant, the result that more
distant cash-flows are riskier is very robust.
Let’s now turn to portfolios sorted according to book–to–market. Contrary to the
empirical evidence, growth stocks (those in the bottom two deciles of the distribution)
fetch higher returns than value stocks (top two deciles). The reason is that growth stocks
feature lower productivity and are therefore riskier.
From a theoretical perspective, the relevance of the book–to–market ratio for asset
pricing analysis stems from the well–known result that under constant returns to scale
and convex adjustment costs, its reciprocal – known as Tobin’s q – equals the marginal
product of capital (marginal q). Since marginal q and the investment rate, tied to each
other by the Euler equation for investment, are positively associated with idiosyncratic
productivity in stationary distribution, one would expect value firms to have a higher
average idiosyncratic productivity and therefore command lower returns.
However, with decreasing returns – the relevant case here – Tobin’s q does not equal
marginal q. Most importantly, in stationary distribution Tobin’s q is negatively associated
with idiosyncratic productivity.
According to the model, the productivity of value firms rises ahead of portfolio formation and declines thereafter. Conversely, the productivity of growth firms declines ahead
of the formation date, to recover in the aftermath. This is why growth firms are riskier

17

and command higher returns.
The data suggests the opposite. As shown by Imrohoroglu and Tuzel (2014), low
book–to–market are firms that are expanding their operations in order to catch up with
recently risen productivity levels. Conversely, high book–to–market firms consist of large
operations that were recently hit by negative news about their productivity.
Our finding of a value discount is clearly at odds with the conclusions reached in
influential contributions to the literature. Zhang (2005), for example, shows that in a
setup very close to ours, assuming costly investment reversibility and countercyclical price
of risk yields a substantial value premium. How to reconcile our results with his?

3.4

The role of capital adjustment costs

Zhang (2005) obtains a value premium – a large one – by imposing strong frictions to the
capital adjustment process. With large enough adjustment costs, the association between
book–to–market and idiosyncratic productivity is the opposite of the one described above.
That is, on average value firms will have lower idiosyncratic productivity and command
a higher return on equity.
To envision why this is the case, consider an extreme scenario where adjustment
costs are so large that capital is essentially fixed. Then, forming portfolios based on
size and book–to–market is equivalent, as the two indicators are monotone increasing and
monotone decreasing in idiosyncratic productivity, respectively.
Consistent with this narrative and with the message of Zhang (2005), even in our model
there exist values of the marginal capital adjustment costs that yield a value premium
instead of a value discount. For example, increasing the parameter φ1 by four orders of
magnitude generates a value premium of 0.135% – about one order of magnitude smaller
than in the data. Unfortunately, however, as a result the standard deviation of the
investment rate plunges to 0.007, the autocorrelation is 0.95, and only a negligible fraction
of firms ever reduce the size of their operations. In other words, firms exhibit an investment
behavior grossly at odds with the evidence.
In appendix C, we show that Zhang’s model, once disciplined to yield data-conforming
values for the the volatility of the investment rate, generates a value discount. Consistent
with the results shown in Zhang (2005), raising the capital adjustment cost to the levels
considered there leads to a sizeable value premium, but at the cost of essentially no cross–
sectional variation in investment rates. We also show that, at the margin, asymmetry in
capital adjustment costs plays no discernable role.
A further insight of Zhang (2005) is that under certain conditions, operating leverage
18

– absent in treatment so far – will have non–trivial implications for the cross–sectional
dispersion of asset returns. For this reason, we now turn to studying its effects in our
setup.

4

Operating Leverage

We begin by following Zhang (2005) in assuming that every period firms pay a cost cf > 0,
independent from the scale of operations. An immediate implication is that for low enough
realizations of productivity, firm value will turn negative. In turn, this precipitates the
need to explicitly model exit.
At the beginning of each period, after the realization of the aggregate and firm-level
shocks but before the realization of the depreciation rate, firms have the opportunity to
cease operations. If they do, they receive current operating profits along with the proceeds
from the sale of the undepreciated capital, net of the adjustment cost required to uninstall
it. It follows that the value of exit is
Z 1
max es+z (k α l1−α )ν − wl +
[(1 − φ0 )(1 − δ)k − g((1 − δ)k, k)]dQ(δ).
l

0

Upon exit, a firm is replaced by another, randomly drawn from the stationary distribution.
This ensure that the simulated panel stays balanced.
We set cf to generate an average exit rate of 0.5%, equal to the average quarterly rate
of delisting for poor performance in our sample.15 The implied average book–to–market
ratio is 0.888, rather close to our empirical estimate of 0.811.
On average, modeling operating leverage in this fashion increases cash–flow risk for
firms with low idiosyncratic productivity and reduces it for those with high productivity.
This is the case because introducing the fixed cost is akin to having shareholders take a
short position on the risk–free asset.
For small firms, operating assets command a higher return than the risk-free rate. As
result, leveraging makes equity riskier. The opposite is true for high–productivity firms,
whose operating assets yield on average a return lower than risk–free. The reason is that
for such firms, negative aggregate shocks trigger a sale of assets and an increase in payouts,
turning them into good hedges.
A further effect deriving from the introduction of operating leverage is the reshaping of
the variation of the book–to–market ratio over the ergodic set. Recall that in our baseline
scenario, which features cf = 0, book–to–market decreases with productivity in stationary
15

More details on the calculation of the exit rate can be found in Appendix A.2.

19

Figure 4: Firm dynamics after portfolio formation – With Operating Leverage
distribution, yielding a value discount. As cf rises, the slope of such association decreases
in absolute value and eventually changes sign, allowing for a value premium. The reader
interested in a firmer illustration of this feature is referred to Appendix B.
Figure 4 helps us appreciate the dynamics of growth and value stocks in the aftermath
of portfolio formation. We report the time–series averages of the portfolio means of
investment rate, dividend to capital ratio, book–to–market, and idiosyncratic TFP over
the 8 quarters following portfolio formation.
At portfolio formation, value firms are endowed on average with capital stocks substantially greater than the optimal level dictated by their efficiency. Growth firms, on the
other hand, have less capital in place than warranted by their relatively high idiosyncratic
productivity. As a result, for a number of periods growth firms invest heavily, requiring
new resources from their shareholders, while value firms divest and pay out dividends.
This occurs while productivity mean–reverts for both sets of firms.
These dynamics are in line with the evidence. The evolution of idiosyncratic productivity is consistent with Imrohoroglu and Tuzel (2014): TFP is higher for growth firms
than value firms, but the gap between the two declines after portfolio formation. Asset
sellers have below average productivity, in line with the evidence presented by Maksimovic

20

and Phillips (2001) and Schoar (2002). Value firms have shorter cash-flow duration, as
documented by Dechow et al. (2004).
The takeaway is that value firms are riskier, and command a greater equity return,
because their idiosyncratic productivity is low. The divesting activity tends to reduce
their risk, since the associated payouts occur even in bad aggregate states of nature. By
the same token, equities of growth firms are safer and yield a lower return, because their
idiosyncratic productivity is high. The investment activity contributes positively to their
risk, as it requires resources from shareholders in all aggregate states of nature.
The above discussion also clarifies why, consistent with the empirical findings of Xing
(2008) among others, an investment strategy calling for a long position on low investment–
rate stocks and a short position on high investment–rate stocks yields a positive return
on average.
With the help of Table 5, we now turn to a quantitative evaluation of the role played by
operating leverage.16 Unfortunately, the magnitude of the value premium is only 0.454%
per quarter, or about 1/3 of the value we estimated from our data.17
Small firms earn, on average, a value–weighted excess return of around 0.6% per
quarter over large firms, or about half the estimated average quarterly value weighted size
premium over the period 1976:q1–2016:q4.
Notice that, counterfactually, the value premium is smaller than the size premium.
This is a robust result, which can be rationalized by two observations. First, the dispersion
of idiosyncratic productivity – the main determinant of variation in risk – is greater across
firms of different size than across firms of different book-to–market. Second, and more
interesting, on average value firms shed capital after portfolio formation, regardless of
the aggregate state of nature. This makes them less risky. Growth firms, on the other
hand, tend to invest – drawing resources from shareholders – in all aggregate states. This
feature makes them riskier.
One may argue that the model’s failure to generate a sizable value premium follows
directly from its inability to generate enough cross–sectional dispersion of returns. Our
response is that as long as we require it to be consistent with the cross–sectional evidence
on investment, the model simply cannot generate a greater dispersion of returns!
In fact, the value premium we report is an upper bound. Because of cross–moment
16

In Table 5, portfolios labeled bottom identify small firms in the first column and growth firms in the
second column. Analogously, portfolios labeled top include large firms in the first column and value firms
in the second.
17
Over
the
period
1976:q1–2016:q4,
Kenneth
French’s
data
generate
an
average
quarterly
value–weighted
value
premium
of
1.305%.
See
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

21

Table 5: Portfolio Sorts with Operating Leverage
Size Sorted

Book-to-Market Sorted

Excess Returns (%)
Bottom
Average
Top

1.244
0.839
0.650

0.551
0.879
1.005

Top-Bottom

-0.594

0.454

Top-Bottom (Data)

-1.248

1.374

Size
Bottom
Average
Top

0.026
0.051
0.102

0.063
0.057
0.046

Book–to–Market
Bottom
Average
Top

0.930
0.882
0.858

0.783
0.878
1.016

Investment Rate
Bottom
Average
Top

0.039
0.046
0.056

0.144
0.044
-0.044

Capital
Bottom
Average
Top

0.023
0.045
0.089

0.050
0.050
0.046

Idiosyncratic Shock
Bottom
Average
Top

-0.067
0.016
0.107

0.058
0.022
-0.035

22

Table 6: When operating costs increase with capital
Low a0

High a0

0.095
0.266
0.181

0.094
0.266
0.181

Growth
Medium
Value

0.623
0.942
1.030

0.725
1.027
1.105

Value-Growth

0.407

0.379

Growth
Medium
Value

0.036
0.015
-0.021

0.021
0.008
-0.013

Value-Growth

-0.057

-0.034

Investment rate
Standard deviation
Autocorrelation
Negative
Excess Returns (%)

Idiosyncratic Shock

restrictions endemic to the log-normal environment – see Section 3.2 – the autocorrelation
of idiosyncratic productivity ρs is a free parameter. We set it equal to 0.97, much higher
than any available estimates, in order to give the model the best chance to generate
dispersion in returns. Lower values of ρs are going to imply a lower dispersion and a lower
value premium.
Once more, our conclusions appear to be at odds with the extant literature. For
example, Carlson et al. (2004) argue that imbedding operating leverage in a production
model accounts both qualitatively and quantitatively for the book–to–market effect.
Key differences between our framework and theirs are in the constraints to investment
activity and in the formulation of operating costs, which in their case are increasing in the
size of capital in place. In order to identify which of the two items is chiefly responsible
for the difference in the conclusions, we now assume that operating costs are of the form
cf + a0 kta1 . The curvature parameter a1 is estimated to be 0.65.18 Regarding the value
18

The value for a1 results from a pooled non–linear estimation of the cost function c = ψ + ψ0 kψ1 , where
c is the real value of selling, general, and administrative expenses (COMPUSTAT item xsgaq) and k is the
real value of net property, plant, and equipment (ppentq). To dampen the effect of extreme observations,

23

of the scaling factor a0 , we experiment with a range of parameter values. We begin with
a0 = 0.0039 – see the column labeled low a0 in Table 6. The parameters governing the
investment rate process {σs , φ0 , φ1 }, as well as cf , are re-calibrated to match the usual
targets for the cross–sectional investment moments and the exit rate.

The value premium is essentially unchanged with respect to the exercise conducted
above. The comparative statics with respect to a0 helps understanding why.
Holding investment behavior constant, raising a0 by 50 percent does increase the
dispersion in returns. However, by impacting the marginal cost of accumulating capital,
a change in a0 affects firms’ investment. Since a1 < 1, a hike in a0 raises the rate at which
the marginal cost of investment declines with k. In turn, this leads to a higher cross–
sectional variation in investment rates. When the conditional volatility of idiosyncratic
productivity σs is adjusted downward to bring the volatility of investment back to its
target value, both the dispersion of returns and the value premium drop. See the right
column in Table 6, labeled high a0 .
We conclude that, as long as we require the model to be consistent with the crosssectional evidence on investment, allowing operating leverage to scale up with operating
assets does not lead to an increase in the dispersion of equity returns. In turn, this also
suggests that the reason why Carlson et al. (2004) obtain a much larger value premium
is that the implied firm–level investment dynamics is at odds with the evidence.
This is transparent in the case of the very stylized setup that Carlson et al. (2004) use
to illustrate the economic mechanism of interest. Since profitability is persistent, a good
sequence of shocks leads firms to accumulate a large capital stock, in turn associated with
large operating costs. Since investment is irreversible by assumption, firms whose fortune
has reversed – value firms – are riskier. Unfortunately, the results we reported in Section
2 suggest that the irreversibility assumption has no empirical support.
In the model utilized by Carlson et al. (2004) for their quantitative analysis, shedding
capital is feasible but is heavily discouraged by the assumption that capital expenditures
are completely sunk. The other parameters shaping adjustment costs, as well as the
volatility of idiosyncratic productivity, are estimated by matching the mean return on
decile portfolios of size-sorted and book-to-market-sorted returns. Unfortunately, the
model’s implications for investment are not provided.
we eliminate firms with a value of the cost–to–capital ratio (xsgaq/ppentq) in the top and bottom 1% of
the distribution. The estimated value of ψ1 is 0.654 with a standard error of 0.015.

24

5

Labor leverage

In Section 3.4 we have argued that when capital is fixed, production is Cobb–Douglas, and
the only source of firm–level heterogeneity is in idiosyncratic, mean–reverting productivity,
value firms are riskier simply because they are less productive. Since the labor share is
constant, employment decisions have no effect on risk and returns.
As highlighted in Donangelo et al. (2018), relaxing the Cobb-Douglas assumption in
such environment, to allow for an elasticity of substitution between capital and labor lower
than one, leads the labor share to move counter–cyclically and to covary negatively with
idiosyncratic productivity in the cross–section. In turn, this means a wider cross–sectional
variation in risk – i.e. a greater value premium.
Does labor leverage contribute to enhancing the value premium even in a scenario,
such as ours, where capital is not fixed and firms’ investment process is forced to conform
with the evidence? To address this question, we generalize the production function to
ν/ϕ

yt = est +zt [ζktϕ + (1 − ζ)ltϕ ]

,

where ζ ∈ (0, 1) measures capital intensity, ν ∈ (0, 1) is still the span–of–control pa-

rameter, and 1/(1 − ϕ) is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. The
Cobb–Douglas case obtains in the limit as ϕ goes to 0.

In spite of the large volume of research on the subject, there is still wide disagreement
about the value of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. Here we follow
Chirinko (2008) in considering values in the interval [0.4, 0.6]. We begin with the upper
bound, which is tantamount to assuming ϕ = −2/3. In turn, ζ is set to match the average

aggregate labor share. The span of control parameter is unchanged.

We further allow for realistic times–series variation in wages. We assume that the pair
{zt , wt } evolves according to the process

 

 

zt+1
ρz ρwz
zt
εz,t+1
=
+
,
wt+1
ρzw ρw
wt
εw,t+1

(5)

where the
of innovations
is jointly normal with mean zero and variance–covariance

 vector
σz2 σwz
matrix
.
2
σwz σw
The empirical counterparts for zt and wt are the deviations from their respective log–
linear trends of John Fernald’s business sector total factor productivity and the BLS’
seasonal adjusted real compensation per hour in the non–farm business sector, respectively, over the period 1964q1–2016q1.
Our estimation procedure, carefully described in appendix A.3, leads us to set ρz =
0.95, ρwz = 0, and σz = 0.007, exactly as in Section 3. The wage is also highly persistent,
25

Table 7: Moments – CES production

Data

(1)
Baseline

(2)
OL

(3)
OL
ϕ = −1.5

(4)
OL
ϕ = −1.5
ζ = 0.95

(5)
OL
ϕ=0
ζ = 0.15

Labor share

0.62

0.63

0.63

0.75

0.64

0.74

Investment rate
Standard Deviation
Autocorrelation
Negative

0.095
0.261
0.182

0.094
0.262
0.176

0.093
0.263
0.180

0.092
0.259
0.194

0.093
0.265
0.187

0.092
0.261
0.186

Risk–free rate
Average (%)
Standard Deviation (%)

0.4
0.9

0.4
0.9

0.4
0.9

0.4
0.9

0.4
0.9

0.4
0.9

Sharpe ratio

0.22

0.20

0.21

0.23

0.21

0.22

0.035
0.165
0.811

0.054
0.282
0.606

0.051
0.288
0.892

0.034
0.251
0.771

0.047
0.278
0.888

0.042
0.270
0.794

Targeted

Not targeted
Average investment rate
Inaction
Book-to-Market

with ρw = 0.9, ρzw = 0.07, and σw = 0.008. The correlation between the two innovations
is 0.276.
In the numerical implementation, we approximate the bi-variate VAR process by
means of the finite-state Markov chain approximation methodology due to Gospodinov
and Lkhagvasuren (2014).19
We set the remaining parameters following the same procedure as in Section 3. In
particular, we strive to match key features of the cross–sectional distribution of investment.

5.1

Results

We start by considering the case for cf = 0. Targeted and non–targeted moments are
listed in column (1) of Table 7, while the parameter values can be found in column “CES”
of Table 3.
Regressing the labor share on the logarithm of aggregate TFP growth over the pooled
19

See appendix A.3 for an assessment of the performance or our approximation.

26

simulated data, yields a coefficient of -0.69, confirming that labor leverage is a risk–factor.
For the sake of comparison, the same regression on actual data by Donangelo et al. (2018)
yields a coefficient of -0.45.
The implications for the cross–section of asset prices are best appreciated with the help
of column (1) in Table 8, which lists mean expected return, labor share, and idiosyncratic
shock across portfolios with low, medium, and high book–to–market, respectively. Once
again, the model generates a value discount. The reason is the same as in Section 3:
Growth firms are characterized by lower idiosyncratic productivity, and are therefore
riskier.
A second observation is that the labor share varies very little across portfolios characterized by different book–to–market ratios. This is the case because an increase in
idiosyncratic productivity is accommodated by changes in both labor and capital. The
flexibility of capital mutes dramatically the effect that reducing the elasticity of substitution has on the labor share variation in the scenario of Donangelo et al. (2018), where
capital is assumed to be fixed.
Column (2) refers to the scenario in which we re-introduce operating leverage in the
form of a value for cf that generates the same exit rate as in the data. As it was the case
in Section 4, the sign of the cross–sectional association between risk and book–to market
changes and a value premium appears.
Operating leverage and labor leverage interact to generate a non–negligible variation
in the fixed cost share, i.e. the ratio of cf to operating profits yt − wt lt . Since they are less
productive, value firms feature a greater labor share and a greater fixed cost share, which

in turns implies a higher risk. The value premium, however, is still substantially smaller
than in the data.
We turn next to consider a value for the elasticity of substitution equal to 0.4, the
level favored by Chirinko and Mallick (2017). See column (3). The dispersion of the labor
share across portfolios increases, and so does the value premium. However, the former
finding is not the driver of the latter. The dispersion in returns increases, because the
average labor share is higher, counter–factually so. A higher labor share is responsible for
the greater dispersion in the fixed cost share and, ultimately, expected returns.
To see that this is indeed the case, consider the scenario of which in column (4). When
raising ζ in order to lower the model-implied average labor share to its targeted value,
the average fixed cost shares across portfolio and the value premium revert to the same
values as in column (2).
Finally, in column (5) we reconsider the Cobb-Douglas scenario, taking care of setting

27

Table 8: Book–to–Market Portfolios
(1)
Baseline

(2)
OL

(3)
OL
ϕ = −1.5

(4)
OL
ϕ = −1.5
ζ = 0.95

(5)
OL
ϕ=0
ζ = 0.15

Growth
Medium
Value

0.985
0.882
0.805

0.674
0.863
1.036

0.684
1.005
1.226

0.674
0.874
1.040

0.657
0.959
1.227

Value-Growth

-0.18

0.362

0.542

0.366

0.570

0.626
0.628
0.631

0.623
0.629
0.634

0.743
0.751
0.759

0.629
0.637
0.645

0.740
0.740
0.740

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.145
0.178
0.253

0.230
0.313
0.485

0.149
0.181
0.258

0.223
0.306
0.467

-0.072
0.002
0.068

0.059
0.022
-0.036

0.075
0.023
-0.043

0.058
0.022
-0.036

0.076
0.023
-0.043

Excess Returns (%)

Labor share
Growth
Medium
Value
Fixed cost share
Growth
Medium
Value
Idiosyncratic Shock
Growth
Medium
Value

ζ to generate an average labor share as counter–factually high as the one reached in
column (3). The model generates the dispersion in fixed cost shares needed to replicate
the value premium obtained when the elasticity of substitution is 0.4.
The upshot is that, differently from what happens in simpler setups with constant
capital, amending the neoclassical framework to allow labor leverage to be a risk factor
yields very little payoff in terms of cross–sectional dispersion of equity returns. In particular, the value premium is substantially smaller than in the data. This result reflects
in large part the limited cross–sectoral variation in labor share that obtains when capital
can adjust optimally to innovations in idiosyncratic productivity.
Cognizant of this outcome, a valuable research direction may consist of departing
further from the neoclassical model. This may mean allowing for labor adjustment costs,

28

firing taxes, or alternative means to drive a wedge between wages and the marginal product
of labor.
Indeed, recently Favilukis and Lin (2016) have argued that allowing firms to reset
wages for only a small fraction of their workforce substantially per period, boosts the
value premium. Marfè (2017) obtains a sizeable value premium in a model in which wages
are the outcome of an intra–firm risk–sharing scheme between shareholders and workers.
Crucially, neither of these contributions confront their results with the evidence on
firm–level investment that disciplines our exercises. In Marfè (2017), capital is fixed
exogenously. In Favilukis and Lin (2016), it is allowed to vary. However, these authors retain the same parametric assumptions about the process driving idiosyncratic productivity
across all of their models. As a result, they end up comparing allocations characterized
by different cross-sectional dispersions in investment rates.
Our own results suggest that a fraction of the difference in returns volatility they
report across models simply reflects the difference in investment growth dispersion. What
fraction, we do not know.

6

Conclusion

In the one–factor neoclassical investment model with mean–reverting idiosyncratic productivity, value firms command greater expected returns than growth firms because, in
common with small firms, they derive a larger fraction of their value from cash–flows
accruing far in the future, which are riskier. Unlike small firms, however, value firms are
burdened with excess capacity. Therefore their risk also depends on their ability to reduce
such capacity by divesting operating assets.
The data strongly suggests that US public firms do adjust to adverse profitability
shocks by relinquishing capital. When capital adjustment costs are parameterized to
reflect this feature of the data, states of nature characterized by low aggregate productivity
(high marginal utility) see value firms to disinvest. This makes them safer, leading to a
lower value premium.
These conclusions, which hold true in scenarios where either operating leverage or
labor leverage are modeled in ways that were deemed promising in the extant literature,
cast a doubt on the quantitative significance of what in the last decade has become the
prevalent theoretical paradigm for the study of cross–sectional variation of asset returns.
Research strategies that aim at obtaining greater variation in returns by limiting firms’
chances to adjust to shocks are likely to have empirically implausible consequences for

29

investment behavior and therefore don’t appear promising.
Our conclusions do not necessarily extend to two–factor models such as those introduced by Papanikolaou (2011), Kogan and Papanikolaou (2014), Belo et al. (2014), and
Garlappi and Song (2017). Adding one risk factor provides one more degree of freedom.
If the objective is to rationalize both the size and value premium, one can, at least in
principle, assign one factor to each source of variation in returns.
For example, consider Belo et al. (2014). The stochastic discount factor loads on
aggregate shocks to productivity and to the adjustment cost of capital, respectively. The
loadings are set to match the Shape ratio and the value premium.
Importantly, the loading on the shock to the adjustment cost of capital is negative:
In states of nature where adjustment costs are low, state prices are (conditionally) high.
It follows that, upon a negative innovation to the adjustment cost, firms whose capital
is lower than efficient (growth firms) will increase their value disproportionably exactly
when marginal utility is relatively high. In turn, this makes growth firm less risky and
contributes to increasing the value premium.
What is not entirely clear to us is the extent to which the claims of success in the two–
factor literature also depend on frictions to the capital adjustment process and whether
the resulting variation in investment rate is consistent with our evidence. For example,
Belo et al. (2014) argue that even in their scenario, costly reversibility is important to
generate a sizeable value premium. Unfortunately, they do not discuss whether such
assumption impairs firms in the model from reacting to adverse shocks as in the data, i.e.
by divesting assets – large portions of them, if needed.

References
Abel, A. and J. Eberly (1994). A unified model of investment under uncertainty. American
Economic Review 84 (5), 1369–1384.
Babenko, I., O. Boguth, and Y. Tserlukevich (2016). Idiosyncratic cash flows and systematic risk. Journal of Finance 71 (1), 425–455.
Barnett, S. A. and P. Sakellaris (1998). Nonlinear response of firm investment to q:
Testing a model of convex and non-convex adjustment costs. Journal of Monetary
Economics 42 (2), 261–288.
Basu, S. and J. Fernald (1997). Returns to scale in us production: Estimates and implications. Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 249–283.
30

Basu, S., J. Fernald, and M. Kimball (2006). Are technology improvements contractionary? American Economic Review 96 (5), 1418–1448.
Bayraktar, N. (2002). Effects of financial market imperfections and non-convex adjustment
costs in the capital adjustment process. Working Paper.
Beaudry, P. and A. Guay (1996). What do interest rates reveal about the functioning of
real business cycle models? Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 20, 1661–1682.
Belo, F., X. Lin, and S. Bazdresch (2014). Labor hiring, investment, and stock return
predictability in the cross section. Journal of Political Economy 122 (6), 129–177.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999). Optimal investment, growth options, and
security returns. Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1553–1607.
Campbell, J., J. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi (2008). In search of distress risk. Journal of
Finance 63 (6), 2899–2939.
Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino (2004). Corporate investment and asset price
dynamics: Implications for the cross–section of returns. Journal of Finance 59 (6),
2577–2603.
Chirinko, R. (2008). σ: The long and short of it. Journal of Macroeconomics 30 (2),
671–686.
Chirinko, R. and D. Mallick (2017). The substitution elasticity, factor shares, and the
low–frequency panel model. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (4), 225–
253.
Clementi, G. L. and B. Palazzo (2016). On the calibration of competitive industry dynamics models. Working paper, Boston University.
Cooley, T. F. and E. C. Prescott (1995). Economic growth and business cycles. In T. F.
Cooley (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Chapter Chapter 1, pp. 1–37.
Princeton University Press.
Cooper, I. (2006). Asset pricing implications of nonconvex adjustment costs and irreversibility of investment. Journal of Finance 61 (1), 139–170.
Cooper, R. and J. Willis (2014). Discounting: Investment sensitivity and aggregate implications. Working Paper, Penn State.

31

Cooper, R. W. and J. C. Haltiwanger (2006). On the nature of capital adjustment costs.
Review of Economic Studies 73 (3), 611–633.
Dechow, P., R. Sloan, and M. Soliman (2004). Implied equity duration: A new measure
of equity risk. Review of Accounting Studies 9, 197–228.
Dimopoulos, T. and S. Sacchetto (2017). Merger activity in industry equilibrium. Journal
of Financial Economics 126 (1), 200–226.
Doms, M. and T. Dunne (1998). Capital adjustment patterns in manufacturing plants.
Review of Economic Dynamics (1), 409–429.
Donangelo, A., F. Gourio, M. Kehrig, and M. Palacios (2018). The cross–section of labor
leverage and equity returns. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Eckbo, E. and K. Thorburn (2008). Corporate restructuring: Breakups and lbos. In
E. Eckbo (Ed.), Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Volume 2, Chapter 16, pp. 431–496. North-Hooland/Elsevier.
Eisfeldt, A. and A. Rampini (2006). Capital reallocation and liquidity. Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369–399.
Favilukis, J. and X. Lin (2016). Wage rigidity: A quantitative solution to several asset
pricing puzzles. Review of Financial Studies 1 (1), 148–192.
Garlappi, L. and Z. Song (2017). Can investment shocks expain the cross section of equity
returns? Management Science 63 (11), 3829–3848.
Gomes, J. and L. Schmid (2010). Levered returns. Journal of Finance 65 (2), 467–494.
Gomes, J. F. (2001). Financing investment. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1263–
1285.
Gomes, J. F., L. Kogan, and L. Zhang (2003). Equilibrium cross section of returns.
Journal of Political Economy 111 (4), 693–732.
Gospodinov, N. and D. Lkhagvasuren (2014). A moment-matching method for approximating vector autoregressive processes by finite–state markov chains. Journal of Applied
Econometrics 29, 843–859.
Guthrie, G. (2011). A note on operating leverage and expected equity returns. Finance
Research Letters 8, 88–100.
32

Imrohoroglu, A. and S. Tuzel (2014). Firm level productivity, risk, and return. Management Science 60 (8), 2073–2090.
Jermann, U. (1998). Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 41 (2), 257–275.
Kogan, L. and D. Papanikolaou (2014). Growth opportunities, technology shocks, and
asset prices. Journal of Finance 69 (2), 675–718.
Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, and N. Stoffman (2018). Winners and losers: creative destruction and the stock market. Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.
Livdan, D., H. Sapriza, and L. Zhang (2009). Financially constrained stock returns.
Journal of Finance 44 (4), 1827–1862.
Maksimovic, V. and G. Phillips (2001). The market for corporate assets: Who engages
in mergers and asset sales and what are the efficiency gains? Journal of Finance 56,
2019–2065.
Marfè, R. (2017). Labor rigidity and the dynamics of the value premium. Working Paper,
Collegio Carlo Alberto.
Obreja, I. (2013). Book-to-market equity, financial leverage, and the cross–section of stock
returns. Review of Financial Studies 5 (1), 1146–1189.
Papanikolaou, D. (2011). Investment shocks and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 119 (4), 639–685.
Rouwenhorst, G. K. (1995). Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle models. In T. F. Cooley (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Chapter Chapter 10,
pp. 294–330. Princeton University Press.
Schmid, L. and L.-A. Kuehn (2014). Investment–based corporate bond pricing. Journal
of Finance 6 (69), 2741–2776.
Schoar, A. (2002). Effects of corporate diversification on productivity. Journal of Finance 57, 2379–2403.
Slovin, M. B., M. E. Sushka, and J. A. Poloncheck (2005). Methods of payment in asset
sales: Contracting with equity versus cash. Journal of Finance 60 (5), 2385–2407.

33

Tuzel, S. and M. B. Zhang (2017). Local risk, local factors, and asset prices. Journal of
Finance 72 (1), 325–370.
Zhang, L. (2005). The value premium. Journal of Finance 60 (1), 67–103.

34

A

Data

In this appendix, we provide details on a number of methodological choices we made when
estimating financial returns, the exit rate, and the VAR(1) process introduced in Section
5.

A.1

Returns

The risk–free rate is the difference between the return on the 90-days US Treasury Bill
(t90ret) and the rate of change in the Consumer Price Index (cpiret) – both from CRSP
– over the period 1976q1-2016q4. The market excess return is the difference between the
total value-weighted market return (vwretd) and return on the 90-days Bills (t90ret). The
Sharpe ratio is the average market excess return divided by its standard deviation.
When sorting stocks based on either book-to-market or market capitalization,20 portfolios are formed at the beginning of January, April, July, and October using firm’s accounting data available at least three months prior. The first portfolio is formed in July
1978, the last one in October 2016. Once the portfolios are formed, we track their monthly
returns for the next three months.
The size premium is the difference between the value-weighted average return among
stocks in the bottom quintile of the size distribution (small size stocks) and the valueweighted average return among stocks in the top quintile (large size stocks). Similarly,
for the value premium.

A.2

Exit Rate

We identify exits as the performance delistings associated to the following CRSP codes:
560 (insufficient capital, surplus, and/or equity), 561 (insufficient float or assets), 574
(bankruptcy, declared insolvent), 580 (delinquent in filing, non-payment of fees), and 584
(does not meet exchanges financial guidelines for continued listing). A quarter’s exit rate
is the fraction of firms that are in the sample at the start and are delisted over the next
three months.
20

The book value of equity is equal to shareholders’ equity (item SEQQ) plus deferred taxes and
investment tax credit (item txditcq, if available) minus the book value of preferred stock (item P ST KRG).
If shareholders’ equity is not available, we use common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying value of
the preferred stock(item P ST KQ). If common equity is not available, we measure shareholders’ equity
as the difference between total assets (item AT Q) and total liabilities (item LT Q). The book–to–market
ratio is the book value of equity divided by the market capitalization. Market capitalization is calculated
using data from CRSP and it is equal to the number of shares outstanding (item SHROU T ) multiplied
by the share price (item P RC).

35

−.1

−.05

0

.05

Figure 5: Wage and TFP

1964q1

1977q1

1990q1
date
wage

2003q1

2016q1

tfp

The average quarterly exit rate of 0.5% implies an annual average exit rate of 2%,
which is roughly mid-way between the rates computed by Campbell et al. (2008) for the
period 1976-2003 – 1.1% – and Dimopoulos and Sacchetto (2017) for the period 1981-2010
– 3.7%.

A.3

Estimation and approximation of the VAR process for wages and
TFP

The wage rate is proxied by real compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector,
provided by the the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.21 For TFP, we use the series for the
U.S. business sector available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s website.22
The data is adjusted for variations in factor utilization, labor effort and capital’s workweek,
following the methodology introduced by Basu et al. (2006). Both series are quarterly.
We consider deviations from a log-linear trend for the period 1964q1–2016q1. See
Figure 5. Estimation of the autoregressive process (5) yields point estimates


ρ̂z = 0.914∗∗∗ ρ̂wz = 0.036
.
ρ̂zw = 0.058∗∗ ρ̂w = 0.898∗∗∗
The elements of the variance-covariance matrix are σ̂z = 0.007, σ̂w = 0.008, and σzw /(σz σw ) =
0.276, all statistically significant at the 1% confidence level.
21
22

See https://fred.stlouisfed.org, item COMPRNFB.
See https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/indicators-data/.

36

Table A.1: VAR: Assessment of the Approximation

TFP Standard Deviation
TFP Autocorrelation
Wage Standard Deviation
Wage Autocorrelation
Corr(ε̂z , ε̂w )
Corr(z,w)

Actual VAR
0.023
0.942
0.026
0.936
0.276
0.723

Approximation
0.023
0.950
0.024
0.941
0.278
0.624

Since ρ̂wz is not significant, we estimate a constrained VAR imposing ρwz = 0. As
expected, the point estimates change marginally to


ρ̂z = 0.942∗∗∗
.
ρ̂zw = 0.066∗∗ ρ̂w = 0.888∗∗∗
The estimated variance-covariance matrix in unchanged.
In light of this evidence, we posit ρz = 0.95, σz = 0.007, as in the baseline model.
Furthermore, we set ρw = 0.90, ρzw = 0.07, σw = 0.008, and σwz = 0.0000151. As noted
in the main text, we approximate the bi-variate VAR process by means of the finite-state
Markov chain approximation methodology developed by Gospodinov and Lkhagvasuren
(2014), with 11 gridpoints for each of the variables.
In Table A.1 we compare some key moments for the tfp and wage process with their
simulated counterparts obtained simulating a bivariate VAR for 15,000 quarters. The
approximated model is able to replicate very closely the standard deviation and the first
order autocorrelation of the two process. The implied correlation between εz and εw is
very close to the one observed in the data (0.278 vs 0.276) and this generates a correlation
between the tfp and the wage processes equal to 0.624, slightly lower than the actual one
(0.723).

B

A Three–Period Model

With the purpose of providing intuition for the results in Section 3, we characterize
analytically the implications for equity returns of a 3–period model that shares all the key
features of the more general setup analyzed there.
The time periods are indexed by t = 0, 1, 2. Firms produce according to yt = est +zt ktα ,
where α ∈ (0, 1). Capital depreciates at the rate δ ∈ (0, 1). Dividends equal cash flows
minus investment.

37

Table B.1: Payoffs
t=1

es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ)
−k2

Current Asset
Continuation Asset

t=2

es2 +z2 k2α

0
+ k2 (1 − δ)

The variables st and zt denote the idiosyncratic and aggregate components of productivity, respectively. Both evolve according to first–order autoregressive processes with
independent, normally distributed innovations, exactly as in Section 3. At any time t,
firms evaluate cash flows accruing at t + 1 according to the stochastic discount factor
Mt+1 ≡ M (zt , zt+1 ). It follows that, conditional on capital k1 and productivity levels
{s1 , z1 }, the cum-dividend value of equity at t = 1 is

V1 (k1 , s1 , z1 ) ≡ max es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ) − k2 + E1 [M2 [es2 +z2 k2α + k2 (1 − δ)]],
k2

where the linear operator Es denotes the expectation taken conditional on the information
known at t = s. As of t = 0, the firm’s optimization problem is
max −k1 + E0 [M1 V1 (k1 , s1 , z1 )].
k1

B.1

Characterization

Equity is a portfolio of two risky assets whose payoffs at time t = 1 and t = 2, respectively, are listed in Table B.1. We will refer to them as current and continuation asset,
respectively.
For simplicity, denote the t = 1 conditional payoffs of the two assets as
Γcu,1 ≡ y1 + k1 (1 − δ)

and

Γco,1 ≡ −k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]],

respectively. The sub-indexes cu and co are mnemonics for current and continuation. It
follows that, with some abuse of notation, we can write the return on equity as
E0 [R1 ] = λ(s0 , z0 )

E0 [Γcu,1 ]
E0 [Γco,1 ]
+ [1 − λ(s0 , z0 )]
,
E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ]
E0 [M1 Γco,1 ]]

where λ(s0 , z0 ) is the loading on the current asset – the fraction of equity value accounted
for by the current asset – or
λ(s0 , z0 ) =

E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ]
.
E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ] + E0 [M1 Γco,1 ]
38

Since the expected returns on either assets are independent of idiosyncratic productivity, the latter influences the expected return on equity only via its impact on the loading
λ. Idiosyncratic productivity being mean–reverting, its expected growth rate is decreasing
in s0 . It follows that λ is strictly increasing in s0 . The continuation asset accounts for a
larger fraction of the value of small firms. These claims are formally stated in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1

1. Equity is a portfolio consisting of current and continuation assets, which

pay off exclusively at t = 1 and t = 2, respectively;
2. The excess return of neither asset depends on idiosyncratic productivity;
3. The current asset is itself a portfolio of the riskless asset and a risky asset with
expected returns

E0 (eεz,1 )
E0 (M1 eεz,1 ) .

The loadings are both positive and are function of the

risk–free rate.
4. The loading on the current asset is an increasing function of idiosyncratic productivity.
Proof. The current asset is itself a portfolio of two assets. One is conditionally riskless,
since it pays k1 (1 − δ) regardless of the state of nature. The other has a payoff es1 +z1 k1α .

The time–0 expected return of the latter is

E0 [es1 +z1 k1α ]
E0 [eεz,1 ]
=
.
E0 [M1 es1 +z1 k1α ]]
E0 [M1 eεz,1 ]

(6)

It follows that the expected return on the current asset is a weighted average of the
conditional risk-free rate Rf,0 and (6), where the weight on the latter is
Rf,0 − (1 − δ)
E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α ]]
=
.
α
s
+z
1
1
E0 [M1 [e
k1 + k1 (1 − δ)]]
Rf,0 − (1 − δ)(1 − α)

The weight on the short asset is
E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α

E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ)]]
.
+ k1 (1 − δ)]] + E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]

The weight will be increasing in s0 as long as the following quantity is decreasing:
E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]
.
E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ)]]

Tedious algebra reveals that the latter can be rewritten as

!
es0

ρs (ρs −1)
1−α

[E[eρs εs ]]1/(1−α) (1 − α)E0 M1
1



[E0 (M1 ez1 )] 1−α 

α
1−δ
1− R

f,0

39

!

α
1−δ
1− R

α
1−α

[E2 [M2 ez2 ]]

1
1−α

f,1

α
1−α

+

1−δ
Rf,0

α
1−δ
1− R

f,0

!

1
1−α







,

which is clearly decreasing in s0 , as ρs ∈ (0, 1).
In order to determine how expected equity returns vary with s0 , we need to establish
whether the current asset commands a greater or lower expected return than the continuation asset.23 In order to answer this question, we make functional assumptions on the
stochastic discount factor.
B.1.1

The Stochastic Discount Factor

Assume that log Mt+1 ≡ log β − γεz,t+1 , where γ > 0 disciplines aversion to risk and
β > 0 is the time discount factor. This choice implies that both the risk-free rate and the
maximum Sharpe ratio are constant. For all t ≥ 0,
Rf t = Rf =

1 1 2 2
1
= e− 2 γ σz
Et [Mt+1 ]
β

and

std(Mt+1 ) p γ 2 σ2
= e z − 1.
E(Mt+1 )

It follows that the expected return on the risky portion of the current asset is
E0 (eεz,1 )
E0 (eεz,1 )
2
=
= eγσz Rf ,
(1−γ)ε
z,1
E0 (M1 eεz,1 )
E0 [e
]
while the expected return on the continuation asset equals
h ρz
i
ε
1−α z,1
E
e
0
γρz 2
1 2 2
E0 [Γco,1 ]
h ρz
i
= e 1−α σz Rf .
= e 2 γ σz
−γ
ε
E0 [M1 Γco,1 ]
E e( 1−α ) z,1 /R
0

B.2

f

Idiosyncratic productivity, size, and expected return on equity

With a constant risk–free rate, the only source of risk is the cash-flow volatility. As long
as ρz > 1 − α, the continuation asset will command a higher expected return than the
current asset, and therefore equity returns will be monotonically decreasing in s0 .

In the cross–section, idiosyncratic productivity is positively associated with both market size and expected returns on equity. This version of the size premium holds both
conditionally and unconditionally, since the absence of capital adjustment costs makes
installed capital k0 immaterial for returns.
The parametric condition ρz > 1 − α is rather intuitive. As of t = 0, the risk of

the continuation asset is pinned down by the covariance between time–1 innovations to
aggregate productivity (εz,1 ) and Γco,1 , the time–1 conditional expectation of the asset’s
23

Note that this is not equivalent to assessing the slope of the equity term structure, as the definition
of assets we are using is not standard.

40

payoff. Such moment is greater, the higher the autocorrelation of the process ρz and the
higher the returns to scale in production.
Returns to scale are relevant, because they shape the elasticity of the capital choice
k2 to time–1 productivity innovations. In the remainder, we focus on the scenario for
ρz > 1 − α, as it is the empirically relevant one.

We conclude by adding that the impact of modelling interest rate risk would depend

on the sign of the covariance between interest rate and the innovation in the aggregate
productivity shock. A countercyclical risk-free rate would magnify the risk of the continuation asset. Conversely, a pro-cyclical risk-free rate would lower it.
B.2.1

Book-to-Market, Investment Rate, and Equity Returns

A corollary of the results obtained above is that information on indicators such as book–
to–market ratio and investment rate cannot improve upon our characterization of the
cross–section of returns. Because of the key role they play in the rest of the paper,
however, we find it relevant to characterize the model–implied correlations between the
two and expected returns.
Both book-to-market ratio and the investment rate depend on the installed capital k0 .
In order to compute the cross-sectional distribution of both quantities at time t = 0, we
need to make assumptions about the distribution of k0 .
We posit that k0 was chosen optimally by each firm at time t = −1, under the as

σs2
sumptions that z−1 = z0 = 0 and s−1 ∼ N 0, 1−ρ
2 . In other words, we consider the
s

scenario in which the aggregate productivity realization was equal to its unconditional
mean in both t = −1 and t = 0, and that the cross-sectional distribution of idiosyncratic

productivity was equal to the unconditional distribution. This is the scenario that more
closely resembles the unconditional average of a full–fledged stationary model such as the
one analyzed in the main body of the paper.
Under these assumptions, the average growth rate of capital installed by firms experiencing a realization of idiosyncratic productivity s0 is
   
k1
ρs (1 − ρs )
E log
|s0 =
s0 .
k0
1−α

This result follows immediately form Lemma 2. In the cross-section, the investment rate
is increasing in s0 .


σ2
Lemma 2 Let st−1 ∼ N 0, 1−ρ
and st = ρst−1 + ε, with ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), σ > 0 and
2
ρ ∈ (0, 1). Then, E[st−1 |st ] = ρst .

41

Proof. For simplicity, let f denote the density of a Normal distribution with parameters



σ2
2 .
0, 1−ρ
2 . Let also g denote the density of a Normal distribution with parameters 0, σ

It follows that

E[st−1 |st ] =

Z

st−1 f (st−1 )g(st − ρst−1 )dst−1
R
.
f (st−1 )g(st − ρst−1 )dst−1

To simplify notation further, let η 2 ≡

σ2
.
1−ρ2

Then,



1
1 s2t−1 (ρst−1 − st )2
+
f (st−1 )g(st − ρst−1 ) =
exp −
.
2πση
2
η2
σ2

Algebraic manipulations yield




1
1 (st−1 − ρst )2
1
s2t
f (st−1 )g(st − ρst−1 ) =
exp −
exp − 2
2πση
2
σ2
2 σ + η 2 ρ2




s2t
1
1
1
1 (st−1 − ρst )2
×√
.
=√
exp − 2
exp −
2 σ + η 2 ρ2
2
σ2
2πη
2πσ
The latter expression is the product of a constant and the density of a Normal with mean
ρst and variance σ 2 . It follows that


Z
1
1 (st−1 − ρst )2
E[st−1 |st ] = st−1 √
= ρst .
exp −
2
σ2
2πσ
Finally, we want to understand how the book-to-market ratio, i.e.
E(k0 |s0 )
,
E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ] + E0 [M1 Γco,1 ]
varies with s0 . Above we have established that both numerator and denominator are
increasing in s0 . In Lemma 3 we prove that the denominator grows faster.


σz2
Lemma 3 Assume that the discount factor is Mt+1 = βeγεt+1 and that s−1 ∼ N 0, 1−ρ
2 .
s

Along the path for the aggregate shock z−1 = z0 = 0,
1. Size and investment rate are increasing in s0 ;
2. Book-to-market is decreasing in s0 .

Proof. We limit ourselves to show that the book-to-market is decreasing in s0 . Rewrite
it as

E(k0 |s0 )
k1
α
s
+z
k1
E0 [M1 [e 1 1 k1 + k1 (1 − δ)]] + E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]
E(k0 |s0 ) g
=
BM.
k1

BM =

42

We have that
g = − log
log BM



E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ)]] E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]
+
k1
k1



Since

"
#−1
α
E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α + k1 (1 − δ)]]
1−δ
=
,
+
1−δ
k1
Rf
1 − Rf
the first addendum in parenthesis does not depend on s0 . It follows that
g)
ρs (1 − ρs )
∂ log(BM
=
Ω0 ,
∂s0
1−α

where
Ω0 =

E0 [M1 [es1 +z1 k1α

E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]
.
+ k1 (1 − δ)]] + E0 [M1 [−k2 + E1 [M2 [y2 + k2 (1 − δ)]]]]

By Lemma 2, s−1 |s0 is normally distributed with mean ρs s0 and variance σs2 . It follows

that




h  ρs s−1 i
E(k0 |s0 )
ρs s 0
log
= log E e 1−α |s0 −
k1
1−α


1 ρs σ s 2
ρs (ρs − 1)
.
s0 +
=
1−α
2 1−α
Finally,
∂log(BM ) ρs (1 − ρs )
=
[Ω0 − 1] < 0.
∂s0
1−α
Expected returns exhibit a negative cross–sectional correlation with the investment
rate and a positive correlation with book-to-market. The latter is the value discount
result that holds true also in Section 3. Value firms earn higher returns because on
average they have low market size!

B.3

Operating leverage

Now assume that at t = 1 firms incur a fixed operating cost cf > 0. The expected return
on equity at t = 0 becomes
E0 [R1 ] =

E0 [V1 (k1 , s1 , z1 )] − cf
.
E0 [M1 V1 (k1 , s1 , z1 )] − cf /Rf

43

.

Equity is now the combination of a short position on the risk–free asset and a long position
on the current and continuation assets introduced above. The position on the risk–free
asset is
−

cf /Rf
< 0,
c
E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ] − Rff + E0 [M1 Γco,1 ]

which is strictly decreasing in cf .
Everything else equal, raising the fixed cost is equivalent to expanding the short position – i.e. increasing leverage. It follows that the expected return on equity is increasing
in cf .
A greater level of s0 is equivalent to a decline in leverage, i.e. a smaller short position on
the risk–free asset and a smaller long position on the portfolio of current and continuation
assets. It follows that the expected equity return still falls with s0 . This property is stated
formally in Lemma 4.
Lemma 4 For cf > 0, as long as ρz > 1 − α, the expected return on equity is still

monotonically decreasing in the level of idiosyncratic productivity s0 .

Proof. Think of equity as a portfolio including the risk–free–asset as well as a composite of current and continuation business assets. The weight of the risk–free asset
−E

cf /Rf
f
[M
y
]+E
[M
[−k
0
1 1
0
1
2 +E1 [M2 y2 ]]]−cf /R

is negative and clearly increasing in s0 . That is, the

short position on the risk–free asset declines with s0 . It follows that the long position on
the composite of current and continuation assets also declines. Then the result follows
from Lemma 1, which ensures that the return on the composite portfolio declines with s0 .
The fixed cost also affects the book–to–market ratio, which becomes
E(k0 |s0 )
.
E0 [M1 Γcu,1 ] + E0 [M1 Γco,1 ] − cf /Rf
The slope of the mapping between s0 and book-to-market, which was proven to be positive
for cf = 0, decreases with cf . For a large enough value, it will turn negative and deliver
an unconditional version of the value premium. On average, high book–to–market firms
will be characterized by low productivity, small size, and high equity returns.

C

The role of investment adjustment costs in Zhang (2005)

Consisting of a minor variation of the neoclassical investment model, our framework is
also very close to that considered in Zhang (2005). Yet, the message of our paper is very
different from the one emerging from his work. Zhang claims in his abstract that “The
44

value anomaly arises naturally in the neoclassical model with rational expectations.” In
this appendix, we demonstrate that the contradiction between the two messages is only
apparent.
We show that when the capital adjustment cost is parameterized in such a way that the
volatility of the investment rate is consistent with the evidence, Zhang’s model generates a
value discount. Raising the adjustment cost to the levels considered in Zhang (2005) leads
to a sizeable value premium, but at the cost of essentially no cross–sectional variation in
investment rates. We also show that, at the margin, asymmetry in investment adjustment
costs plays no significant role.
We consider a version of Zhang’s economy with counter–cyclical price of risk and
symmetric investment adjustment costs. All parameters are set equal to the benchmark
values of the original paper.24 We compute allocations for levels of the parameter φ1 ,
governing the marginal cost of investment, as low as 0 and as high as 15. The latter is
the value entertained in Zhang (2005).
The results – expressed at the monthly frequency to ensure consistency with Zhang
(2005) – are gathered in Table C.1. The message is the same as that emerging from
Section 3.4. As long as adjustment costs are moderate enough to produce an empirically
sensible standard deviation of the investment rate (about 0.05 at the monthly frequency,
according to our estimation), the model cannot produce a value premium. When φ1 is
raised to 15, however, the annualized value premium rises to 4.38%.
A large value premium obtains because the capital stock is essentially fixed. All cross–
sectional variation in book-to-market is due to the variation in idiosyncratic productivity.
Value firms identify with small–cap firms. Growth firms, on the other hand, are large–cap
firms.
In a second exercise, we explore the role played by the asymmetry in investment
adjustment cost, which Zhang (2005) identifies as necessary condition for obtaining a
sizeable value premium. Table C.2 compares key implications of the model of which in
the bottom row of Table C.1 – i.e. symmetric adjustment cost with φ1 = 15 – with those
of a version where, exactly as in the benchmark scenario in Zhang (2005), the marginal
cost of negative investment is 10 times larger than the cost of positive investment (which
is kept at 15).

24
The only minor difference is that we do not allow the price of the final good to vary. We set the price
equal to the unconditional mean of its distribution in Zhang (2005). Our own calculation show that the
price variation has essentially no role in shaping the cross–section of returns.

45

Table C.1: Comparative Statics w.r.t. φ1 – Zhang’s Economy – Monthly frequency

Investment Moments

Returns (%)

Investment Rate

Capital

Idiosyncratic Shock

46

φ1

mean ik

std ik

Growth

Value

∆

Growth

Value

∆

Growth

Value

∆

Growth

Value

∆

0

0.039

0.150

1.310

0.968

-0.342

0.177

-0.047

-0.225

2.621

10.677

8.056

-0.426

0.377

0.803

0.0005

0.031

0.125

1.311

0.958

-0.353

0.142

-0.048

-0.190

2.614

11.122

8.509

-0.429

0.415

0.845

0.005

0.020

0.082

1.307

0.959

-0.348

0.081

-0.035

-0.116

2.533

10.236

7.703

-0.434

0.392

0.826

0.05

0.013

0.043

1.227

0.988

-0.239

0.049

-0.020

-0.069

2.547

8.201

5.654

-0.337

0.301

0.638

0.5

0.011

0.019

1.074

1.101

0.027

0.034

-0.009

-0.043

2.581

4.851

2.271

-0.029

0.001

0.030

5

0.010

0.008

0.940

1.209

0.269

0.020

0.002

-0.018

2.120

2.217

0.097

0.421

-0.398

-0.819

15

0.010

0.005

0.911

1.269

0.358

0.016

0.006

-0.011

1.555

1.488

-0.067

0.530

-0.495

-1.025

Table C.2: Asymmetric Adjustment Costs
Moments

No Asymmetric Cost

Asymmetric Cost

Mean Investment Rate

0.0100

0.0100

Std. Dev. Investment Rate

0.0055

0.0043

Autocorrelation Investment Rate

0.7959

0.7278

Growth Firms Return (%)

0.9111

0.9064

Value Firms Return (%)

1.2687

1.2834

Value Premium (%)

0.3576

0.3770

Adding a large degree of asymmetry barely changes the key cross–sectional moments.
In particular, the impact on the value premium is a negligible 0.02% per month. The
reasons is that asymmetry is added to a model – with φ1 = 15 for both positive and
negative investment – that already displays no variation in the capital stock.

47

