                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CREATIVE DESTRUCTION AND SUBJECTIVE WELLBEING

                                          Philippe Aghion
                                            Ufuk Akcigit
                                           Angus Deaton
                                          Alexandra Roulet

                                        Working Paper 21069
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21069


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




The authors are grateful to the Gallup Organization for permitting the use of the Gallup Healthways
Wellbeing Index data. For very helpful comments and discussions, we thank Marios Angeletos, Roland
Benabou, Anne Case, Henry Farber, Fabrice Murtin, Richard Rogerson, Francesco Trebbi, Fabrizio
Zilibotti, and seminar or conference participants at Princeton, CIFAR, Columbia, Zurich, Harvard,
the London School of Economics, the NBER Summer Institute Income Distribution & Macroeconomics
group, the Firm and Technology Dynamics Conference at the University of Nottingham, the ASSA
Meetings in Boston, and the IEA Annual Congress in Amman. Deaton acknowledges funding support
from the Gallup Organization, with whom he is a consulting Senior Scientist, and from the National
Institute of Aging through the NBER, grants numbers 5R01AG040629-02 and P01 AG05842-14, and
through Princeton's Roybal Center for Translational Research on Aging, Grant P30 AG024928. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Philippe Aghion, Ufuk Akcigit, Angus Deaton, and Alexandra Roulet. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Creative Destruction and Subjective Wellbeing
Philippe Aghion, Ufuk Akcigit, Angus Deaton, and Alexandra Roulet
NBER Working Paper No. 21069
April 2015
JEL No. I31,J63,J65,O33,O38,Z19

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we analyze the relationship between turnover-driven growth and subjective wellbeing,
using cross-sectional MSA level US data. We find that the effect of creative destruction on wellbeing
is (i) unambiguously positive if we control for MSA-level unemployment, less so if we do not; (ii)
more positive on future wellbeing than on current well-being; (iii) more positive in MSAs with faster
growing industries or with industries that are less prone to outsourcing; (iv) more positive in MSAs
within states with more generous unemployment insurance policies.


Philippe Aghion                                   Angus Deaton
Department of Economics                           361 Wallace Hall
Harvard University                                Woodrow Wilson School
1805 Cambridge St                                 Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER                                          and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu                           deaton@princeton.edu

Ufuk Akcigit                                      Alexandra Roulet
Department of Economics                           Harvard University
University of Pennsylvania                        alexandra.roulet@gmail.com
3718 Locust Walk, #445
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
uakcigit@econ.upenn.edu
1        Introduction

Does higher (per capita) GDP or GDP growth increase happiness? The existing empirical literature
on happiness and income looks at how various measures of subjective wellbeing relate to income or
income growth, but without going into further details of what drives the growth process.
        In his 1974 seminal work, Richard Easterlin provides evidence to the e¤ect that, within a given
country, happiness is positively correlated with income across individuals but this correlation no
longer holds within a given country over time.1 This Easterlin paradox is often explained by the
idea that, at least past a certain income threshold, additional income enters life satisfaction only
in a relative way;2 Clark et al. (2008) provided a review of this large literature of which Luttmer
(2005), Clark and Senik (2010), and Card et al. (2012) are prominent examples. Recent work has
found little evidence of thresholds and a good deal of evidence linking higher incomes to higher life
satisfaction, both across countries and over time. Thus in his cross-country analysis of the Gallup
World Poll, Deaton (2008) …nds a relationship between log of per capita GDP and life satisfaction
which is positive and close to linear, i.e. with a similar slope for poor and rich countries, and
if anything steeper for rich countries. Stevenson and Wolfers (2013) provide both cross-country
and within-country evidence of a log-linear relationship between per capita GDP and wellbeing
and they also fail to …nd a critical "satiation" income threshold.3 Yet these issues remain far from
settled, see for example the reviews by Frey and Stutzer (2002), Layard (2005) or Graham (2012) as
well as the new work investigating how happiness measures relate to economists’notions of utility
(e.g. see Benjamin et al., 2012). Importantly, however, none of these contributions looks into the
determinants of growth and at how these determinants a¤ect wellbeing. In this paper, we provide
a …rst attempt at …lling this gap.
        More speci…cally, we look at how an important engine of growth, namely Schumpeterian creative
destruction with its resulting ‡ow of entry and exit of …rms and jobs, a¤ects subjective wellbeing
di¤erently for di¤erent types of individuals and in di¤erent types of labor markets.
        Thus, in the …rst part of the paper we develop a simple Schumpeterian model of growth and
unemployment to organize our thoughts and generate predictions on the potential e¤ects of turnover
    1
     Easterlin’s results have been much debated. Even the importance of income to explain life satisfaction variation
across individuals has been sometimes quali…ed. Blanch‡ower and Oswald (2004) argue that life events such as
unemployment or marital status have larger e¤ects than income. Di Tella et al (2007) show that the e¤ect of an
income shock on life satisfaction is only temporary: 65% of the e¤ect disappears within four years.
   2
     In other words, provided you can ful…ll basic needs, what really matters for happiness is to be richer than one’s
neighbors or reference person.
   3
     Interestingly, Deaton and Stone (2013) show that income impacts di¤erently di¤erent measures of wellbeing
but argue that relative income and wellbeing remains a puzzle of the literature. They distinguish between hedonic
wellbeing (“did you experience a lot of happiness yesterday?), which could be consistent with a relative income story,
and evaluative wellbeing (as measured by how individuals assess their lives on a 0 to 10 ladder), which is more closely
related to absolute income.



                                                          1
on life satisfaction. In this model growth results from quality-improving innovations. Each time
a new innovator enters a sector, the worker currently employed in that sector loses her job and
the …rm posts a new vacancy. Production in the sector resumes with the new technology only
when the …rm has found a new suitable worker.                  Life satisfaction is proxied by the expected
discounted valuation of an individual’s future earnings. In the model a higher rate of turnover
has both direct and indirect e¤ects on life satisfaction. The direct e¤ects are that, everything
else equal, more turnover translates into both, a higher probability of becoming unemployed for
the employed which reduces life satisfaction, and a higher probability for the unemployed to …nd
a new job, which increases life satisfaction. The indirect e¤ect is that a higher rate of turnover
implies a higher growth externality and therefore a higher net present value of future earnings: this
enhances life satisfaction. Overall, a …rst prediction of the model is that a higher turnover rate
increases wellbeing more when controlling for aggregate unemployment, than when not controlling
for aggregate unemployment. A second prediction is that higher turnover increases wellbeing more,
the more turnover is associated with growth-enhancing activities. A third prediction is that higher
turnover increases wellbeing more for more forward-looking individuals. A fourth prediction is that
higher turnover increases wellbeing more, the more generous are unemployment bene…ts.4
    In the second part of the paper we test the predictions of the model using cross-section MSA-
level US data. To measure creative destruction we follow Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996)
and use their measure of job turnover, de…ned as the job creation rate plus the job destruction
rate.5 The data come from the Census’Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) and are at the MSA
level. For robustness checks, we also use the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)
data from the Census, which provides information on hires, separations, employment, and thus
turnover, also at the MSA-level. To measure subjective wellbeing, we use the life satisfaction index
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), and the Cantril ladder of life from
the Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Index (Gallup), which asks about both current and anticipated
well-being. The BRFSS measure is constructed using the question "In general how satis…ed are
you with your life?"; the Cantril ladder is based on the following questions: "Imagine a ladder with
steps numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top; the top of the ladder represents the best
possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible life for you. On
which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand at this time? And which level
of the ladder do you anticipate to achieve in …ve years?" Another measure of wellbeing we also
   4
     In the Appendix we characterize the transitional dynamics of the model, and also extend the analysis to the case
where job destruction can be partly exogenous, or to the case where the turnover rate is endogenously determined
by a free entry condition.
   5
     We have also looked at …rm turnover, namely the sum of the establishment entry rate and the establishment exit
rate, with similar results.




                                                         2
consider using the Gallup database, as it could more directly capture how individuals react to the
risk involved in creative destruction, is the "worry" measure based on individual answers to the
question: "Did you experience worry during a lot of the day yesterday?".
      We investigate whether Schumpeterian creative destruction a¤ects all these measures of well-
being positively or negatively, by regressing our measures of subjective wellbeing on our creative
destruction variables. Our main …nding is that the e¤ect of the turnover rate on wellbeing is un-
ambiguously positive when we control for unemployment. This result is consistent with the theory,
and it is remarkably robust. In particular it holds: (i) whether looking at wellbeing at MSA-level
or at individual level; (ii) whether looking at the life satisfaction measure from the BRFSS or at the
Cantril Ladder measures from the Gallup survey; (iii) whether using the BDS or the LEHD data
to construct our proxy for creative destruction. We also …nd that the positive e¤ect of turnover
is stronger on anticipated wellbeing than on current wellbeing. On the other hand, creative de-
struction increases individuals’ worry - which re‡ects the fact that more creative destruction is
associated with higher perceived risk by individuals. Next, when interacting creative destruction
with MSA-level industry characteristics; we …nd that the positive e¤ect of turnover on wellbeing
is stronger in MSAs with above median productivity growth or with below median outsourcing
trends. Finally, we …nd that higher turnover increases wellbeing more in states with unemployment
insurance policies that are more generous than the median.
      The paper relates to two main strands of literature. First, to the literature on subjective
wellbeing. There, as mentioned above, we contribute by looking at the channels whereby innovation-
led growth a¤ects wellbeing. Second, to the literature on growth, job turnover and unemployment.6
In particular this literature points to two opposite e¤ects of growth on unemployment. One is a
"capitalization" e¤ect whereby more growth reduces the rate at which …rms discount the future
returns from creating a new vacancy: this e¤ect pushes towards creating more vacancies and
thus towards reducing the equilibrium unemployment. The counteracting e¤ect is a "creative
destruction" e¤ect whereby more growth implies a higher rate of job destruction which in turn
tends to increase the equilibrium level of unemployment. We contribute to this literature by
looking at the counteracting e¤ects of innovation-led growth on subjective wellbeing.
      The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the model and
generates predictions on the e¤ects of turnover on subjective wellbeing, and how these e¤ects
depend upon individual or local labor market characteristics. Section 3 describes the data, the
approach underlying the empirical analysis, and presents the empirical results. Section 4 concludes.
The Appendix contains extensions to the baseline framework and all regression tables. Additional
proofs and derivations are included in the Online Appendix.
  6
      E.g see Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996), Mortensen and Pissarides (1998), and Aghion and Howitt (1998).


                                                         3
2        Theoretical analysis
2.1       A toy model

In this section, we will o¤er a simple model to motivate our empirical analysis. The source of eco-
nomic growth is Schumpeterian creative destruction which at the same time generates endogenous
obsolescence of …rms and jobs. The workers in the obsolete …rms join the unemployment pool until
they are matched to a new …rm. Higher …rm turnover has both a positive e¤ect (by increasing
economic growth and by increasing employment prospects of unemployed workers) and a negative
e¤ect (by increasing the probability of currently employed workers losing their job) on wellbeing.
Which e¤ect dominates will in turn depend upon both individual characteristics (discount rate,
risk-aversion,...) and characteristics of the labor market (unemployment bene…ts,...). To keep the
analysis tractable, in what follows we will consider a steady-state economy with exogenous entry,
risk neutral agents, and only endogenous job destruction. These assumptions will be relaxed in
the Appendix: Section A focuses on transitional dynamics, B considers a model with exogenous
job destruction, C considers the implications of risk aversion, and D endogeneizes entry in the
theoretical model.

2.1.1       Production technology and innovation

We consider a multi-sector Schumpeterian growth model in continuous time. The economy is
populated by in…nitely-lived and risk-neutral individuals of measure one, and they discount the
future at rate :7 Therefore the household Euler equation is simply

                                                        r= ;                                                     (1)

where r is the interest rate of the economy.
        The …nal good is produced using a continuum of intermediate inputs, according to the logarith-
mic production function:                                Z
                                              ln Yt =           ln yjt dj
                                                         j2J

where J         [0; 1] is the set of active product lines. We will denote its measure by J 2 [0; 1] : The
measure J is invariant in steady state.
        Each intermediate …rm produces using one unit of labor according to the following linear pro-
duction function,
                                                   yjt = Ajt ljt ;
    7
    The analysis in this section can be straightforwardly extended to the case where individuals are risk-averse. See
the Appendix C.




                                                            4
where ljt = 1 is the labor employed by the …rm, and is the same in all sectors. Thus the measure
of inactive product lines is equal to the unemployment rate

                                                   ut = 1     Jt ;

where u denotes the equilibrium unemployment rate. Our focus will be on balanced growth path
equilibrium, therefore when possible, we will drop time subscripts to save notation.8

2.1.2    Innovation and growth

An innovator in sector j at date t will move productivity in sector j from Ajt               1   to

                                                 Ajt = Ajt       1;


where     > 1: The innovator is a new entrant, and entry occurs in each sector with Poisson arrival
rate x which we assume to be exogenous:9 Upon entry in any sector, the previous incumbent …rm
becomes obsolete and its worker loses her job and the entering …rm posts a new vacancy with an
instantaneous cost cY .10 Production in that sector resumes with the new technology when the
…rm has found a new suitable worker. In Appendix B, we extend the model so as to also allow for
exogenous job destruction.

2.1.3    Labor market and job matching

Following Pissarides (1990), we let
                                              m(ut ; vt ) = ut vt1                                              (2)

denote the arrival rate of new matches between …rms and workers, where ut denotes the number of
unemployed at time t and vt denotes the number of vacancies. Thus the ‡ow probability for each
unemployed worker to …nd a suitable …rm is

                                                  m(ut ; vt )=ut ;

whereas the probability for any new entrant …rm to …nd a suitable new worker is

                                                  m(ut ; vt )=vt :

In steady state, there will a constant fraction of product lines that are vacant (of measure v), and
the remaining fraction will be producing. We illustrate this economy in Figure 1.
   8
     In Appendix A, we consider the transitional dynamics. As it is shown there, convergence to the steady state
happens very rapidly, therefore focusing on steady-state of our model is almost without loss of generality.
   9
     See Appendix D for an extension of the model where we endogeneize entry.
  10
     In the Online Appendix, we provide su¢ cient conditions under which the incumbent …rm in any sector will choose
to leave the market as soon as a new entrant shows up in that sector. The basic story is that, conditional upon a
new entrant showing up, it becomes pro…table for the incumbent …rm to seek an alternative use of her assets.


                                                         5
    Finally, we assume that in each intermediate sector where a worker is currently employed, the
worker appropriates fraction             of pro…ts whereas the complementary fraction (1              ) accrues to
the employer.

                                           Figure 1. Model Economy
                              productivity level

                              Aj




                                                                                     product line
                                                                                                j
                              0                                                         1


                                   Vacant lines, v          Producing lines, 1-v




2.1.4    Valuations and life satisfaction

Our proxy for life satisfaction is the average present value of an individual employee, namely:

                                                Wt = ut Ut + (1        ut )Et ;

where Ut is the net present value of an individual who is currently unemployed, and Et is the net
present value of an individual who is currently employed.11
    The value of being currently employed, satis…es the asset equation:

                                               Et    E_ t = wt + x(Ut        Et ):

In words: the annuity value of being currently employed is equal to the capital gain E_ t plus the
wage rate wt at time t and with arrival rate x the worker becomes unemployed as the incumbent
…rm is being displaced by a new entrant. Here we already see the negative e¤ect of turnover on
currently employed workers.
    Similarly the value of being unemployed satis…es the asset equation:

                                      Ut      U_ t = bt + (m(ut ; vt )=ut )(Et        Ut ):

As before, the annuity value of being currently unemployed is equal to the capital gain U_ t plus the
bene…t bt accruing to an unemployed worker,12 and with arrival rate m(ut ; vt )=ut the unemployed
  11
     Thus our theoretical measure of subjective wellbeing is the ex ante expected valuation of a representative indi-
vidual who does not know yet whether she will start being employed or unemployed. In the next section, we shall
argue that the anticipated Cantril ladder is a good empirical proxy for this ex ante valuation indicator.
  12
     Think of this bene…t term as being the sum of a (monetary) unemployment bene…t and of a private utility (or
disutility) of being currently unemployed.


                                                             6
worker escapes unemployment. For any given unemployment rate, turnover has a positive e¤ect on
the value of unemployed because it creates job opportunities.

2.2      Solving the model

We now proceed to solve the model for equilibrium production and pro…ts, for the equilibrium
steady-state unemployment rate, for the steady-state growth rate, and for the equilibrium value of
life satisfaction.

2.2.1      Static production decision and equilibrium pro…ts

Let wt denote the wage rate at date t. The logarithmic technology for …nal good production implies
that the …nal good producer spends the same amount Yt on each variety j: As a result, the …nal
good production function generates a unit elastic demand with respect to each variety: yjt = Yt =pjt .
       Note that the cost of production is simply wjt which is the …rm-speci…c wage rate: Then the
pro…t is simply
                                            jt   = pjt yjt   wjt = Yt       wjt :                                    (3)

       Next, the above sharing rule between wage and pro…ts implies that wjt =                    (Yt    wjt ) ; hence

                                                                            1
                               wjt = wt =              Yt ; and   jt   =      Yt = Y:
                                                 1+                        1+

Clearly      determines the allocation of income in the economy, with a higher                   shifting the income
distribution towards workers.

2.2.2      Steady state equilibrium unemployment

Our focus is on a steady state equilibrium in which all aggregate variables (Yt ; wt ; Ut ; Et ) grow at
the same constant rate g; and where the measure of unemployed u and the number of vacancies
and the interest rate remain constant over time.13 Henceforth, we can drop the time index from
now on.
       In steady state, the ‡ow out of unemployment must equal the ‡ow into unemployment. Namely:

                                                  m(u; v) = (1     u)x:                                              (4)

The left-hand side is the ‡ow out of unemployment, the right hand side is the ‡ow into unemploy-
ment, equal to the number of active sectors (1               u) time the turnover rate x:
  13
    In Appendix A, we analyze the transitional dynamics of this model. More speci…cally, we look at the dynamic
impact of a sudden increase in the entry rate. In particular we show that: (i) following that increase in the entry rate
convergence to the steady-state is fast; (ii) the big change in welfare occurs at the time of the increase in entry rate,
and: (iii) the comparative statics on this change is quite similar to the comparative statics on steady-state welfare
stated in Proposition 1 below.



                                                             7
     In addition, the number of sectors without an employed worker is equal to the number of sectors
with an open vacancy, u = v: Combining this fact with the matching technology (2), we get:

                                             m = u = v:                                          (5)

     Putting these equations (4) and (5) together, we obtain the equilibrium unemployment rate
u = (1    u)x; or equivalently
                                                   x
                                             u=       :                                          (6)
                                                  1+x
That the numerator of u be increasing in x re‡ects the job destruction e¤ect of turnover on currently
employed workers; that the denominator be also increasing in x re‡ects the positive e¤ect a higher
turnover rate has on the job …nding rate of currently unemployment workers.
     The …rst e¤ect dominates here, with the equilibrium unemployment rate being increasing in
the turnover rate x: However this very much hinges on the fact that innovative turnover is the
only source of job destruction in this baseline model. In Appendix B, we introduce the possibility
of exogenous job destruction on top of innovation-driven job destruction. Then we show that the
higher the exogenous rate of job destruction, the more will the innovation rate x contribute to
reducing unemployment, and therefore the more positive the overall e¤ect of x on equilibrium
wellbeing:
     Now we can express the growth rate of the economy.

Lemma 1 The balanced growth path growth rate of the economy is equal to

                                             g = m ln ;

where m denotes the ‡ow of sectors in which a new innovation is being implemented (i.e., the rate
at which new …rm-worker matches occur).

     Proof. See the Online Appendix.
     Then, using the fact that in steady-state equilibrium we have:

                                                       x
                                          m=u=            ;
                                                      1+x

we get the equilibrium growth rate as,

                                                 x
                                           g=       ln :                                         (7)
                                                1+x

As expected, the growth rate is increasing in the turnover rate x and with the innovation step size
 .



                                                  8
2.2.3     Equilibrium valuations and life satisfaction

Recall that our proxy for life satisfaction is the average present value of an individual employee,
namely:
                                               W = uU + (1              u)E;

where:

                                  rE      E_ =            Y + x(U        E); and                             (8)
                                  rU      U_   = bY + (m(u; v)=u)(E                     U ):                 (9)

    Now, after substituting for E and U in the expression for W; and using the fact that in steady
state E_ = gE and U_ = gU; and that in equilibrium (see equation (5)) m = u = x=(1 + x), we get
the following expression for life satisfaction:14

                                                      Y                  xB
                                           W =                                                              (10)
                                                  r       g             1+x

where
                                                x
                                        g=         ln         and B                b:
                                               1+x
      From the above expression for W; we see three e¤ects of turnover on life satisfaction. First,
for given growth rate g; more turnover increases the probability of an employed worker losing her
                              xB
current job (numerator in     1+x )   which reduces life satisfaction; second, for given growth rate g; more
                                                                                                            xB
turnover increases the probability of an unemployed worker …nding a new job (denominator in                 1+x )
which increases life satisfaction; third, higher turnover increases the growth rate g which in turns
acts favorably on life satisfaction: this is the capitalization e¤ect mentioned in the introduction.
The overall e¤ect of turnover on life satisfaction is ambiguous.15
      Finally, if we look at the e¤ect of turnover on life satisfaction controlling for unemployment,
this e¤ect is unambiguously positive. To see this, after some straightforward algebra we reexpress
equilibrium welfare W as:
                                                     Y
                                          W =                [ub + (1    u)    ]                            (11)
                                                 r       g
which for given u is increasing in x since it is increasing in g and g is increasing in x (capitalization
e¤ect).16
 14
    See the Online Appendix for the detailed derivation of (10).
 15                               Y[  ln   B ]                                                     ln
    Using the fact that: @W
                         @x
                            = [(1+x)(  ln )+ln ]2
                                                  ; we see that @W
                                                                 @x
                                                                    > 0 if and only if         <   B
                                                                                                        :
 16
    See the Online Appendix for the detailed derivation of equation 11.




                                                               9
2.2.4       Comparative statics

Using the fact that:
                                        @W        Y [ ln     B ]
                                           =                          ;
                                        @x   [(1 + x) (  ln ) + ln ]2
we immediately get that a higher turnover rate x increases life satisfaction W more the lower the
discount rate :17
                                                     @2W
                                                         < 0:
                                                     @x@
       Next, life satisfaction increases more with turnover x the more generous unemployment bene-
…ts18 :
                                                     @2W
                                                          > 0:
                                                     @x@b
       A …nal remark is in order. In our analysis, life satisfaction is not necessarily equal to the
present discounted value of income for at least two reasons. First, even though we labelled b as
unemployment bene…t, the interpretation of it is much more general and it can embody in reality
the private disutility associated with being unemployed or opportunity cost of not working. Second,
our results also hold for the case of risk aversion as we illustrate in Appendix C in which case income
and life satisfaction are distinct objects.

2.2.5       Summary and main predictions

We summarize the above discussion in the following proposition:

Proposition 1 (i) A higher turnover rate x increases life satisfaction W unambiguously once
we control for the unemployment rate, not otherwise; (ii) a higher turnover rate increases life
satisfaction more the lower the discount rate ; (iii) life satisfaction increases more with turnover
x the more generous are unemployment bene…ts.

       In the empirical analysis below, we will use cross-MSA data on wellbeing and job turnover to
test the following predictions from the model:
       Prediction 1: A higher turnover rate increases wellbeing more when controlling for aggregate
unemployment than when not controlling for aggregate unemployment.
       Prediction 2: A higher turnover rate increases wellbeing more, the more turnover is associated
with growth-enhancing activities (i.e, the less it stems from unilateral job destruction).
  17
       And in fact life satisfaction increases with turnover when < Bln , and it decreases with turnover otherwise.
  18
       Indeed:
                                            @2W                Y
                                                  =                           > 0:
                                            @x@b    [(1 + x) (   ln ) + ln ]2




                                                          10
    Prediction 3: A higher turnover rate increases wellbeing more for more forward-looking indi-
viduals.
    Prediction 4: A higher turnover rate increases wellbeing more, the more generous unemploy-
ment bene…ts.


3     Empirical analysis
3.1    Data

The data on creative destruction come from the Business Dynamics Statistics, which provide, at
the metropolitan level (MSA), information on job creation and destruction rates as well as on the
entry and exit rates of establishments.19 These rates are computed from the whole universe of
…rms as described in the Census Longitudinal Business Database. Our main measure of creative
destruction is the "job turnover rate", de…ned as the sum of the job creation and job destruction
rates. We also analyze the role of creation rates and destruction rates separately. We look at
alternative measures of creative destruction in our robustness checks.
    The data on subjective wellbeing come from two sources. First, the Gallup Healthways Well-
being Index, which collects data on 1,000 randomly selected Americans each day through phone
interviews. The period covered is 2008-2011. Subjective wellbeing in Gallup is assessed through
various questions aimed at capturing di¤erent dimensions of wellbeing. Some questions target
the individual’s current emotional state20 and are framed along those lines: "Did you experience
worry/sadness/happiness during a lot of the day yesterday?". Answers are binary, 0 or 1. We use
the "worry" variable, which is the variable most likely to capture the e¤ect of the (unemployment)
risk associated with creative destruction. Alternatively, the "Cantril ladder of life" questions are
destined to measure the individual’s evaluation of her life. Each individual is asked: "Please imag-
ine a ladder with steps numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top; the top of the ladder
represents the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible
life for you; on which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand at this time?";
and then "which level of the ladder do you anticipate to achieve in …ve years?". We refer to answers
to the …rst question as the "current ladder" and to the second one as the "anticipated ladder". The
"anticipated ladder" measure is particularly interesting as we recall that the theoretical wellbeing
indicator W analyzed in the previous section is precisely an expectation, namely the ex ante ex-
pected valuation of an individual who does not know yet whether she will start being employed or
unemployed.
   19
      The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments
from year t 1 to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average employment between years t and
t 1.
   20
      See Deaton and Kahneman (2010) for the distinction between emotional and evaluative wellbeing.


                                                        11
       The second source of data on subjective wellbeing is the Behavioral Risk Factor and Surveillance
System (BRFSS). The sample size is also roughly 350,000 respondents per year, and the period
covered is 2005-2010. To proxy for subjective well-being in the BRFSS, we use the Life Satisfaction
question: "In general how satis…ed are you with your life?". The possible answers are: "Very
satis…ed"; "Satis…ed"; "Dissatis…ed"; "Very dissatis…ed". We recode these answers so that "Very
dissatis…ed" corresponds to grade 1 and "Very satis…ed" corresponds to grade 4. The descriptive
statistics of our data can be found in Table 1.

                                              T ABLE 1 HERE

3.2      Estimation framework

The model highlights two opposite forces whereby creative destruction impacts subjective wellbeing:
the negative e¤ect that comes from the higher risk of unemployment and the positive e¤ect through
higher growth expectations. A testable prediction of the model is that when regressing subjective
wellbeing measures on creative destruction variables, controlling for the unemployment rate should
capture part of the negative force of creative destruction and thus lead to a more positive coe¢ cient
of creative destruction on wellbeing than without the control for unemployment.
       Our measure of creative destruction varies at the MSA level, thus we estimate MSA-level re-
gressions. However, in order to take advantage of our micro-level data on subjective wellbeing, we
also perform individual-level regressions that allow us to have a richer and more meaningful set of
controls.21
       In both cases, regressions are OLS and the …rst exercise we perform is to compare the coe¢ cients
from a baseline speci…cation with and without the control for the MSA-level unemployment rate.
We restrict the analysis to working age individuals (18-60 years old) to be closer to the model in
which individuals are either employed or unemployed.22
       At the MSA level, we look at purely cross-sectional regressions where we average our subjective
wellbeing data at the MSA-level and across the di¤erent years available: 2005-2010 for the BRFSS
data, and 2008-2011 for the Gallup data. Table 2 focuses on life satisfaction, as measured either by
the BRFSS, or by the current and anticipated ladder of the Gallup-Healthways Wellbeing Index.
Table 3 investigates the e¤ect on an alternative dimension of wellbeing: individuals’"worry". In
all cases, we also look at how the e¤ect of creative destruction is decomposed into a "job creation"
e¤ect and a "job destruction" e¤ect.
       In Table 4, we allow the unemployment rate to have a non-linear e¤ect on subjective wellbeing
  21
     Individual characteristics like marital status do not vary much if we aggregate them at the MSA level, yet they
are very important determinants of wellbeing at the individual level.
  22
     However, we performed all the regressions for the whole population as well, which yields very similar results.



                                                        12
by introducing a cubic polynomial of the unemployment rate in the regressions. In Tables 5 and 6,
we control for income per capita. Our preferred way of doing so is by using MSA-level averages of
the log of BRFSS or Gallup respondents’income. We also check and report results when using the
log of MSA-level income per capita as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and averaged
over the relevant period (2005-2010 for the BRFSS regressions and 2008-2011 for the Gallup ones).
Tables 7 and 8 explore what happens when we add MSA-level potential confounders such as crime
rate, the share of African Americans and population (in levels).
      We then perform individual level regressions, where we control for individual characteristics
such as education and ethnicity, as well as gender, marital status, and age. Income is not an
innocuous control as the e¤ect of creative destruction is likely to operate precisely through income,
so we show results separately with and without this control.
      The speci…cation is as follows:

                            SW Bi;m;t = CDm;t + Um;t + Xi;t + Tt +           i;t ,                    (12)

where SW Bm;t is subjective wellbeing for individual i who lives in MSA m in year t. This measure
is derived either through the life satisfaction question of the BRFSS or through the current ladder
question or the anticipated ladder question in the Gallup survey. CDm;t is creative destruction in
MSA m in year t; which we take to be either the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction
rate, or these two components introduced separately but simultaneously in the regression. Um;t is
the unemployment rate in that MSA in year t. Xi;t are individual-level controls: gender, age, age
square, race, detailed education, detailed family status and, in some speci…cations, dummies for
income brackets.23 Tt are year and month …xed e¤ects. And       m;t   is the error term. A constant is also
included and standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. The main coe¢ cient of interest is .
We look at how this coe¢ cient changes depending on whether or not we control for unemployment.
We perform several robustness checks which we discuss below. We then look at how the e¤ect of
creative destruction di¤ers according to the sectoral composition of the MSA: some sectors have
stronger or weaker employment prospects, depending on their growth rate or on their tendency to
outsource.

3.3     Baseline results
3.3.1     MSA-level results

Table 2 shows the results from the baseline OLS regressions at the MSA level. Panel A of Table
2 is based on the BRFSS dataset and thus the dependent variable is the Life Satisfaction index
 23
   In both surveys, income is measured by income brackets: monthly individual income in Gallup and annual
household income in Gallup. We use dummies for these brackets.



                                                   13
constructed from answers to the question "How satis…ed are you with your life?". Column (1)
shows a negative e¤ect of unemployment on Life Satisfaction. Column (2) shows a non-signi…cant
positive e¤ect of job turnover on Life Satisfaction. Column (3) shows that once we control for
unemployment, job turnover has a positive signi…cant e¤ect on Life Satisfaction. This is in line
with our model which predicts that, controlling for unemployment, turnover should only have
a positive e¤ect on wellbeing as it implies higher growth and a higher probability for currently
unemployed workers of …nding a new job.24 Column (4) decomposes job turnover between job
creation and job destruction. We see the positive e¤ect of job creation and the negative e¤ect
of job destruction, although the latter becomes non-signi…cant once we control for unemployment
(Column (5)).
    Panel B of Table 2 reproduces the same exercise but using the Gallup survey and the correspond-
ing Cantril ladder indicator. Remarkably, even though the data set and measure are completely
di¤erent from those in the BRFSS, the results exactly mirror those from the BRFSS, namely: (i)
a negative e¤ect of unemployment on the Cantril ladder in Column (1); (ii) a positive but barely
signi…cant e¤ect of job turnover on the ladder in Column (2); (iii) a signi…cant and more positive
e¤ect of turnover on the ladder once we control for unemployment in Column (3); (iv) a positive
e¤ect of job creation and a negative e¤ect of job destruction in Column (4), the latter being more
than halved once we control for unemployment (Column (5)).


                                             T ABLE 2 HERE

Panel C of Table 2 reproduces the same regression analysis but looking at the e¤ect of job turnover
on the Anticipated ladder (which again uses the Gallup data). By comparing with Panel B, we …rst
see that job turnover has a stronger e¤ect on the Anticipated ladder than on the current Cantril
ladder. Moreover, Column (2) shows that job turnover has a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the
Anticipated ladder even if we do not control for unemployment. This in turn points to the notion
that individuals disentangle the short-run losses from becoming unemployed as a result of job
turnover from the long-term gains associated with higher growth and more new job opportunities
in the future. This view is con…rmed by looking at Column (4) which shows that the negative
e¤ect of job destruction on the Anticipated ladder is barely signi…cant even if we do not control for
unemployment.
    Table 3 looks at the e¤ect of job turnover on the "Worry" measure of wellbeing. We see
that job turnover increases "worry", and that the coe¢ cient becomes smaller when we control for
unemployment. This again is in line with the theory, and suggests that one source of short-run
  24
     The correlation between the MSA-level average job turnover rates over the period 2005-2010 and the MSA-level
average unemployment rates over the same period, is equal to 0.27.


                                                       14
stress from higher turnover is due to the increased probability of becoming unemployed.

                                             T ABLE 3 HERE

Now, consider the magnitudes of the various e¤ects. Consistently across both datasets, the magni-
tude of the e¤ect of creative destruction on current life satisfaction is in the same ballpark as that
of the e¤ect of the unemployment rate. In particular, moving from an MSA which is at the 25th
percentile in terms of its level of creative destruction (i.e with a job creation rate + destruction rate
at 23.4%) to an MSA at the 75th percentile (i.e with a job creation rate plus job destruction rate
at 28.3%) is associated with an increase in the current ladder of life of 0.067 points (Column (3) in
Table 2, Panel B). As a benchmark, looking at the same regression, moving from the 75th to the
25th percentile in terms of the unemployment rate (that is, from a 9.4% to a 6.7% unemployment
rate) is associated with an increase in life satisfaction of 0.08 points. Another way to put it is that a
one standard deviation increase in job turnover has an e¤ect equivalent to a 0.7 standard deviation
increase in the MSA level unemployment rate.
       When focusing on anticipated wellbeing, that is, on Panel C of Table 2, the e¤ect of creative
destruction is slightly stronger than that of the unemployment rate. Indeed, a one standard devi-
ation increase in job turnover has an e¤ect on the future ladder of life equivalent to a 1.3 standard
deviation increase in the MSA-level unemployment rate.
       Table 4 shows that the signi…cance and sign of the job turnover coe¢ cient remain when in-
troducing the square and the cube of the unemployment rate as additional controls. Thus the
positive e¤ect of job turnover is not standing proxy for potential non-linearities in the e¤ect of the
unemployment rate.
       Tables 5 and 6 add controls for income per capita. Table 5 focuses on the Cantril ladder of life
from Gallup whereas Table 6 uses the BRFSS measure of life satisfaction. In these tables, Panel A
just reproduces the baseline results showed in Table 2. Then Panel B adds our preferred control for
income. In both surveys, income is measured in terms of income brackets. We take the midpoints
of these brackets assuming that income is log-normally distributed and we then average at the
MSA-level these log midpoints. Panel C controls for income in another way: namely, we take the
MSA-level income per capita measure from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, average it over the
relevant years and then take its log. We see that, when the Cantril ladder of life is the dependant
variable (Table 5), not only do both types of control for income yield very similar results but the
coe¢ cient for the job turnover rate remains essentially the same as in the speci…cation without any
control for income. This result is in line with our remark in the theory section about the e¤ect of
turnover on wellbeing going beyond the e¤ect of turnover on income.25
  25
   The F-test for the joint signi…cance of the job creation and the job destruction rates when we control for the
unemployment rate and average log of income is 13.75.


                                                       15
       Now if we move to the BRFSS dataset (Table 6), controlling for the BEA income per capita
measure (Panel C) yields a very similar coe¢ cient for the job turnover rate as in the speci…cation
without control for income (Panel A). But, when controlling for the average log income as measured
by the BRFSS (Panel B) job turnover has a signi…cant e¤ect on life satisfaction even when we do
not control for the unemployment rate (column 2). However we still obtain a coe¢ cient for the job
turnover rate which is higher when we control for unemployment (column 3) than when we do not
(column 2).
       Tables 7 and 8 add further controls which are meant to capture characteristics of MSAs that
might a priori confound the results which we care about. Thus to the baseline speci…cations of
Tables 2 and 3 we add controls for the average log of income (as measured by the BRFSS or Gallup
surveys), MSAs’population levels coming from the BEA, crime rates from the FBI Crime Statistics
and the share of African Americans in the MSA.26 Comparing Table 7 to Table 2 and Table 8 to
Table 3 provide evidence that, for all subjective wellbeing measures considered, our baseline results
are robust to adding these potential confounders as controls.
       Overall, creative destruction has an e¤ect on subjective wellbeing of the opposite sign from that
of unemployment but of similar magnitude when measuring wellbeing by current life satisfaction;
and the e¤ect of creative destruction on subjective wellbeing is of a higher magnitude than that
of unemployment when measuring wellbeing by anticipated life satisfaction (i.e by the Anticipated
ladder).
                                          T ABLES 4 to 8 HERE

3.3.2      Individual level results

In Tables 9 to 12, we perform individual-level regressions using the BRFSS and the Gallup data
and …nd qualitatively similar results as in Tables 2 and 3. The di¤erence is that we now also control
for individual-level characteristics and for year and month …xed e¤ects.

                                         T ABLES 9 to 12 HERE

       Panels "A" in all Tables 9 to 12, are without individual demographic controls, whereas Panels
"B" in these tables include all controls except income and Panels "C" also control for income. Our
preferred speci…cation in all tables is that of Panels "B", as the model predicts that the indirect
positive e¤ect of job turnover on individual wellbeing goes through a higher net present value of
earnings, and controlling for self-reported income might partially shut down this latter channel.
  26
    The share of African Americans is a weighted average of the number of respondents in the surveys that report
being black in the race question. Weights use to compute the weighted average are those attached to the respondent
by either Gallup or the BRFSS.




                                                       16
   The magnitude of the creative destruction e¤ect is roughly similar to that displayed at the MSA
level, although slightly smaller. A one standard deviation increase in job turnover has an e¤ect on
the current ladder of life which is equivalent to half a standard deviation increase in the MSA-level
unemployment rate. And it has an e¤ect on the future ladder of life twice as large as that on the
current ladder.

3.4     Robustness analysis
3.4.1    Subperiod analysis

To deal with the concern that the period post 2008 is a period following a major recession, where
all sorts of other things were going on in developed economies, in Table 13 we decompose the overall
BRFSS sample period into the subperiods 2005-2007 and 2008-2010. The Table shows that the
main result, namely that the e¤ect of the turnover rate on wellbeing is unambiguously positive
when we control for unemployment and less so if we do not, remains true in both subperiods.

                                         T ABLE 13 HERE

3.4.2    Alternative database for creative destruction

As an alternative to the creative destruction data from the Census’Business Dynamics Statistics
(BDS), here we use the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) dataset constructed
by the Census bureau. These data are constructed based on the Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages (QCEW) and other administrative and survey data. They contain information on
employment, earnings, and job ‡ows at the MSA level with a detailed industry breakdown. The
only state that does not participate in this program is Massachusetts (and Puerto Rico). We will
take advantage in the next subsections of the detailed breakdown at the industry level. In terms
of creative destruction: rather than job creations and destructions, the data give us the number
of hires and separations. They give both the raw numbers of all hires and separations that occur
during a given quarter in a given MSA, and the numbers of so-called "stable hires", that is hires
that lasted at least a full quarter, and so-called "separations from stable jobs", that is a separation
from a job that had begun in the previous quarter. To compute the turnover rates, we divide
these hires or separations by the average stock of employment between the previous quarter and
the current one (or the average stock of stable jobs for the "stable job turnover" measure). The
correlation between our proxy for creative destruction in the two di¤erent datasets is around 0.6.
Table 14 shows the robustness of the MSA-level baseline results to using this alternative measure
of creative destruction (with slightly more positive coe¢ cients for stable job turnover).

                                         T ABLE 14 HERE

                                                  17
3.4.3      Panel analysis and predicted creative destruction

Using the quarterly data from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) dataset,
we can perform two additional exercises. The …rst exercise is to look at the relationship between
turnover and wellbeing in panel regressions with year, quarter and MSA …xed e¤ects (Table 15,
columns 1, 2 and 3). Whether looking at Panels A or B, i.e. whether considering the turnover rate
for stable jobs or for all jobs, if we compare column 1 to column 2, we see again that the coe¢ cient
for job turnover is higher when we control for the MSA-level unemployment rate than when we do
not. These two columns are without MSA …xed-e¤ects. When we add MSA …xed e¤ects (column
3), the coe¢ cient of job turnover is still signi…cantly positive although of a smaller magnitude and
again this is the case in both Panels A and B.
       Second, to abstract from the e¤ects of local changes in industry composition, or from the e¤ects
of purely local shocks that could get mixed up with variations in local turnover, we can construct
a "predicted measure" (or Bartik-type measure) of creative destruction as follows:
                                       X
                               d m;t =
                               CD          ! j;m;2004 CDj;U SA;t
                                                  j

                                                                                      d m;t , is
       For each MSA m in quarter-year t, the predicted level of Creative Destruction, CD
computed by taking a weighted average of countrywide turnover measures in sector j, quarter-year
t, CDj;U SA;t , with weights being determined by the sectoral structure in the MSA in 2004, ! j;m;2004
(sectors are 2 digit NAICS).
    Thus, in Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table 15 we reproduce the MSA-level regressions of Columns 1-
                                                                           d m;t : Standard errors are
3, but replacing the direct local turnover variable by its predicted value CD
still clustered at the MSA level.27 The results turn out to be quite similar when using the predicted
measure of turnover instead of the actual quarterly turnover rate as right-hand side variable. In
particular, the coe¢ cient for job turnover is larger when we control for unemployment than when we
do not (columns 5 versus 4) and the coe¢ cient remains positive and signi…cant when we add MSA
…xed-e¤ects (column 6). Interestingly the MSA …xed-e¤ects do not make the coe¢ cient decrease
as much as when using the actual turnover rate as the main right-hand side variable.

                                              T ABLE 15 HERE

3.5      Interactions

We …rst interact turnover with MSA-level characteristics, and more precisely with the industry
composition of the MSAs. Namely, we look at whether the e¤ect of job turnover on wellbeing di¤ers
  27
    If we assume that the sectoral composition in an MSA in 2004 has no direct e¤ect on subjective wellbeing in that
same MSA in 2005-2011, we could use our predicted measure of creative destruction as an instrument to try and get
at whether the e¤ect of creative destruction on subjective well-being is causal.


                                                        18
according to whether the dominant sectors of the MSA have lower or stronger growth potential and
have a higher or lower propensity to outsource their activities abroad.
      In Table 16 we interact job turnover (or the job creation and job destruction rates separately)
with a dummy for being in an MSA above median in terms of the productivity growth in the
MSA’s industries. The productivity growth measure is constructed as the Bartik variable in the
above subsection: namely, as a weighted average of TFP growth in the di¤erent sectors,
                                                   X
                                         P Gm =         wj;m T F P Gj;U SA
                                                    j

with weights wj;m corresponding to average sector shares in the MSA’s total employment over
the period 2005-2010. The source for the productivity measure is the NBER-CES Manufacturing
Industry database.28 This database stops in 2009, thus sectoral nationwide productivity growth is
averaged over the period 2005-2009. Table 16 shows that turnover has a more positive e¤ect on
well-being in MSAs where industries are growing faster than the median. Indeed we see that, when
we do not control for unemployment, the job turnover rate has a positive e¤ect on life satisfaction
only in MSAs above median in terms of productivity growth (column 1). When we do control for
unemployment, the e¤ect is signi…cantly positive everywhere but signi…cantly stronger in "above
median" MSAs.
                                              T ABLE 16 HERE

In Table 17 we perform the same exercise except that we look at the extent to which industries
outsource: presumably, the e¤ect of turnover on wellbeing should be less positive in MSAs where the
economic activity is more dominated by industries which outsource more, the idea being that job
destruction is more likely to be irreversible in such MSAs. To proxy the extent to which a sector is
prone to outsourcing, we follow Autor et al (2013) and use the growth of imports from China in that
sector over the period 1991-2007. Sectoral variation is within the 3 digits NAICS manufacturing.
Table 12 con…rms that turnover has a less positive e¤ect on wellbeing in MSAs where industries
are more prone to outsource their activities. Indeed we see that the interaction term between the
job turnover rate and the dummy for being above median in terms of the outsourcing threat, is
signi…cantly negative whether or not we control for unemployment (columns 1 and 2). Moreover,
this is driven by a more negative e¤ect of the job destruction rate in MSAs that are more likely
to outsource: namely, the interaction term between the job creation rate and the dummy for being
above median is not signi…cant whereas the interaction term between the job destruction rate and
the dummy for being above median is signi…cantly negative (columns 3 and 4)

                                              T ABLE 17 HERE
 28
      We thus restrict attention to manufacturing and consider 3 digits NAICS manufacturing sectors.


                                                         19
Finally, we interact turnover with the generosity of unemployment insurance (UI generosity) at
the state level. More speci…cally, in Table 18 we reproduce the baseline MSA-level analysis (Table
2 Panel B) but interacting all creative destruction variables (either the job turnover rate or the
job creation rate and job destruction rates separately) with a dummy for whether the MSA in
located in a state above median in terms of UI generosity, and controlling for the direct e¤ect of
being located in such a state. A state’s UI generosity is measured by the average maximum weekly
bene…t amount over the period 2008-2011. We see that the e¤ect of turnover is only positive for
MSAs located in states above median. Moreover this di¤erence come from the e¤ect of the job
destruction rate: there are no statistically signi…cant di¤erences for the e¤ect of the job creation
rate between MSAs in states above or below median in terms of UI generosity but the e¤ect of the
job destruction rate is negative for MSAs in states below median and positive for MSAs in states
above median when we control for the unemployment rate.

                                       T ABLE 18 HERE

In Table 19 we also replicate the baseline MSA level analysis (Table 2 Panel B) but splitting the
sample of MSAs into those located in states above median in terms of UI generosity and those
located in states below median, and running separate regressions for the two sub-samples. We see
that the e¤ect of job turnover on life satisfaction is signi…cantly positive only for MSAs in states
above median.
                                       T ABLE 19 HERE


4    Conclusion

In this paper we have analyzed the relationship between turnover-driven growth and subjective
wellbeing, using cross-sectional MSA level US data. We have …rst built a Schumpeterian model
of growth and unemployment to make predictions on how job and …rm turnover a¤ect wellbeing
under various circumstances. Our main empirical …ndings are consistent with the theory: namely:
(i) the e¤ect of creative destruction on wellbeing is unambiguously positive if we control for MSA-
level unemployment, less so if we do not; (ii) creative destruction has a larger positive e¤ect on
future wellbeing than on current wellbeing; (iii) creative destruction has a more positive e¤ect
on wellbeing in MSAs with faster growing industries or with industries that are less prone to
outsourcing; (iv) creative destruction has a more positive e¤ect on wellbeing in MSAs within states
with more generous unemployment insurance policies.
    The analysis in this paper can be extended in several directions. A …rst avenue would be to
use a similar combination of the theory and of cross-section analysis to investigate other potential
determinants of wellbeing and compare them with the determinants of (per capita) GDP growth.

                                                20
A second extension would be to look at how the relationship between turnover and wellbeing is af-
fected by individual characteristics29 and by characteristics of labor markets and labor market policy
beyond the generosity of unemployment insurance (e.g. training systems, availability of vocational
education,..). A third extension would be to look for policy shocks (labor market reforms,...) that
may a¤ect the relationship between creative destruction and wellbeing. These and other extensions
of the analysis in this paper are left for future research.


References

 [1] Aghion, P., and Howitt, P (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press.

 [2] Autor, D., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G (2013) "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market E¤ects
       of Import Competition in the United States", American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121-2168.

 [3] Benjamin, D., He¤etz, O., Kimball, M., and Rees-Jones, A (2012), "What Do You Think
       Would Make You Happier? What Do You Think You Would Choose?", American Economic
       Review, 102, 2083-2110.

 [4] Blanch‡ower, D, and Oswald, A (2004), "Well-Being over Time in Britain and the USA",
       Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1359-86.

 [5] Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E., and Saez, E (2012), "Inequality at Work: The E¤ect of Peer
       Salaries on Job Satisfaction", American Economic Review, 102, 2981-3003.

 [6] Clark, A., Frijters, P., and Shields, M (2008), "Relative Income, Happiness, and Utility: An
       Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles", Journal of Economic Literature,
       46, 95-144.

 [7] Clark, A., and Senik, C (2010), "Who Compares to Whom? The Anatomy of Income Com-
       parisons in Europe", Economic Journal, 120, 573-594.

 [8] Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., and Schuh, S (1996), Creative Destruction, MIT Press.

 [9] Deaton, A (2008), "Income, Health and Well-Being Around The World : Evidence from the
       Gallup Word Poll", Journal of Economic Perspective, 22, 53-72;
  29
      Thus we looked at how the e¤ect of turnover on wellbeing might vary with age: more speci…cally, we replicated
the baseline analysis of Table 2 Panel B but instead of considering the wellbeing of all working age respondents (as
in Table 2 Panel B) we looked separately at the wellbeing of respondents below median in terms of age (see Table 20
Panel A) and above median (see Table 20 Panel B), the median age being 40. We found that the e¤ect of turnover on
life satisfaction is more positive for the younger individuals, which is in turn consistent with our theoretical prediction
that the e¤ect of turnover on wellbeing should be more positive the lower the discount rate.




                                                            21
[10] Deaton, A., and Kahneman, A (2010), "High Income Improves Evaluation of Life But Not
    Emotional Well-Being", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(38), 16489-
    16493.

[11] Deaton, A., and Stone, A (2013), "Two Happiness Puzzles", American Economic Review,103,
    591-597.

[12] Di Tella, R., Haisken-De New, J. and MacCulloch, R (2010). "Happiness Adaptation to Income
    and to Status in an Individual Panel," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 76,
    834-852.

[13] Easterlin, R (1974), "Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot", in Paul David and
    Melvin Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic growth: Essays in Honor of Moses
    Abramovitz, New York: Academic Press.

[14] Frey, B., and Stutzer, A (2002), "What Can Economists Learn from Happiness Research?",
    Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 402-435.

[15] Graham, C (2012), Happiness Around the World: The Paradox of Happy Peasants and Un-
    happy Millionaires, Oxford University Press.

[16] Layard, R (2005), Happiness: Lessons from a New Science, London: Allen Lane.

[17] Luttmer, E (2005), "Relative Earnings and Well Being", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120,
    963-1002.

[18] Mortensen, D., and Pissarides, C (1998), "Technological Progress, Job Creation, and Job
    Destruction", Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 733-753.

[19] Pissarides, C (1990), Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Blackwell, Oxford.

[20] Stevenson, B., and Wolfers, J (2013) "Subjective Well-Being and Income: Is There Any Evi-
    dence of Satiation?" American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 101, 598-604.




                                              22
Appendix: Extensions
A     Transitional dynamics

Now we focus on a sudden change in the entry rate to analyze its impact on the economy’s transition
from one steady state to the next.
    Assume that the economy starts at its steady state with entry rate xlow and the entry rate sud-
denly increases from xlow to xhgh such that xhgh > xlow : We start by focusing on the unemployment
rate …rst. After the change in the entry rate, the ‡ow equation of the unemployment rate becomes

                                           u_ t = (1     ut ) xhgh   mt :

Since ut = vt in every period; we get mt = ut = vt ; therefore

                                           u_ t = xhgh    (1 + xhgh ) ut :                                         (13)

The solution to this di¤erential equation is simply

                                    xlow          xhgh                    xhgh
                           ut =                          e (1+xhgh )t +          :
                                  1 + xlow      1 + xhgh                1 + xhgh

Recall that the growth rate is simply g = m ln : Therefore the aggregate growth rate of this
economy during transition is

                                  xlow          xhgh                    xhgh
                        gt =                           e (1+xhgh )t +                    ln :
                                1 + xlow      1 + xhgh                1 + xhgh

Now we turn to the value functions

         rEt   E_ t =      Yt + xhgh (Ut     Et ); and rUt       U_ t = bYt + (mt (ut ; vt )=ut )(Et     Ut ):

Note that out of the steady state, it is not possible to solve these value functions further analytically.
However, we can explore them numerically. For that, we need to determine 6 parameters:                           ; xhgh ;
xlow ; ; ; and b: Since our model is stylized, our goal here is to show you the numerical properties
of the model, rather than trying to provide a detailed calibration exercise. We pick the discount
rate, which also corresponds to the interest rate in the benchmark model, to be                        = 5%: We will
set xlow = 6:4% and xhgh = 8:7% such that the steady-state unemployment rates are 6% and 8%;
respectively. We set       = 1:18 in order to obtain an initial steady state growth rate of 1%: The
worker share of output is chosen to be         = 0:9 such that the pro…t share of the …rm is 10%. Finally
we set the unemployment bene…t to be b = 0:3%.
    The following …gures illustrate this experiment. Until time 0, the economy is at its initial steady
state and at t = 0; the rate of creative destruction increases from xlow to xhgh : The left …gure shows

                                                         23
the evolution of the unemployment rate and the right …gure shows the e¤ect on equilibrium welfare.
For expositional purposes, we plot the welfare after normalizing it by the aggregate output every
period.
                                                                       Unemployment Rate                                                                                  Welfare
                                                   0.085                                                                                            12

                                                                                                                                                   11.9
                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                   11.8
                            unemployment rate, u




                                                   0.075                                                                                           11.7




                                                                                                                                        value, u
                                                                                                                                                   11.6
                                                       0.07
                                                                                                                                                   11.5

                                                   0.065                                                                                           11.4

                                                                                                                                                   11.3
                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                   11.2

                                                   0.055
                                                       -10        -5               0        5               10                                       -10       -5            0           5              10
                                                                                years, t                                                                                  years, t
                                                                              (A)                                                                                            (B)

                                                                                                       Figure 2.

   After the change, the unemployment rate starts to evolve towards its new level according to
the law of motion in (13) : What we see is that the convergence is quick and the economy assumes
its new steady state value almost after 6 years. The impact on welfare is slightly di¤erent. After
the sudden change, the welfare function features a sudden jump at time 0 and then starts to evolve
towards the new steady state. The big change in welfare occurs at the time of the change in creative
destruction and the remaining portion of the transition has much lower impact on the new level of
welfare.
   The following …gures illustrate the change in welfare, i.e.                                                                                                      Wt = Wt>0            Wt=0 for di¤erent
values of the discount rate                                                        and unemployment bene…t b:


                    Increase in Welfare when Creative Destruction Increases                                                               Increase in Welfare when Creative Destruction Increases
                                1.8                                                                                                     0.755
                                                                                                r=low
                                                                                                r=medium
                                1.6                                                             r=high                                     0.75


                                1.4                                                                                                     0.745
                                                                                                                      change in value
          change in value




                                1.2                                                                                                        0.74


                                                   1                                                                                    0.735


                                0.8                                                                                                        0.73


                                0.6                                                                                                     0.725                                                    b=low
                                                                                                                                                                                                 b=medium
                                                                                                                                                                                                 b=high
                                0.4                                                                                                        0.72
                                                       0      2          4              6   8              10                                       0      2          4              6       8              10
                                                                             years, t                                                                                     years, t

                                                                             (A)                                                                                          (B)

                                                                                                       Figure 3.

These results con…rm the steady state results in Proposition 1. The left …gure shows that the
increase in welfare after the increase in entry is higher, the higher is the unemployment bene…t.

                                                                                                                 24
Similarly, the increase in welfare is higher, the lower is the discount rate. Hence, the steady state
results of the benchmark model are con…rmed in this simple numerical exercise even when the
transitions are taken into account.


B     Exogenous job destruction

So far, the only source of job destruction, as well as job creation, was new entry. However, in reality,
new entry is not the only source of job destruction. Following Pissarides (1990) we now allow for an
additional -exogenous- source of job destruction rate. To capture this, we assume that each job is
destroyed at the rate : Upon this destruction shock, the worker joins the unemployment pool and
the product line becomes idle. When a new entrant comes into this product line at the rate x; it …rst
posts a vacancy in which case then the same product line moves from being idle to being vacant.
Finally, when a vacant product line …nds a suitable worker, the product line becomes producing.
Similarly, if a new entrant enters into a currently producing line, then the sector becomes directly
vacant, the incumbent worker joins the unemployment pool, and the new entrant searches for a
new suitable worker.
    In steady state, there will a constant fraction of product lines that are vacant (of measure v), a
constant fraction of lines that are idle (of measure i) and the remaining fraction will be producing.
We illustrate this economy in the following …gure:

                   Figure 4. Economy with exogenous job destruction
                           productivity level

                           Aj




                                                                                         product line
                                                                                                     j
                           0                                                                1


                                Vacant lines, v        Idle lines, i   Producing lines, 1-v-i



Next, one can compute the steady state fraction of idle, vacant, and producing lines using the
following ‡ow equations:

                                                       (1       v) x = m;
                                                  (1      v      i)    = ix:

    The left hand side of the …rst equation is the ‡ow of sectors into the vacant stage: it is equal
to the ‡ow of productive sectors which become (directly) vacant, namely (1                               v   i)x, plus the ‡ow

                                                                  25
of idle sectors which become vacant, namely ix:The sum of these two terms is equal to (1                                                                                                            v)x:
The right hand side of the …rst equation is the ‡ow of sectors out of the vacant stage: it is simply
equal to the job matching rate m:
   Similarly, the left hand side of the second equation is the ‡ow into the idle stage: it is equal
to the ‡ow of producing sectors which become idle, namely (1                                                                                     i     v) times the ‡ow probability
  of an exogenous job destruction shock in such a sector. The right hand side is equal to the ‡ow
out of the idle stage. It is equal to the number of idle sectors times the ‡ow probability of a new
entry in such a sector, which will make it become vacant: namely, ix.
   By de…nition unemployment is equal to all the product lines where there is no production,
u = i + v: Hence the above ‡ow equations can be reexpressed as

                                                                (1       v) x = m; and (1                  u)                       = (u         v) x:                                              (14)

Moreover, the matching technology is such that

                                                                                            m = u v1                                                                                                (15)

Substituting (15) into (14) we get

                                                           (1         v) x = u v 1              ; and (1                    u)         = (u          v) x:                                          (16)

These last two equations give us a system of 2-equations and 2-unknowns. For analytical tractabil-
ity, assume                               = 0:5: Then the equilibrium unemployment rate solves a simple quadratic equation,
yielding the solution:                                                                          q
                                                                          ( + 1)                 ( + 1)2                             4[              2 x2 ]
                                                            u=1                                                            2 x2 ]
                                                                                                  2[
where                                 1 + =x:

                                    Unemployment Rate vs Creative Destruction                                                       Subjective Well-being vs Creative Destruction
                           1
                                                                             φ=low (=0)                                    10
                          0.9                                                φ=med (=.2)
                                                                             φ=high (=.9)                                   9
                          0.8
                                                                                                                            8
                          0.7
   unemployment rate, u




                                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                           well-being, W




                          0.6
                                                                                                                            6
                          0.5
                                                                                                                            5

                          0.4
                                                                                                                            4

                          0.3                                                                                               3

                          0.2                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                 φ=low (=0)
                          0.1                                                                                               1                                                    φ=med (=.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                 φ=high (=.9)
                           0                                                                                                0
                                0        0.2       0.4          0.6        0.8              1                                   0          0.2           0.4         0.6       0.8              1
                                               creative destruction, x                                                                               creative destruction, x


                                                Figure 5.                                                                                              Figure 6.


                                                                                                   26
    Unlike in the model without exogenous job destruction, the relationship between entry and
unemployment, and therefore between growth and unemployment, is no longer automatically
monotonic. Here, jobs are being destroyed both by creative destruction at the rate x and also
by the exogenous shock       : The only source of job creation is job postings that happens though
new entrants. Hence, one would expect that when                    is large, then the main role of entry will
be job creation whereas when            is very low, then we are back to the previous model and entry
will mainly create unemployment. This is evident in Figure 5 that plots the unemployment rate
against the entry rate for various values of the exogenous destruction rate                  2 f0; 0:2; 0:9g : As
expected, as   ! 0; entry (turnover) and unemployment becomes positively correlated: in this case
the job destruction e¤ ect dominates the job creation e¤ect. On the other hand, when                     is very
high, then the relationship is negative: in that case the job creation e¤ ect of innovation-led growth
on unemployment dominates the job destruction e¤ect.
    Now, moving to the relationship between the innovation-led turnover rate x and well-being W ,
Figure 6 shows that the higher the exogenous job destruction rate , the more positive the e¤ect
of x on W; especially for small initial values of x : this is not surprising, as the lower x is relative
to , the more the job creation e¤ect of increasing x dominates the job destruction e¤ect.


C     Risk aversion

We now consider the case where individuals are risk averse with instantaneous preferences U = ln C;
and compute the steady-state value functions under this assumption. Recall that the individuals
discount the future at the rate : Then the value functions for currently employed and unemployed
individuals satisfy the asset equations:

                               E        E_ = ln (         Y ) + x(U   E)
                               U        U_     = ln (bY ) + (m(u; v)=u)(E      U)

    Now the value functions take the following form
                                    1            x ln ( =b) g
                         E =                 ln (   )      + + ln Y             and
                                                  1+x+
                                    1          ln ( =b) g
                         U    =       ln (b) +          + + ln Y :
                                               1+x+
    Using the above expressions for E and U; well-being can be shown to be equal to:
                                    1         x            1                  1 g
                    W u(c)=ln c =                ln (b) +     ln (      ) +         + ln Y
                                             1+x          1+x
This expression shows that for given growth rate well-being is a¤ected more negatively by creative
destruction than in the risk neutrality case: since here the agent is risk averse, more asymmetry
between the returns when employed (                 ) and when unemployed (b) lowers her well-being by more.

                                                           27
       The net e¤ect of creative destruction on well-being will ultimately depend upon the size of
the asymmetry and upon the magnitude of the growth e¤ect: in particular, if the unemployment
bene…t is too low relative to the wage rate, or if the growth e¤ect is too small, then the overall
e¤ect of creative destruction on well-being is negative. More precisely:

Proposition 2 When agents are risk averse with U = ln C and the unemployment bene…t is suf-
…ciently low, namely b <        1=   , then a higher turnover rate x decreases life satisfaction W :

                                                     @W u(c)=ln c
                                                                  < 0:
                                                        @x
       This proposition states that, when agents are risk averse, job loss is perceived more detrimentally
than when they are risk neutral. Consequently, there is a range of unemployment bene…ts for which
higher turnover reduces life satisfaction for risk averse individuals with log preferences whereas it
would increase life satisfaction for risk-neutral individuals:
                                                            ln
                                                     1                   <b<    1=

       Finally, moving continuously from the baseline case where individuals are risk-neutral towards
the risk-averse case where individuals have log preferences, makes the e¤ect of creative destruction
on life satisfaction become increasingly less positive (or increasingly more negative).30


D         Endogeneizing the turnover rate

In this section of the Appendix, we endogeneize the turnover rate x. To this end, we …rst solve for
the value function of posting a vacancy (V ) and a …lled vacancy (P ) that is currently producing.
If the cost of posting a vacancy is cY , which we think as the registration fee that has to be paid to
the government; then we can write the value of a vacancy as
                                                                         m
                                          rV      V_ =          cY +       [P    V ]:
                                                                         v
                                                     m
Note that a vacancy is …lled at the rate             v.   The value of a …lled vacancy is

                                             rP          P_ = Y + x [0          P]
  30
       More formally, if
                                     W (x; ") = (1       ")W u(c)=c (x) + "W u(c)=ln c (x);
where
                                                                 Y              xB
                                            W u(c)=c =
                                                            r        g         1+x
is the equilibrium life satisfaction when individuals are risk neutral with u(c) = c (see above); the variable " re‡ects
the degree of risk aversion, and we have
                                                       @2W
                                                              < 0:
                                                       @x@"



                                                                 28
   In steady state we get the following values

                                                           Y
                                            P =                                                              (17)
                                                  r        g+x

and
                                           Y
                                 V =                      c+                :                                (18)
                                       r   g+1                  r   g+x
   Now we are ready to introduce free entry. There is a mass of outsiders enter at the ‡ow of
innovation x. Then the free entry condition is simply equates the value of vacancy to 0:

                                                 V = 0:                                                      (19)

Then using (18) and (19) we …nd the entry rate as

                                            x=             r + g:
                                                  c

This equation is intuitive. The entry rate increases in ‡ow pro…ts and decreases in the cost of
vacancy. Moreover, it increases in the equilibrium growth rate due to capitalization e¤ect (it
indicates that any formed business today will have higher future growth opportunities).
                                                                                 x
   Recall that r =     from the household maximization and g =                  1+x   ln : Hence equation (19) is
reexpressed as
                                                            x
                                       x=             +        ln :
                                            c              1+x
To ensure the existence of a unique equilibrium, it is su¢ cient to have the following assumption.
   Assumption: The discounted sum of future pro…ts is greater than cost of posting vacancy
  > c:
   Then the entry rate is implicitly determined as

                                                       x
                                           x=     +       ln
                                                      1+x

where      c      : Hence
                                                      q
                                 (1         ln ) +         (1        ln )2 + 4
                            x=                                                         :                     (20)
                                                           2

Proposition 3 There exists a unique entry rate x. Moreover, the equilibrium entry rate is increas-
ing in pro…ts    and innovation size   and decreasing in the cost of posting vacancy c and discount
rate
                                  @x @x                        @x @x
                                    ;   >0        and            ;   < 0:
                                  @ @                          @ @c




                                                      29
                                                                                                                                 Table 1: (B) Summary statistics- Individual-level variables
 Table 1: (A) Summary statistics- MSA-level variables
                                                                                                                                                              Mean    Standard deviation        Min     Max
                  Observations   Mean   Standard deviation   Min     Max
                                                                                                                                                   Panel A: Gallup data, 2008-2011
     MSA level averages of subjective well-being variables                                                                                               Sample size: 836,805

  faction             364        3.37         0.046          3.14    3.58                                                                               Subjective well-being
, 2005-2010)
 ladder               363        6.74         0.187          6.15    7.51                                                     Current ladder                   6.86             1.99 Table 1: (B)  10
                                                                                                                                                                                               0 Summary statistics- Individual-lev
  2008-2011)                                        Table 1: (A) Summary statistics- MSA-level variables                      Anticipated ladder               7.77             2.20           0   10
ted ladder            363        7.97         0.187         7.42 8.48                                                         Worry                            0.32             0.47           0    1         Mean Standard devia
  2008-2011)                                                        Observations   Mean   Standard deviation    Min    Max
                      363        0.35         0.034          0.24    0.46                                                                               Individual covariates                            Panel A: Gallup data, 2008-2011
2008-2011)                                              MSA level averages of subjective well-being variables                                                                                                  Sample size: 836,805
                                                                                                                              Female                           0.51             0.49             0      1
          Creative destruction and unemployment   rate
                                          Life satisfaction            364         3.37        0.046            3.14   3.58   Age                               40              12.3            18     60      Subjective well-being
                                          (BRFSS, 2005-2010)                                                                  Married or partner               0.58             0.49             0     1
             2005-2010 averages (Table 2 panel
                                          Current
                                                A) ladder              363         6.74        0.187            6.15   7.51   Black                            0.14                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                0.34Current ladder      1            6.86              1.99
over rate           366         0.29      (Gallup,
                                             0.035 2008-2011)0.18 0.43                                                        Asian                            0.02                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                0.15Anticipated ladder 1             7.77              2.20
tion rate           366         0.15         0.015
                                          Anticipated   ladder0.08 0.22363         7.97        0.187            7.42   8.48   Hispanic                         0.15             0.36Worry        0      1            0.32              0.47
ruction rate        366         0.14      (Gallup,
                                             0.017 2008-2011)0.09 0.22                                                        Graduate school                  0.14             0.35             0      1
 yment rate         366         0.07         0.015
                                          Worry              0.03   0.24
                                                                       363         0.35        0.034            0.24   0.46   College degree                   0.20             0.40             0      1      Individual covariates
                                          (Gallup, 2008-2011)                                                                 Some college                     0.25             0.43             0      1
     2008-2011 averages (Table 2 panel B and C, Table 3)                                                                      High school                      0.26                              0     1




             30
                                                                                                                                                                                0.44Female                           0.51              0.49
over rate           366         0.26         0.036           0.16 0.41
                                                             Creative destruction and unemployment rate                       Technical degree                 0.06             0.24Age          0     1              40               12.3
tion rate           366         0.13         0.018           0.08 0.21                                                        Less than high school            0.09                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                0.27Married or partner  1            0.58              0.49
ruction rate        366         0.14         0.021           0.082005-2010
                                                                    0.22 averages (Table 2 panel A)
                                                                                                                                                                               Black                                 0.14              0.34
 yment rate         366         0.08      Job0.025
                                               turnover rate 0.03 0.28366          0.29        0.035            0.18   0.43                        Panel B: BRFSS data, 2005-2010
                                                                                                                                                                               Asian                                 0.02              0.15
                                           Job creation rate            366        0.15         0.015           0.08   0.22                              Sample size: 964,869  Hispanic                              0.15              0.36
                                           Job destruction rate         366        0.14         0.017           0.09   0.22                                                       Graduate school                    0.14              0.35
                                           Unemployment rate            366        0.07         0.015           0.03   0.24                             Subjective well-being     College degree                     0.20              0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                  Some college                       0.25              0.43
                                                        2008-2011 averages (Table 2 panel B and C, Table 3)                   Life satisfaction                3.37           0.63High school 1      4               0.26              0.44
                                           Job turnover rate          366        0.26          0.036            0.16   0.41                                                       Technical degree                   0.06              0.24
                                           Job creation rate          366        0.13          0.018            0.08   0.21                             Individual covariates     Less than high school              0.09              0.27
                                           Job destruction rate       366        0.14          0.021            0.08   0.22
                                           Unemployment rate          366        0.08          0.025            0.03   0.28   Female                           0.51             0.50              0      1Panel B: BRFSS data, 2005-2010
                                                                                                                              Age                               39              11.9             18     60      Sample size: 964,869
                                                                                                                              Married or partner               0.65             0.48              0     1
                                                                                                                              Black                            0.11             0.31              0      1      Subjective well-being
                                                                                                                              Asian                            0.04             0.20              0     1
                                                                                                                              Hispanic                         0.17                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                0.37Life satisfaction    1             3.37           0.63
                                                                                                                              College or more                  0.38             0.48              0      1
                                                                                                                              Some college                     0.27             0.44              0      1      Individual covariates
                                                                                                                              High school graduate or GED      0.25             0.43              0     1
                                                                                                                              High school dropout              0.06             0.24Female        0      1             0.51           0.50
                                                                                                                              No high school                   0.04             0.19Age           0      1              39            11.9
                                                                                                                                                                                   Married or partner                0.65              0.48
                                                                                                                                                                                   Black                             0.11              0.31
                                                                                                                                                                                   Asian                             0.04              0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                   Hispanic                          0.17              0.37
                                                                                                                                                                                   College or more                   0.38              0.48
                                                                                                                                                                                   Some college                      0.27              0.44
                                                                                                                                                                                   High school graduate or GED       0.25              0.43
                                                                                                                                                                                   High school dropout               0.06              0.24
                                                                                                                                                                                   No high school                    0.04              0.19
                                    Table 2: MSA-level averages - Life satisfaction
                                             (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)                                 (5)
         VARIABLES                                           Subjective well-being

                      Panel A: ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS, 2005-2010 averages)

         Unemployment rate                -1.496***                            -1.694***                            -1.519***
                                           (0.270)                               (0.247)                             (0.270)
          Job turnover rate                                    0.121            0.347***
                                                             (0.0868)           (0.0785)
          Job creation rate                                                                       1.637***           0.847***
                                                                                                   (0.239)            (0.257)
          Job destruction rate                                                                    -1.605***            -0.272
                                                                                                   (0.257)            (0.319)                                                 Table 3: MSA-level averages -Worry
          Observations                        364               364               364                364                 364                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)                            (5)
          R-squared                          0.255             0.007             0.309              0.131               0.321                 VARIABLES                                   Worry (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)
                              Panel B: Cantril ladder of life (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                               Unemployment rate               0.462***                            0.383***                            0.258***
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.0812)                            (0.0854)                            (0.0952)
         Unemployment rate                -2.303***                            -2.970***                            -1.971***                  Job turnover rate                                0.257***          0.163***
                                           (0.731)                               (0.730)                             (0.757)                                                                    (0.0522)          (0.0565)
          Job turnover rate                                   0.653*            1.377***                                                       Job creation rate                                                                   -0.405***            -0.251
                                                              (0.365)            (0.379)                                                                                                                                            (0.152)            (0.158)
          Job creation rate                                                                       5.886***           4.713***                  Job destruction rate                                                                0.826***           0.576***
                                                                                                   (0.943)            (0.924)                                                                                                       (0.115)            (0.155)
          Job destruction rate                                                                    -3.849***          -1.945**




31
                                                                                                                                               Observations                      363               363               363              363                 363
                                                                                                   (0.842)            (0.983)                  R-squared                        0.119             0.073             0.145            0.144               0.170
          Observations                        363               363               363                363                363
          R-squared                          0.097             0.016             0.158              0.163              0.211            Note: The dependent variable is the MSA-level weighted average of the worry measure from Gallup. The weights used to
                                                                                                                                        compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent by Gallup. The sample years are 2008-2011.
                          Panel C: Anticipated Cantril ladder (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                         The independent variables are averages across the years 2008-2011 of MSA-level unemployment rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job
                                                                                                                                        turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The unemployment rates come from
         Unemployment rate                  -0.560                             -1.485***                             -1.007**           the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates come from
                                           (0.465)                               (0.461)                              (0.498)           the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment
          Job turnover rate                                  1.549***           1.911***                                                gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average
                                                              (0.319)            (0.341)                                                employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction
          Job creation rate                                                                       4.107***           3.508***           rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.
                                                                                                   (0.850)            (0.854)
          Job destruction rate                                                                      -0.652             0.321
                                                                                                   (0.759)            (0.884)
          Observations                        363               363               363                 363               363
          R-squared                          0.006             0.087             0.122               0.122             0.134

     Note: The dependent variables are MSA-level weighted averages of life satisfaction measures, coming either from the BRFSS
     (Panel A) or from Gallup (Panel B and C). The weights used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to
     each respondent by either the BRFSS or Gallup. The sample years are 2005-2010 for BRFSS and 2008-2011 for Gallup. The
     independent variables are averages across either 2005-2010 (Panel A) or 2008-2011 (Panel B and C) of MSA-level unemployment
     rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The
     unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and
     job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate
     is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment
     startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation
     rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.




                                                                   33
                          Table 4: Allowing for a non-linear effect of unemployment
                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                         VARIABLES                                      Subjective well-being
                                                                                                                                                         Table 5: Controlling for MSA-level income per capita in Gallup
                            Panel A: ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS, 2005-2010 averages)                                                                          (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                                                                                                 VARIABLES                                                 Current ladder (Gallup)
                         Job turnover rate               0.121        0.301***
                                                       (0.0868)       (0.0733)                                                                                               Panel A: No controls besides coefficient displayed
                         Job creation rate                                            1.637***          0.505**
                                                                                       (0.239)          (0.207)                                  Unemployment rate            -2.303***                          -2.970***                        -1.971***
                         Job destruction rate                                         -1.605***          0.0516                                                                (0.731)                             (0.730)                         (0.757)
                                                                                       (0.257)          (0.260)                                   Job turnover rate                             0.653*            1.377***
                          Unemployment rate                                                                                                                                                     (0.365)            (0.379)
                         cubic polynomial                                 x                                x                                      Job creation rate                                                               5.886***        4.713***
                         Observations                    364             364             364              364                                                                                                                      (0.943)         (0.924)
                          R-squared                     0.007           0.376           0.131            0.378                                    Job destruction rate                                                            -3.849***       -1.945**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.842)         (0.983)
                                    Panel B: Cantril ladder of life (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                             Observations                   363              363               363              363             363
                                                                                                                                                  R-squared                     0.097            0.016             0.158            0.163           0.211
                         Job turnover rate             0.653*         1.309***
                                                       (0.365)         (0.348)                                                                                     Panel B: controlling for average log of income as measured by Gallup
                         Job creation rate                                            5.886***          4.100***
                                                                                       (0.943)           (0.806)                                 Unemployment rate            -1.856***                          -2.562***                         -1.535**
                         Job destruction rate                                         -3.849***          -1.458*                                                               (0.388)                             (0.407)                          (0.775)
                                                                                       (0.842)           (0.844)                                  Job turnover rate                             0.632**           1.267***
                          Unemployment rate                                                                                                                                                     (0.265)            (0.271)
                         cubic polynomial                                 x                                x                                      Job creation rate                                                               5.418***        4.639***
                         Observations 363                363             363             363                                                                                                                                        (0.978)        (0.940)
                          R-squared                     0.016           0.279           0.163            0.315                                    Job destruction rate                                                            -3.476***       -2.101**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.864)        (0.958)
                                Panel C: Anticipated Cantril ladder (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                             Ln income                    0.205***        0.304***           0.163***         0.237***        0.169**
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.0612)        (0.0588)           (0.0602)         (0.0795)       (0.0829)
                         Job turnover rate             1.549***       1.891***                                                                    Observations                    363             363                363              363            363
                                                        (0.319)        (0.336)                                                                    R-squared                      0.124           0.083              0.175            0.203          0.229
                         Job creation rate                                            4.107***          3.324***




32
                                                                                       (0.850)           (0.862)                                                      Panel C: Controlling for log of average income per capita (BEA)
                         Job destruction rate                                           -0.652            0.471
                                                                                       (0.759)           (0.883)                                 Unemployment rate            -2.090***                          -2.840***                         -1.809**
                          Unemployment rate                                                                                                                                    (0.740)                             (0.751)                          (0.772)
                         cubic polynomial                                 x                                x                                      Job turnover rate                             0.683*            1.401***
                         Observations                    363             363             363              363                                                                                   (0.367)            (0.396)
                          R-squared                     0.087           0.142           0.122            0.151                                    Job creation rate                                                               5.697***        4.722***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.963)        (0.934)
                                             Panel D: Worry (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                                     Job destruction rate                                                            -3.619***        -1.933*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.853)        (0.987)
                         Job turnover rate             0.257***       0.172***                                                                    Ln income                     0.0739          0.155**            0.0281           0.116*         0.0463
                                                       (0.0522)       (0.0549)                                                                                                 (0.0762)         (0.0760)          (0.0748)         (0.0672)       (0.0685)
                         Job creation rate                                            -0.405***           -0.179                                  Observations                    355              355               355              355            355
                                                                                        (0.152)          (0.147)                                  R-squared                     0.107             0.059             0.166            0.185          0.219
                         Job destruction rate                                          0.826***         0.520***
                                                                                        (0.115)          (0.142)                       Note: Panel A shows the benchmark results of table 2 Panel B, where the dependent variable is MSA-level weighted average
                          Unemployment rate
                                                                                                                                       of the current ladder of life measure from Gallup. Panel B and C each add a control for income but a di↵erent one. Panel B
                         cubic polynomial                                 x                                x
                         Observations                    363             363             363              363                          uses MSA-level averages of the log of income of each Gallup respondent, where income is defined as the midpoint of individual
                          R-squared                     0.073           0.186           0.144            0.203                         monthly income brackets assuming a log-normal distribution. Panel C uses the log of the average MSA-level income per capita
                                                                                                                                       over the period 2008-2011 as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analaysis.
     Note: Everything is similar to Tables 2 and 3, except that the unemployment rate is introduced in the regressions along with
                                                                                                                                       Besides income, as in table 2, the independent variables are averages across the years 2008-2011 of MSA-level unemployment
     its square and its cube.
     The dependent variables are MSA-level weighted averages of subjective wellbeing measures, coming either from BRFSS (Panel         rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The
     A) or from Gallup (Panel B, C and D). The weights used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to              unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and
     each respondent by either BRFSS or Gallup. The sample years are 2005-2010 for BRFSS and 2008-2011 for Gallup. The main            job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate
     independent variables are averages across either 2005-2010 (Panel A) or 2008-2011 (Panel B, C and D) of MSA-level job turnover
                                                                                                                                       is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment
     rates (column 1 and 2), and of job creation and job destruction rates (column 3 and 4). In column 2 and 4, we control for a
     cubic polynomial of 2005-2010 or 2008-2011 averages of MSA-level unemployment rates. The unemployment rates come from             startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation
     the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates come from         rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.
     the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment
     gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average
     employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction
     rate. There is no additional control besides the variables mentioned in the tables.
                                                                                                                                                           Table 7: Controlling for many potential MSA-level confounders
                                                                                                                                                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)                 (4)            (5)
                                                                                                                                              VARIABLES                                                         Subjective well-being
                    Table 6: Controlling for MSA-level income per capita in the BRFSS
                                                (1)              (2)                  (3)            (4)             (5)                                        Panel A: ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS, 2005-2010 averages)
              VARIABLES                                                  Life satisfaction (BRFSS)
                                                                                                                                              Unemployment rate                     -1.163***                        -1.344***                          -1.104***
                                             Panel A: No controls besides coefficient displayed                                                                                      (0.291)                           (0.247)                           (0.260)
                                                                                                                                               Job turnover rate                                     0.361***         0.469***
              Unemployment rate             -1.496***                           -1.694***                        -1.519***                                                                           (0.0838)         (0.0840)
                                             (0.270)                              (0.247)                         (0.270)                      Job creation rate                                                                        1.662***        1.111***
               Job turnover rate                                0.121            0.347***                                                                                                                                                 (0.230)         (0.257)
                                                              (0.0868)           (0.0785)                                                      Job destruction rate                                                                     -1.167***          -0.327
               Job creation rate                                                                  1.637***        0.847***                                                                                                                (0.238)         (0.307)
                                                                                                   (0.239)         (0.257)                     Ln income                            0.0662***        0.155***        0.0889***           0.142***       0.0941***
               Job destruction rate                                                               -1.605***         -0.272                                                           (0.0169)        (0.0173)         (0.0167)           (0.0151)        (0.0165)
                                                                                                   (0.257)         (0.319)                     Crime rate                                x               x                x                  x                x
               Observations                    364               364               364               364             364                       Share of African Americans                x               x                x                  x                x
               R-squared                      0.255             0.007             0.309             0.131           0.321                      Population                                x               x                x                  x                x
                                                                                                                                               Observations                             342             342              342                342             342
                               Panel B: controlling for average log of income as measured by the BRFSS                                         R-squared                              0.292            0.226            0.384              0.319           0.403

              Unemployment rate             -1.216***                           -1.389***                        -1.158***                                              Panel B: Cantril ladder of life (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)
                                             (0.284)                              (0.252)                         (0.266)
               Job turnover rate                              0.258***           0.377***                                                     Unemployment rate                     -1.797**                         -2.428***                           -1.392*
                                                              (0.0785)           (0.0787)                                                                                            (0.801)                           (0.807)                           (0.801)
               Job creation rate                                                                  1.546***       0.979***                      Job turnover rate                                     0.724**          1.281***
                                                                                                    (0.221)        (0.248)                                                                           (0.360)           (0.396)
               Job destruction rate                                                               -1.236***         -0.363                     Job creation rate                                                                        5.405***        4.670***
                                                                                                    (0.237)        (0.299)                                                                                                                (0.990)        (0.954)
               Ln income                    0.0616***         0.137***          0.0710***          0.124***      0.0758***                     Job destruction rate                                                                     -3.343***       -2.107**
                                             (0.0150)         (0.0145)           (0.0146)          (0.0133)       (0.0146)                                                                                                                (0.900)        (0.982)
               Observations                     364              364                364               364            364                       Ln income                              0.191          0.318***          0.177             0.246**         0.181*
               R-squared                      0.284             0.186              0.347             0.275          0.364                                                            (0.118)          (0.108)         (0.112)            (0.0985)        (0.102)
                                                                                                                                               Crime rate                               x                x               x                   x              x




33
                                      Panel C: controlling for log of average income per capita (BEA)                                          Share of African Americans               x                x               x                   x              x
                                                                                                                                               Population                               x                x               x                   x              x
              Unemployment rate             -1.446***                           -1.676***                        -1.472***                     Observations                            344              344             344                 344            344
                                             (0.284)                              (0.261)                         (0.291)                      R-squared                              0.143            0.108           0.194               0.229          0.251
               Job turnover rate                                0.113            0.349***
                                                              (0.0869)           (0.0799)                                                                             Panel C: Anticipated Cantril ladder (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)
               Job creation rate                                                                  1.622***        0.883***
                                                                                                    (0.230)        (0.264)                    Unemployment rate                       -0.150                           -1.039*                            -0.671
               Job destruction rate                                                               -1.595***         -0.317                                                           (0.569)                           (0.551)                           (0.562)
                                                                                                    (0.248)        (0.331)                     Job turnover rate                                     1.566***         1.804***
               Ln income                      0.0151         0.0660***           0.00510          0.0623***        0.0112                                                                             (0.300)          (0.321)
                                             (0.0159)         (0.0177)           (0.0152)          (0.0162)       (0.0158)                     Job creation rate                                                                        3.361***        3.006***
               Observations                     355              355                355               355            355                                                                                                                 (0.719)         (0.679)
               R-squared                      0.259             0.046              0.313             0.168          0.326                      Job destruction rate                                                                      0.00697          0.603
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.748)         (0.780)
     Note: Panel A shows the benchmark results from table 2 Panel A, where the dependent variable is MSA-level weighted average                Ln income                            0.251***         0.291***        0.230***           0.263***        0.232***
     of the life satisfaction measure from the BRFSS. Panel B and C each add a control for income but a di↵erent one. Panel B                                                       (0.0880)         (0.0740)        (0.0789)           (0.0725)        (0.0754)
                                                                                                                                               Crime rate                               x                x               x                  x               x
     uses MSA-level averages of the log of income of each BRFSS respondent, where income is defined as the midpoint of annual                  Share of African Americans               x                x               x                  x               x
     household income brackets assuming a log-normal distribution. Panel C uses the log of the average MSA-level income per capita             Population                               x                x               x                  x               x
     over the period 2005-2010 as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analaysis.                                                                Observations                            344              344             344                344             344
                                                                                                                                               R-squared                              0.345            0.427           0.443              0.444           0.449
     Besides income, as in table 2, the independent variables are averages across the years 2005-2010 of MSA-level unemployment
     rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The
                                                                                                                                        Note: Everything is similar to table 2, except that we now include controls for: average log of income, population (in levels),
     unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and             crime rates and share of African-Americans.
     job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate       Log of income is the MSA-level weighted average of the log of income of each BRFSS/Gallup respondent, where income is
     is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment        defined as the midpoint of income brackets assuming a log-normal distribution (monthly individual income for Gallup and
                                                                                                                                        annual household income for BRFSS). The share of African Americans is a weighted average of the number of respondents
     startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation   in the surveys that report being black in the race question. Weights use to compute MSA-level weighted averages are those
     rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.                               attached to the respondent by BRFFS/Gallup. Population levels comes from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Crime rates
                                                                                                                                        come from the FBI Crime statistics.
                                                                                                                                        As in table 2, the dependent variables are MSA-level weighted averages of life satisfaction measures, coming either from the
                                                                                                                                        BRFSS (Panel A) or from Gallup (Panel B and C). Weights used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached
                                                                                                                                        to each respondent by either BRFSS or Gallup. The sample years are 2005-2010 for BRFSS and 2008-2011 for Gallup. The
                                                                                                                                        main independent variables are averages across either 2005-2010 (Panel A) or 2008-2011 (Panel B, C and D) of MSA-level
                                                                                                                                        unemployment rates (column 2 and 4), job turnover rates (column 1 and 2), job creation and job destruction rates (column
                                                                                                                                        3 and 4). The unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The
                                                                                                                                        job creation and job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation
                                                                                                                                        (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including
                                                                                                                                        establishment startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of
                                                                                                                                        the job creation rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the variables mentioned in the tables.
                                                                                                                                                                              Table 9: Individual-level results; BRFSS data
                                                                                                                                                                                       (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)                          (5)
                                                                                                                                                   VARIABLES                                      ”How satisfied are you with your life?”

                                                                                                                                                                                       Panel A: Without individual controls

                                                                                                                                                   Unemployment rate                -1.440***                           -1.510***                           -1.465***
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.174)                              (0.172)                            (0.179)
                                                                                                                                                    Job turnover rate                                   0.0299           0.155**
                Table 8: Controlling for many potential MSA-level confounders                                                                                                                          (0.0831)          (0.0653)
                                      (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)                                                 (5)         Job creation rate                                                                      0.372***          0.241***
        VARIABLES                                 Worry (Gallup data, 2008-2011 averages)                                                                                                                                                   (0.106)          (0.0898)
                                                                                                                                                    Job destruction rate                                                                   -0.344**           0.0527
        Unemployment Rate                          0.295***                                0.220**                                  0.0781                                                                                                  (0.137)           (0.105)
                                                   (0.0808)                                (0.0850)                                (0.0898)        Year and Month F.E.                  x                 x                 x                  x                 x
         Job turnover rate                                             0.203***            0.153***                                                Observations                      856,906           856,906           856,906            856,906           856,906
                                                                       (0.0510)            (0.0558)                                                R-squared                          0.002             0.000             0.002              0.000             0.002
         Job creation rate                                                                                    -0.353***            -0.311**
                                                                                                                (0.134)             (0.143)                 Panel B: With individual level controls (age, education, race, gender, marital status)
         Job destruction rate                                                                                 0.686***             0.617***
                                                                                                                (0.109)             (0.141)        Unemployment rate                -0.811***                           -0.898***                           -0.860***
         Ln income                               -0.0647***          -0.0792***          -0.0664***          -0.0706***           -0.0670***                                         (0.132)                              (0.132)                            (0.137)
                                                  (0.0110)            (0.0108)            (0.0113)             (0.0100)            (0.0106)         Job turnover rate                                  0.127**           0.199***
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.0558)          (0.0496)
         Crime rate                                    x                   x                   x                   x                     x          Job creation raten                                                                     0.351***          0.273***
         Share of African Americans                    x                   x                   x                   x                     x                                                                                                 (0.0850)          (0.0770)
         Population                                    x                   x                   x                   x                     x          Job destruction rate                                                                    -0.119             0.112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.0841)          (0.0740)




34
         Observations                                 344                 344                 344                 344                   344
         R-squared                                   0.253               0.254               0.276               0.307                 0.310       Year and Month F.E.                  x                 x                 x                  x                 x
                                                                                                                                                   Observations                      856,902           856,902           856,902           856,902           856,902
     Note: Everything is similar to table 3, except that we now include controls for: average log of income, population (in levels),               R-squared                          0.074             0.073             0.074              0.073             0.074
     crime rates and share of African-Americans.
     Log of income is the MSA-level weighted average of the log of income of each Gallup respondent, where income is defined                                               Panel C: All individual level controls of Panel B + income
     as the midpoint of monthly individual income brackets assuming a log-normal distribution. The share of African Americans
     is a weighted average of the number of respondents in the survey that report being black in the race question. Weights use                    Unemployment rate                -0.436***                           -0.526***                           -0.467***
     to compute MSA-level weighted averages are those attached to the respondent by Gallup. Population levels comes from the                                                         (0.125)                              (0.123)                            (0.124)
     Bureau of Economic Analysis. Crime rates come from the FBI Crime statistics.                                                                   Job turnover rate                                  0.161***          0.204***
     As in table 3, the dependent variable is the MSA-level weighted average of the worry meaasure from Gallup. The weights used                                                                       (0.0495)          (0.0462)
     to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent by Gallup. The sample years are 2008-2011.                       Job creation rate                                                                      0.360***          0.318***
     The independent variables are averages across the years 2008-2011 of MSA-level unemployment rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job                                                                                                            (0.0823)          (0.0789)
     turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The unemployment rates come from                     Job destruction rate                                                                    -0.0571           0.0682
     the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates come from                                                                                                             (0.0763)          (0.0728)
     the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment                     Year and Month F.E.                  x                 x                 x                  x                 x
     gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average               Observations                      780,169           780,169           780,169            780,169           780,169
     employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction                  R-squared                          0.102             0.102             0.103              0.103             0.103
     rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.
                                                                                                                                               Note: The dependent variable is the BRFSS life satisfaction measure over the periode 2005-2010. Column (1) regresses it on
                                                                                                                                               the unemployment rate of the MSA the respondent lives in. Column (2) regresses it on the job turnover rate of the MSA the
                                                                                                                                               respondent lives in. Column (3) regresses it on both the unemployment and job turnover rates. Column (4) and (5) regress
                                                                                                                                               it on the MSA’s job creation and job destruction rates introduced separately, respectively without and with a control for the
                                                                                                                                               MSA’s unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Year and month fixed e↵ects are included in each
                                                                                                                                               regression. Panel A does not include any individual-level controls. Panel B includes basic demographic controls: age, age
                                                                                                                                               square, a dummy for being female, 7 dummies for family satus , 7 dummies for education, and race dummies (black, asian,
                                                                                                                                               white, other or missing). Panel C adds 8 dummies for annual household income brackets. All regressions are weighted by
                                                                                                                                               individual weights attached by the BRFSS to each respondent.



                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                Table 11: Individual-level results; Gallup data - Anticipated ladder
                 Table 10: Individual-level results; Gallup data - Current ladder
                                                                                                                                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)                                        (5)
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)                                          (5)                 VARIABLES                                    Anticipated ladder
         VARIABLES                                      Current ladder
                                                                                                                                                                             Panel A: Without individual controls
                                             Panel A: Without individual controls
                                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate                  -0.675                          -1.785***                           -1.663***
         Unemployment rate                 -3.020***                         -3.600***                            -3.426***                                                 (0.493)                            (0.435)                            (0.427)
                                            (0.505)                            (0.509)                             (0.501)                Job turnover                                      1.632***          1.974***
         Job turnover rate                                    0.340           1.035***                                                                                                       (0.240)           (0.259)
                                                             (0.299)           (0.279)                                                    Job creation rate                                                                    2.488***          2.379***
         Job creation rate                                                                      1.837***          1.614***                                                                                                      (0.396)           (0.346)
                                                                                                 (0.524)           (0.414)                Job destruction rate                                                                 0.921***          1.595***
         Job destruction rate                                                                  -0.905***           0.491*                                                                                                       (0.319)           (0.339)
                                                                                                 (0.332)           (0.279)                Year and Month F.E.                 x                x                 x                 x                 x
         Year and Month F.E.                   x                x                x                  x                 x                   Observations                     650,625          650,625           650,625           650,625           650,625
         Observations                       668,386          668,386          668,386            668,386           668,386                R-squared                         0.003            0.004             0.004             0.004             0.004
         R-squared                           0.008            0.007            0.008              0.007             0.008
                                                                                                                                                  Panel B: With individual level controls (age, education, race, gender, marital status)
                  Panel B: With individual level controls (age, education, race, gender, marital status)
                                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate                  0.329                              -0.311                             -0.279
         Unemployment rate                 -1.668***                         -2.048***                            -1.881***                                                 (0.286)                            (0.257)                            (0.253)
                                            (0.425)                            (0.434)                             (0.426)                 Job turnover rate                                1.110***          1.168***
          Job turnover rate                                   0.309           0.696***                                                                                                       (0.133)           (0.133)
                                                             (0.250)           (0.246)                                                     Job creation rate                                                                   1.294***          1.275***
          Job creation rate                                                                     1.380***          1.253***                                                                                                      (0.206)           (0.200)
                                                                                                 (0.428)           (0.373)                 Job destruction rate                                                                0.956***          1.068***
          Job destruction                                                                       -0.580**            0.176




35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.216)           (0.207)
                                                                                                 (0.269)           (0.248)                Year and Month F.E.                 x                x                 x                 x                 x
         Year and Month F.E.                   x                x                x                  x                 x                   Observations                     649,329          649,329           649,329          649,329            649,329
         Observations                       666,983          666,983          666,983            666,983          666,983                 R-squared                         0.083            0.083             0.084             0.083             0.084
         R-squared                           0.063            0.063            0.063              0.063             0.063
                                                                                                                                                                 Panel C: All individual level controls of Panel B + income
                                 Panel C: All individual level controls of Panel B + income
                                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate                0.571**                             0.0386                             0.0563
         Unemployment rate                 -1.236***                         -1.401***                            -1.239***                                                (0.254)                             (0.268)                            (0.272)
                                            (0.421)                           (0.444)                              (0.447)                 Job turnover rate                                0.984***          0.976***
          Job turnover rate                                  0.0374            0.304                                                                                                         (0.124)           (0.135)
                                                             (0.227)          (0.226)                                                      Job creation rate                                                                   1.033***          1.037***
          Job creation rate                                                                      0.934**           0.858**                                                                                                      (0.208)           (0.206)
                                                                                                 (0.374)           (0.348)                 Job destruction rate                                                                0.942***          0.920***
          Job destruction rate                                                                  -0.712**            -0.216                                                                                                      (0.199)           (0.212)
                                                                                                 (0.282)           (0.281)                Year and Month F.E.                 x                x                 x                 x                 x
         Year and Month F.E.                   x                x                x                  x                  x                  Observations                     544,228          544,228           544,228          544,228            544,228
         Observations                       556,300          556,300          556,300            556,300           556,300                R-squared                         0.094            0.094             0.094             0.094             0.094
         R-squared                           0.930            0.103            0.103              0.103              0.103
                                                                                                                                     Note: The dependent variable is the anticipated Cantril ladder from Gallup over the periode 2008-2011. Column (1) regresses
     Note: The dependent variable is the Cantril ladder of life from Gallup over the periode 2008-2011. Column (1) regresses it on   it on the unemployment rate of the MSA the respondent lives in. Column (2) regresses it on the job turnover rate of the MSA
     the unemployment rate of the MSA the respondent lives in. Column (2) regresses it on the job turnover rate of the MSA the       the respondent lives in. Column (3) regresses it on both the unemployment and job turnover rates. Column (4) and (5) regress
     respondent lives in. Column (3) regresses it on both the unemployment and job turnover rates. Column (4) and (5) regress        it on the MSA’s job creation and job destruction rates introduced separately, respectively without and with a control for the
     it on the MSA’s job creation and job destruction rates introduced separately, respectively without and with a control for the   MSA’s unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Year and month fixed e↵ects are included in each
     MSA’s unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Year and month fixed e↵ects are included in each       regression. Panel A does not include any individual-level controls. Panel B includes basic demographic controls: age, age
     regression. Panel A does not include any individual-level controls. Panel B includes basic demographic controls: age, age       square, a dummy for being female, 6 dummies for marital status, 6 dummies for education and race dummies (black, asian,
     square, a dummy for being female, 6 dummies for marital status, 6 dummies for education and race dummies (black, asian,         white). Panel C adds 9 dummies for individual monthly income brackets. All regressions are weighted by individual weights
     white). Panel C adds 9 dummies for individual monthly income brackets. All regressions are weighted by individual weights       attached by Gallup to each respondent.
     attached by Gallup to each respondent.



                                                                                                                                                                                                  42
                                                                  41
                             Table 12: Individual-level results; Gallup data - Worry
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)                                  (5)
          VARIABLES                                                Worry

                                             Panel A: Without individual controls

          Unemployment rate                 0.531***                           0.481***                           0.477***                 Table 13: Robustness checks - Pre-crisis v. “crisis” years - MSA-level averages -
                                            (0.0736)                           (0.0767)                           (0.0774)                                         (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)       (5)
           Job turnover rate                                 0.181***           0.0878*                                                   VARIABLES                       ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS)
                                                             (0.0486)          (0.0455)
           Job creation rate                                                                     0.0413            0.0721
                                                                                                                                                                                         Panel A: 2005-2007
                                                                                                (0.0752)          (0.0630)
           Job destruction rate                                                                 0.297***           0.103*
                                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate                -1.741***                           -1.825***                             -1.602***
                                                                                                (0.0578)          (0.0557)
                                                                                                                                                                            (0.315)                              (0.295)                              (0.267)
          Year and month F.E.                  x                 x                x                 x                 x
                                                                                                                                           Job turnover rate                                   0.0938           0.185***
          Observations                      669,605           669,605          669,605          669,605           669,605
                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.0826)          (0.0686)
          R-squared                          0.001             0.001            0.001             0.001             0.001
                                                                                                                                           Job creation rate                                                                       0.935***          0.718***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.169)           (0.169)
                  Panel B: With individual level controls (age, education, race, gender, marital status)                                   Job destruction rate                                                                   -1.116***          -0.607***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.247)           (0.223)
          Unemployment rate                 0.349***                           0.293***                           0.288***                 Observations                       364               364                364                364               364
                                            (0.0683)                           (0.0711)                           (0.0721)                 R-squared                         0.146             0.004              0.161              0.077             0.189
           Job turnover rate                                 0.159***           0.104**
                                                             (0.0439)          (0.0434)
                                                                                                                                                                                     Panel B: 2008-2010 averages
           Job creation rate                                                                     0.0703            0.0897
                                                                                                (0.0684)          (0.0622)
                                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate                -1.191***                           -1.359***                             -1.465***
           Job destruction rate                                                                 0.233***          0.117**




36
                                                                                                                                                                            (0.204)                              (0.203)                              (0.248)
                                                                                                (0.0518)          (0.0526)
                                                                                                                                           Job turnover rate                                  0.0441            0.336***
          Year and month F.E.                  x                 x                x                 x                 x
                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.120)            (0.118)
          Observations                      668,204           668,204          668,204          668,204           668,204
                                                                                                                                           Job creation rate                                                                      0.780***            0.0505
          R-squared                          0.018             0.018            0.018             0.018             0.018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.274)            (0.265)
                                                                                                                                           Job destruction rate                                                                   -0.538**            0.602**
                                 Panel C: All individual level controls of Panel B + income                                                                                                                                        (0.235)            (0.278)
                                                                                                                                           Observations                       364               364                364               364                364
          Unemployment rate                 0.278***                           0.188**                            0.186**                  R-squared                         0.192             0.001              0.224             0.032              0.228
                                            (0.0741)                           (0.0760)                           (0.0771)
           Job turnover rate                                 0.201***          0.166***                                              Note: The dependent variables are MSA-level weighted averages of the life satisfaction measure from the BRFSS. The weights
                                                             (0.0435)          (0.0436)                                              used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent in the BRFSS. The sample years are
           Job creation rate                                                    0.149**         0.160**                              2005-2007 in Panel A and 2008-2010 in Panel B. The independent variables are averages across either 2005-2007 (Panel A) or
                                                                                                (0.0656)          (0.0623)           2008-2010 (Panel B) of MSA-level unemployment rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation
           Job destruction rate                                                                 0.245***          0.171***           and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area
                                                                                                (0.0549)          (0.0554)           Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the
          Year and month F.E.                  x                 x                x                 x                 x              Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments
          Observations                      556,966           556,966          556,966          556,966           556,966            from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job
          R-squared                          0.034             0.034            0.034             0.034             0.034            turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides
                                                                                                                                     the coefficient displayed.
     Note: The dependent variable is the Gallup measure of worry over the periode 2008-2011. Column (1) regresses it on the
     unemployment rate of the MSA the respondent lives in. Column (2) regresses it on the job turnover rate of the MSA the
     respondent lives in. Column (3) regresses it on both the unemployment and job turnover rates. Column (4) and (5) regress
     it on the MSA’s job creation and job destruction rates introduced separately, respectively without and with a control for the
     MSA’s unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Year and month fixed e↵ects are included in each
     regression. Panel A does not include any individual-level controls. Panel B includes basic demographic controls: age, age
     square, a dummy for being female, 6 dummies for marital status, 6 dummies for education and race dummies (black, asian,
     white). Panel C adds 9 dummies for individual monthly income brackets. All regressions are weighted by individual weights
     attached by Gallup to each respondent.
                                                                                                                                                                 Table 15: Robustness checks - Predicted turnover rate
                                                                                                                                                                            (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)             (5)                                   (6)
                                                                                                                                            VARIABLES                                  Quarterly MSA-level averages of the Cantril ladder

               Table 14: Robustness checks - Longitudinal Employer Household data                                                                                                                  Panel A: All jobs
         VARIABLES                      (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)                                             (5)
                                                                                                                                            Actual                          0.537***          0.717***           0.317**
                                 Panel A : ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS)                                                  job turnover                    (0.0857)          (0.0934)           (0.127)

         Unemployment rate                          -1.504***                       -1.688***                        -1.607***              Predicted                                                                             0.586***         1.538***          1.552***
                                                     (0.270)                          (0.216)                         (0.228)               job turnover                                                                           (0.200)          (0.225)           (0.517)
          Job turnover rate (all jobs)                               0.0645*         0.179***
                                                                     (0.0381)        (0.0367)                                              Unemployment Rate                                      x                 x                                   x                   x
          Job turnover rate (stable jobs)                                                            0.139***        0.229***              MSA F.E.                                                                 x                                                       x
                                                                                                     (0.0497)        (0.0478)              Year and quarter F.E                 x                 x                 x                 x                x                    x
                                                                                                                                            Observations                      5,584             5,584             5,584             5,584            5,584                5,584
         Observations                                  357              357             357             357             357                 R-squared                         0.144             0.170             0.292             0.137            0.166                0.292
         R-squared                                    0.257            0.008           0.309           0.020           0.306
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Panel B: Stable jobs
                                            Panel B : Current ladder of life (Gallup)
                                                                                                                                            Actual                          0.823***          0.937***          0.485***
         Unemployment rate                          -2.303***                       -2.859***                        -2.445***              job turnover                     (0.111)           (0.113)           (0.188)




37
                                                     (0.731)                          (0.572)                         (0.623)
          Job turnover rate (all jobs)                               0.599***        0.879***                                               Predicted                                                                             0.606**          1.715***           1.216*
                                                                      (0.144)         (0.177)                                               job turnover                                                                          (0.301)           (0.326)           (0.737)
          Job turnover rate (stable jobs)                                                            0.807***        0.909***
                                                                                                      (0.185)         (0.204)              Unemployment Rate                                      x         x                                           x                   x
                                                                                                                                           MSA F.E.                                                         x                                                               x
          Observations                                 359              359             359             359             359                Year and quarter F.E                 x            x              x              x                           x                    x
          R-squared                                   0.097            0.042           0.182           0.043           0.152                Observations                      5,584        5,584          5,584          5,584                       5,584                5,584
                                                                                                                                            R-squared                         0.146        0.169          0.292          0.137                       0.162                0.291
     Note: The dependent variables are MSA-level weighted averages of life satisfaction measures, coming either from the BRFSS                                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
     (Panel A) or from Gallup (Panel B). The weights used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each
     respondent by either the BRFSS or Gallup. The sample years are 2005-2010 for BRFSS and 2008-2011 for Gallup. The
                                                                                                                                                                                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     independent variables are averages across either 2005-2010 (Panel A) or 2008-2011 (Panel B) of MSA-level unemployment
     rates (column 1, 3 and 5), and job turnover rates (column 2, 3, 4 and 5). The unemployment rates come from the Bureau              Note: The dependent variable is quarterly MSA-level averages of the current Cantril ladder in Gallup. Column (1) to (3) use
     of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job turnover rates come from the Longitudinal Employer               the actual quarterly job turnover rate from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics. Column (4) to (6) use a predicted
     Household Dynamics Data. Job turnover is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction rate. The job         measure of the job turnover rate. Panel B shows the results when we use only jobs that lasted more than a quarter to compute
     creation (destruction) rate is the number of workers who started a new job (lost a job) during quarter t, divided by the average   the job creation and destruction rates (and thus the job turnover rate), whereas Panel A shows the results when we use all jobs
     employment in that quarter (defined as the sum of employment on the first day and employment on the last day divided by 2).        to compute the job creation and destruction rates. The predicted variable is defined as follows: we take quarterly job turnover
     The job turnover for stable jobs is defined similarly exept that only jobs that lasted more than one quarter are counted. There    rates by sector at the national level from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics, and for each MSA we compute a
     is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.                                                                        weighted average of these national sectoral rates where weights correspond to the share of the MSA’s total employment that the
                                                                                                                                        sector represents in 2004. The sectoral composition of employment by MSA used for the weights comes from the Longitudinal
                                                                                                                                        Employer Household Dynamics.
                                                                                                                                        All regressions include year and quarter fixed e↵ects. Column (3) and (6) add MSA fixed e↵ects.Column (1) and (4) are without
                                                                                                                                        controling for the annual MSA unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-level.
                                                                                                                                                                       Table 17: Interactions with outsourcing threat
                                   Table 16: Interactions with productivity growth                                                                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                      (1)           (2)              (3)                                 (4)                 VARIABLES                                       ”How satisfied are you with your life?” (BRFSS)
         VARIABLES                                               Life satisfaction (BRFSS)
                                                                                                                                             Above median * Job turnover                     -0.160**            -0.181***
         Above median * Job turnover                     0.154**              0.146**                                                                                                        (0.0657)             (0.0656)
                                                         (0.0711)            (0.0711)                                                         Job turnover rate                              0.235***             0.316***
          Job turnover rate                               0.0786             0.157***                                                                                                        (0.0483)             (0.0485)
                                                         (0.0599)            (0.0604)                                                         Above median * Job destruction                                                        -0.290***            -0.323***
         Above median * Job destruction                                                           0.190*                0.145                                                                                                         (0.105)              (0.104)
                                                                                                  (0.107)              (0.108)                Job destruction rate                                                                     0.0725             0.332***
          Job destruction rate                                                                   -0.201**              0.0815                                                                                                        (0.0902)             (0.0922)
                                                                                                 (0.0937)             (0.0969)                Above median * Job creation                                                             -0.0347              -0.0554
          Above median * Job creation                                                              0.145                0.151                                                                                                        (0.0906)             (0.0906)
                                                                                                 (0.0986)             (0.0986)               Job creation rate                                                                       0.388***            0.309***
          Job creation rate                                                                      0.315***              0.216**                                                                                                       (0.0737)             (0.0735)
                                                                                                 (0.0896)             (0.0898)                Outsourcing above median                      0.0525***           0.0580***           0.0538***            0.0625***
          Above median TFP growth                       -0.0552***          -0.0554***          -0.0585***           -0.0559***                                                              (0.0189)            (0.0188)            (0.0192)             (0.0192)
                                                         (0.0200)            (0.0199)            (0.0199)             (0.0199)                Unemployment rate                                                      x                                        x




38
          Unemployment rate                                                      x                                        x                  Individual controls                                 x                   x                   x                    x
         Individual controls                                x                    x                   x                    x                  Year and Month F.E.                                 x                   x                   x                    x
         Year and Month F.E.                                x                    x                   x                    x                  Observations                                     825,298            825,298              825,298              825,298
         Observations                                    825,298              825,298             825,298              825,298                R-squared                                        0.065               0.066               0.065                0.066
          R-squared                                       0.065                0.066               0.065                0.066
                                                                                                                                         Note: The depdendent variable is the BRFSS measure of life satisfaction over the periode 2005-2010. The independent
     Note: The dependent variable is the BRFSS measure of life satisfaction over the periode 2005-2010. The independent variables        variables are measures of creative destruction from the Business Dynamics Statistics (either the job creation rate and the job
     are measures of creative destruction from the Business Dynamics Statistics (either the job creation rate and the job destuction     destruction rate or the sum of the two), a measure of whether predominant sectors in the MSA are more or less prone to
     rate or the sum of the two), a measure of whether predominant sectors in the MSA experience more or less productivity growth        outsource their activity and interaction terms between the creative destruction variables and the measure of the outsourcing
     and interaction terms between the creative destruction variables and the productivity growth measure. The productivity growth
                                                                                                                                         threat. The outsourcing threat measure of an MSA is computed as follows: following Autor et al. (AER, 2013), we take the
     measure of an MSA is computed as follows: we take the 5 factors TFP annual growth by sector at the national level from the
     NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (which is only available until 2009 so we use an average over 2005-2009), and for          growth of imports from China by sectors, and for each MSA we compute a weighted average of these national sectoral import
     each MSA we compute a weighted average of these national sectoral rates where weights correspond to the share of the MSA’s          growth rates where weights correspond to the share of the MSA’s total employment that the sector represents (we average
     total employment that the sector represents (on average over the period 2005-2009). The sectoral composition of employment          these shares over the whole period 2005-2010). The sectoral composition of employment by MSA used for the weights comes
     by MSA used for the weights comes from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics. Column (1) and (2) use the job
                                                                                                                                         from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics. Column (1) and (2) use the job turnover rate (the sum of the job
     turnover rate (the sum of the job creation and the job destruction rate) whereas column (3) and (4) introduce the job creation
     and the job destruction rate separately. Column(2) and (4) control for the MSA’s unemployment rate whereas column(1) and            creation and the job destruction rate) whereas column (3) and (4) introduce the job creation and the job destruction rate
     (3) do not. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Year and month fixed e↵ects are introduced in all regressions as well   separately. Column(2) and (4) control for the MSA’s unemployment rate whereas column(1) and (3) do not. Standard errors
     as individual controls:age, age square, a dummy for being female, a dummy for being married or having a partner, a dummy            are clustered at the MSA level. Year and Month fixed e↵ects are introduced in all regressions as well as individual controls:
     for having some college or more and race dummies (black, asian, hispanic).
                                                                                                                                         age, age square, a dummy for being female, a dummy for being married or having a partner, a dummy for having some college
                                                                                                                                         or more and race dummies (black, asian, hispanic).
                                                                                                                                                                   Table 19: Unemployment benefits prediction ct’ed
                                                                                                                                                                            (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)                                    (5)
                                                                                                                                            VARIABLES                                       Current ladder (Gallup)
                 Table 18: Interactions with generosity of unemployment benefits
                                             (1)         (2)             (3)                                           (4)                                             Panel A: States above median in terms of UI generosity
          VARIABLES                                    ”Current ladder” (Gallup)
                                                                                                                                            Unemployment rate               -1.357**                             -2.390***                             -1.940***
          Above median * Job turnover                      1.411**          1.784***                                                                                         (0.678)                               (0.654)                              (0.736)
                                                           (0.637)           (0.680)                                                         Job turnover rate                                1.299***            2.039***
           Job turnover rate                                -0.118            0.433                                                                                                            (0.356)             (0.410)
                                                           (0.529)           (0.512)                                                         Job creation rate                                                                       4.701***           3.415***
           Above median * Job destruction                                                      3.708***            4.526***                                                                                                           (1.371)            (1.303)
                                                                                                (1.395)              (1.507)                 Job destruction rate                                                                      -1.670             0.576
           Job destruction rate                                                                -5.380***           -3.524***                                                                                                          (1.036)            (1.328)
                                                                                                (0.946)              (1.077)                 Observations                      173               173                173                 173                173
           Above median * Job creation                                                           -1.484               -1.734                 R-squared                        0.048             0.072              0.198               0.150              0.209
                                                                                                (1.689)              (1.497)
           Job creation rate                                                                   6.186***            4.900***                                                           Panel B: States below median
                                                                                                (0.993)              (1.057)
           Above median UI                                 -0.277*           -0.382**            -0.256             -0.330**                Unemployment rate               -3.644**                             -3.915***                               -2.857*




39
                                                           (0.166)            (0.175)           (0.159)              (0.165)                                                 (1.402)                              (1.463)                                (1.486)
          Unemployment rate                                                      x                                       x                   Job turnover rate                                  -0.115             0.597
          Observations                                       363                363                363                 363                                                                     (0.529)            (0.511)
          R-squared                                         0.093              0.237              0.216               0.281                  Job creation rate                                                                      6.203***            4.579***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.985)             (1.374)
     Note: The dependent variable is MSA-level weighted averages of answers to the current ladder of life question. The weights used         Job destruction rate                                                                   -5.375***           -3.070**
     to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent by Gallup. The sample years are 2008-2011.                                                                                                        (0.934)             (1.487)
     The independent variables are 2008-2011 averages of MSA-level job turnover rates (column 1 and 2), job creation and job                 Observations                      190               190                190                190                 190
     destruction rates (column 3 and 4) and unemployment rates (column 2 and 4), interacted with whether the MSA is located                  R-squared                        0.187             0.000              0.199              0.175               0.261
     in a state above median in terms of UI generosity, controlling for the direct e↵ect of being located in such an above median
     state. A state’s UI generosity is measured by the average maximum weekly benefit amount over the period 2008-2011. The             Note: The dependent variable is MSA-level weighted averages of answers to the current ladder of life question. The weights
     unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and             used to compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent by Gallup. The sample years are
     job destruction rates come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate       2008-2011. Panel A restricts attention to MSAs located in states above median in terms of UI generosity whereas Panel B
     is the sum of all employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment        focuses on MSAs in states below median. A state’s UI generosity is measured by the average maximum weekly benefit amount
     startups, divided by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation   over the period 2008-2011. The independent variables are 2008-2011 averages of MSA-level unemployment rates (column 1, 3
     rate and the job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.                               and 5), job turnover rates (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The unemployment rates
                                                                                                                                        come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates
                                                                                                                                        come from the Business Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all
                                                                                                                                        employment gains (losses) from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided
                                                                                                                                        by the average employment in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the
                                                                                                                                        job destruction rate. There is no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                Table 20: Discount rate prediction - Young v. Old
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)                                      (5)
         VARIABLES                                         Current ladder (Gallup)

                                          Panel A: Age below median (Median age is 40)

         Unemployment rate                 -1.683**                             -2.358***                                -1.438*
                                            (0.827)                               (0.834)                                (0.870)
          Job turnover rate                                    0.819**           1.394***
                                                               (0.409)            (0.430)
          Job creation rate                                                                         5.320***            4.464***
                                                                                                     (0.916)             (0.921)
          Job destruction rate                                                                      -3.053***             -1.664
                                                                                                     (0.959)             (1.101)
          Observations                        363                363                363                363                 363
          R-squared                          0.043              0.020              0.095              0.111               0.132

                                                      Panel B: Age above median

         Unemployment rate                 -2.815***                            -3.374***                               -2.369***




40
                                            (0.606)                               (0.612)                                (0.653)
          Job turnover rate                                     0.333            1.156***
                                                               (0.363)            (0.370)
          Job creation rate                                                                         5.923***            4.513***
                                                                                                     (1.083)             (1.069)
          Job destruction rate                                                                      -4.475***           -2.188**
                                                                                                     (0.838)             (1.019)
          Observations                        363                363                363                363                 363
          R-squared                          0.122              0.003              0.158              0.144               0.202

     Note: The dependent variable is MSA-level weighted averages of answers to the current ladder of life question from Gallup
     for either respondents of age below median (Panel A) or respondents of age above median (Panel B). The weights used to
     compute the MSA-level averages are the weights attached to each respondent by Gallup. The sample years are 2008-2011.
     The independent variables are 2008-2011 averages of MSA-level unemployment rates (column 1, 3 and 5), job turnover rates
     (column 2 and 3), job creation and job destruction rates (column 4 and 5). The unemployment rates come from the Bureau
     of Labor Statistics (Local Area Unemployment Statistics). The job creation and job destruction rates come from the Business
     Dynamics Statistics from the Census Bureau. The job creation (destruction) rate is the sum of all employment gains (losses)
     from expanding establishments from year (t-1) to year t including establishment startups, divided by the average employment
     in year t and (t-1). The job turnover rate is defined as the sum of the job creation rate and the job destruction rate. There is
     no additional control besides the coefficient displayed.




                                                                   51
                                     Online Appendix:
             Creative Destruction and Subjective Well-Being

                          by Aghion, Akcigit, Deaton, and Roulet

                                          March 9, 2015


                               Not for Publication Unless Requested



OA-1       Su¢ cient Condition for Exit in Section 2.1.2.

Denote the value of an incumbent before entry by V1 and after entry V2 : Then we can express these
value functions as

                                                                           m
                rV1   V_ 1 = Y + x (V2         V1 ) ; and rV2    V_ 2 = Y + (0     V2 ) :
                                                                           v

Since in equilibrium m = v; we get
                                                       Y
                                           V2 =            :                                (OA-1)
                                                     1+r g
Then we can express V1 as
                                                (1    ) Y + xV2
                                      V1 =                                                  (OA-2)
                                                     x+r g
Note that (OA-1) implies Y = (1 + r        g) V2 : Substitute this into (OA-2) :

                                                       V2
                                     V1 = V2 +                  > V2 :
                                                     x+r    g

Hence any outside option O such that V1 > O > V2 :

                              Y                  1                     Y
                                          1+                >O>
                            1+r g              x+r+g                 1+r g

implies the incumbent …rm will exit as soon as there is a new entrant. This is what we assume
throughout our analysis.


OA-2       Derivation of Equation (10) :

Note that using the fact that in steady state E_ = gE and U_ = gU;and after subtracting the second
equation from the …rst:
                              (r   g)(E    U ) = BY + (1 + x)(U          E);

                                                     OA-1
where B           b:
   This yields:
                                                         BY
                                             E    U=              :
                                                    r g+1+x
   Then, substituting for (E         U ) in the above asset equations (8) and (9), yields:
                                 BY     1                                                            xBY    1
               U = bY +                    ; and E =                                Y                          :
                           r     g+1+x r g                                                   r       g+1+x r g
so that, after substituting for E and U in the expression for W; and using the fact that in equilibrium
u = x=(1 + x), we get:
                                                       Y                   xB
                                         W =                                  :
                                                  r        g              1+x

OA-3       Derivation of Equation (11) :

Recall that:
                                              W = uU + (1                 u)E;

where E and U are expressed in (8) and (9) : Now, using the fact that m(u; v)=u = (1                                u)x=u and
that in steady state E_ = gE and U_ = gU; we obtain:
                                                                      BY
                                             E        U=                      :
                                                                r     g + x=u
   Substituting for (E         U ) in the asset equations (8) and (9), yields:
                                                      [(1        u)x=u]BY                1
                                    U = bY +                                                     ;
                                                        r        g + x=u             r       g
and
                                                                 xBY      1
                                      E=          Y                          :
                                                               r g + x=u r g
so that:
                                                      Y
                                        W =                    [ub + (1        u)       ]:
                                                  r        g

OA-4       Proof of Lemma 1

The output in this economy is
                                              Z
                                    ln Yt =               ln Ajt dj       (1        u) ln At
                                                 j2J

Then after a small time interval        t:
               Z                                                      Z   hm                                            i
                                                                                                              m
 ln Yt+ t =       [x t 0 + (1           x t) ln Ajt ] dj +                           t ln (1 + ) At + 1         t      0 dj
                  J                                     J0 v                                                  v
                                             m
            = (1       x t) (1 u) ln At + u     t ln (1 + ) At
                                             v
            = [1       u] ln At + m t ln (1 + )

                                                               OA-2
Hence we can …nd the growth rate as

                                      ln Yt+   t       ln Yt
                           g = lim                             = m ln (1 + )
                                t!0                t




                                               OA-3
