                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SPATIAL VARIATION IN HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AND THE SUPPLY
                         OF COLLEGE GRADUATES

                                          John Kennan

                                      Working Paper 21065
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21065


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2015, Revised January 2018




Earlier versions of this paper had a different title: “Higher Education Subsidies and Human
Capital Mobility.” I thank Gadi Barlevy, John Bound, Rebecca Diamond, Eric French, Chao Fu,
Ahu Gemici, Grey Gordon, Joseph Han, Jim Heckman, Tom Holmes, Lisa Kahn, Maurizio
Mazzocco, Bob Miller, Derek Neal, Jack Porter, Mike Rothschild, Jean-Marc Robin, Chris Taber,
Sarah Turner, Jim Walker, Yoram Weiss and many seminar participants for helpful comments. I
thank four referees and the Editor for detailed and constructive comments on both substance and
exposition. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by John Kennan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Spatial Variation in Higher Education Financing and the Supply of College Graduates
John Kennan
NBER Working Paper No. 21065
April 2015, Revised January 2018
JEL No. I22,I23,J24,J61

                                         ABSTRACT

In the U.S. there are large differences across States in the extent to which college education is
subsidized, and there are also large differences across States in the proportion of college
graduates in the labor force. State subsidies are apparently motivated in part by the perceived
benefits of having a more educated workforce. The paper extends the migration model of Kennan
and Walker (2011) to analyze how geographical variation in college education subsidies affects
the migration decisions of college graduates. The model is estimated using NLSY data, and used
to quantify the sensitivity of migration and college enrollment decisions to differences in
expected net lifetime income, focusing on how cross-State differences in public college financing
affect the educational composition of the labor force. The main finding is that these differences
have substantial effects on college enrollment, and that these effects are not dissipated through
migration.


John Kennan
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jkennan@ssc.wisc.edu
 Spatial Variation in Higher Education Financing and the Supply of
                                             College Graduates
                                                John Kennan∗
                                 University of Wisconsin-Madison and NBER

                                                December 26, 2017



                                                       Abstract

              In the U.S. there are large differences across States in the extent to which college education is
          subsidized, and there are also large differences across States in the proportion of college graduates
          in the labor force. State subsidies are apparently motivated in part by the perceived benefits of
          having a more educated workforce. The paper extends the migration model of Kennan and Walker
          (2011) to analyze how geographical variation in college education subsidies affects the migration
          decisions of college graduates. The model is estimated using NLSY data, and used to quantify
          the sensitivity of migration and college enrollment decisions to differences in expected net lifetime
          income, focusing on how cross-State differences in public college financing affect the educational
          composition of the labor force. The main finding is that these differences have substantial effects
          on college enrollment, and that these effects are not dissipated through migration.


1        Introduction
There are substantial differences in subsidies for higher education across States in the U.S. Are these
differences related to the proportion of college graduates in each State? If so, why? Do the subsidies
change decisions about whether or where to go to college? If State subsidies induce more people to
get college degrees, to what extent does this additional human capital tend to remain in the State
that provided the subsidy?
        There is a considerable amount of previous work on these issues, discussed in Section 3 below.
What is distinctive in this paper is that migration is explicitly modeled. Recent work on migration
has emphasized that migration involves a sequence of reversible decisions that respond to migration
    ∗
    Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, 1180 Observatory Drive, Madison, WI 53706; jken-
nan@ssc.wisc.edu. Earlier versions of this paper had a different title: “Higher Education Subsidies and Human Capital
Mobility.” I thank Gadi Barlevy, John Bound, Rebecca Diamond, Eric French, Chao Fu, Ahu Gemici, Grey Gordon,
Joseph Han, Jim Heckman, Tom Holmes, Lisa Kahn, Maurizio Mazzocco, Bob Miller, Derek Neal, Jack Porter, Mike
Rothschild, Jean-Marc Robin, Chris Taber, Sarah Turner, Jim Walker, Yoram Weiss and many seminar participants
for helpful comments. I thank four referees and the Editor for detailed and constructive comments on both substance
and exposition.



                                                           1
incentives in the face of potentially large migration costs.1 The results of Kennan and Walker (2011)
indicate that labor supply responds quite strongly to geographical wage differentials and location
match effects, in a life-cycle model of expected income maximization.
        This suggests that variation in tuition rates across States should have substantial effects on
schooling decisions. This paper considers these effects in a dynamic programming model that allows
for migration both before and after acquiring a college degree. In the absence of moving costs, the
optimal policy for someone who decides to go to college is to move to the location that provides the
cheapest education (or the best value for money), and subsequently move to the labor market that
pays the highest wage. At the other extreme, if moving costs are very high, the economic incentive
to go to college depends only on the local wage premium for college graduates, and estimates based
on the idea of a national labor market are likely to be misleading. Thus it is natural to consider
college choices and migration jointly in a model that allows for geographical variation in both the
costs and benefits of a college degree.
        The model is estimated using panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979
Cohort); the estimation sample includes white males with at least a high school education born
between 1958 and 1964, observed annually from 1979 to 1994. College graduation is modeled as the
outcome of a stochastic process, rather than as a choice: high school graduates choose whether to
enroll in college, knowing that they may or may not emerge as college graduates, with probabilities
that depend on their ability, and on the type of college. Enrollment and migration choices are
affected by cross-State differences in college tuition and expenditures on higher education, and also
by spatial wage differences. The main empirical finding is that cross-State differences in higher
education expenditures, and (especially) in tuition levels, have substantial and long-lasting effects
on the proportion of college-educated workers in each State.


2        Geographical Distribution of College Graduates
There are surprisingly big differences across States in the proportion of college graduates among
those born in each State, and in the proportion of college graduates among those working in the
State. Figure 2.1 shows the distribution of college graduates aged 25-50 in the 2000 Census, as a
proportion of the number of people in this age group working in each State, and as a proportion of
the number of workers in this age group who were born in each State. For example, someone who
was born in New York is almost twice as likely to be a college graduate as someone born in Kentucky,
and someone working in Massachusetts is twice as likely to be a college graduate as someone working
in Nevada. Generally, the proportion of college graduates is high in the Northeast, and low in the
South.2
        There are also big differences in the proportion of college graduates who stay in the State where
they were born. On average, about 45% of all college graduates aged 25-50 work in the State
where they were born, but the proportion working in their birth-State is above 65% for Texas and
    1
        See Kennan and Walker (2011),Gemici (2011) and Bishop (2012).
    2
        The colors in Figure 2.1 (and subsequent figures) represent the nine Census Divisions.


                                                              2
                                                                                            Figure 2.1: Birth and Work Locations of College Graduates, 2000
                                                                                        College Graduate Proportions                                                                                                                      Gross Flows of College Graduates
 Graduates as percentage of workforce in each State




                                                                                                                                                                         22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52
                                                                                                                                                               ma                                                                                                                            MA
                                                      42
                                                      41
                                                      40
                                                      39




                                                                                                                                                                                Percentage of graduates: inflow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VT
                                                      38                                                                     co                           ct        ny                                                                                                  MD
                                                      37                                                           md                                          nj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MN                CT
                                                      36                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CO
                                                      35                                                                                   il        ri                                                                                              ME                                              NJ
                                                      34                                    vt va                             mn                                                                                                                                       IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RI        DE
                                                      33                                            wa        ca                    de
                                                                                                                                                hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA                    MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OH NH
                                                      32                                                 nh                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NC            MO                        WI
                                                      31                  ga
                                                                                                                             ks    pa nb                                                                                               CA NM                KS                     IA
                                                      30                          tx or
                                                                                                               mo                                                                                                                          TXAL LA            UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MT     HI        NB
                                                      29                az      nm                  ut                  mt                                                                                                                 SC OR            IN
                                                                             nc me                                      wi                                                                                                                         TN              SD
                                                      28                        fl
                                                                                        ak          mi
                                                                                                    oh                        sd
                                                                                                                                         nd                                                                                          KY AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AK                           ND
                                                      27                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ID
                                                                                  al
                                                      26           sc        tn        la    id
                                                                                                     ok                                                                                                                     WV                         OK
                                                      25                                    in
                                                                                                          wy                                                                                                                        MS               WY
                                                      24      ky
                                                      23                wv ms                                                                                                                                                  AR
                                                      22           ar
                                                                                  nv                                                                                                                                                     NV
                                                      21
                                                           23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40                                                                                                           28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
                                                                  Percentage of graduates, among those born in each State                                                                                                                     Percentage of graduates: outflow


These figures show birth and work locations for labor force participants aged 25 − 50 in the 2000
Census. On the left, the percentage of college graduates among those working in each State is plotted
against the percentage among those born in that State. The figure on the right refers to gross
flows: people born in one State who are working in a different State. In this figure, the percentage
of graduates among the (domestic) immigrants to each State is plotted against the percentage of
graduates among the emigrants.


California, and it is below 25% for Alaska and Wyoming. One might expect that the proportion of
college graduates in the flow of in-migrants would be relatively high in States that have relatively few
graduates in the native population, and similarly that the proportion of graduates in the flow of out-
migrants would be high in States that have a high proportion of graduates in the native population.
The right panel of Figure 2.1 shows that this is not the case.34
                                                3
     Card and Krueger (1992) analyzed the effect of school quality using the earnings of men in the 1980 Census,
classified according to when they were born, where they were born, and where they worked. An essential feature of
this analysis is that the effect of school quality is identified by the presence in the data of people who were born in one
State and who worked in another State (within regions, since the model allows for regional effects on the returns to
education). This ignores the question of why some people moved and others did not.
   4
     One possible explanation for the differences in the proportion of college graduates across States is that there are
similar differences across States in the proportion of college graduates in the parents’ generation, and there is a strong
relationship between the education levels of parents and children. Of course this “explanation” merely shifts the question
to the previous generation, but it is still of interest to know whether parental education is enough to account for most
of the observed differences in college choices.There is indeed a strong relationship between the proportion of college
graduates by State of birth for men aged 30-45 in the 2000 Census and the proportion of college graduates among the
fathers in the 1970 Census, by State of residence (the regression coefficient is .78). But there is still plenty of inter-State
variation in college graduation rates, even after controlling for the proportion of fathers who are college graduates.




                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                              Figure 2.2: Tuition and Higher Education Expenditures
                                                                            Persistence of Expenditure Differences                                                                                                      Expenditures and Tuition
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Public Colleges (except community colleges)
 Higher Education per capita Expenditure, 2012




                                                                                                                                                   nd




                                                                                                                                                                              1500
                                                      00                                                                         ut                                                                           ak
                                                 13                                                                                           de
                                                                                                                                      ak wy
                                                     0
                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                             Expenditure per potential student
                                                                                                                               vt




                                                                                                                                                                                         1250
                                                 1                                                                        ia    nm                                                                                              co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   az
                                                      00                                                            miwi hi      ks
                                                 11                                                                   nb
                                                                                                 md            or                                                                                                          nv
                                                      00




                                                                                                                                                                               1000
                                                                                                         nc                                                                                                                                                                             vt
                                                 10                                              al ca                                                                                                                    ut                            de
                                                                                        wv artx
                                                                                              va              in
                                                        0                                    msok                   co
                                                     90                                   ky                   wa                                                                                       wy    hi                             or
                                                                                                         mn                                                                                               nm                    wa
                                                       0                                                                                                                                                   ca




                                                                                                                                                                       750
                                                                                        mt
                                                     80           ma          sd             oh sc                                                                                                             idflnc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nd                      va
                                                                       ct mo       nyil       pa          az                                                                                                       ky      ksal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ga
                                                       0                  nh          la        id                                                                                                tx       la                     wi    sc
                                                     70                            nj
                                                                                    ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                        nb    ar                         in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nh
                                                                       ga                                                                                                                                   mt                   ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ia                          mi




                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                                      metn                                                                                                             ok      tn                            md ri
                                                       0                                                                                                                                                       wv
                                                     60                                                                                                                                                                   mo                       me        oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ny nj
                                                       0           fl                                                                                                                                                           sdct             il                         pa
                                                     50                            nv




                                                                                                                                                                              250
                                                        0                                                                                                                                                                              ma
                                                     40
                                                            200         250       300     350       400     450      500     550                   600                                           500   750         1000         1250         1500       1750       2000   2250   2500
                                                                               Higher Education per capita Expenditure, 1992                                                                                                           1984 Tuition


The figure on the left uses data on State & Local Finances from the Census of Governments. Per
capita State and local expenditures on higher education for each State in 2012 are plotted against the
corresponding amounts for 1992, with a regression line superimposed. The figure on the right uses
data from IPEDS. The y-variable is calculated by summing instructional expenditures over all public
colleges in each State, and dividing by the number of high school graduates born in that State who
were in the age range 22 − 36 in the 1990 Census. The x−variable is an enrollment-weighted average
of sticker prices in public colleges in each State in 1984. Two regression lines are superimposed (y
on x and x on y).


2.1                                                         Tuition and Higher Education Expenditures
States spend substantial amounts on higher education, and there are large and persistent differences in
these expenditures across States. Figure 2.2 shows the variation in (nominal) per capita expenditures
across States in 1992 and 2012, using data from the Census of Governments. The magnitude of these
expenditures suggests that a more highly educated workforce is a major goal of State economic
policies, perhaps because of human capital externalities. Figure 2.2 also shows tuition levels in
public universities in 1984 (when the people in the NLSY cohort were aged 19 to 25), plotted against
a measure of expenditures per student in these universities. Although differences in tuition levels
and expenditures are correlated across States, there is considerable independent variation in these
variables.
                                                 A common assumption in the literature on the relationship between college enrollment and cost
is that the relevant measure of tuition is the in-state tuition level, given that most students attend
college in their home State. This is a crude approximation. On average, about 20% of college
freshmen in 2012 enrolled in an out of State college.5 Moreover, this proportion varies greatly across
States. At one extreme, the proportion of both imported and exported students was close to 10%
for California and Texas.6 At the other extreme, most of the freshmen in Vermont were not from
                                           5
    See nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13 309.20.asp?current=yes
                                           6
    The proportion of imported students is the number of nonresident students as a fraction of total enrollments in
the State, while the proportion of exported students is the number of students from this State attending college out of
state, as a proportion of all students from this State.


                                                                                                                                                         4
Vermont, while most students from New Jersey were not studying in New Jersey.


3       Related Literature
The literature on the effects of State differences in college tuition levels is summarized by Kane (2006,
2007). The “consensus” view is that these effects are substantial – that a $1,000 reduction in tuition
increases college enrollment by something like 5%.7 Of course a major concern is that the variation
in tuition levels across States is not randomly assigned, and there may well be important omitted
variables that are correlated with tuition levels.8 There is no fully satisfactory way to deal with
this problem. One approach is to use large changes in the net cost of going to college induced by
interventions such as the introduction of the Georgia Hope Scholarship, as in Dynarski (2000), or the
elimination of college subsidies for children of disabled or deceased parents, as in Dynarski (2003), or
the introduction of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant program, as in Kane (2007). Broadly speaking,
the results of these studies are not too different from the results of studies that use the cross-section
variation of tuition levels over States, suggesting that the endogeneity of tuition levels might not
be a major problem.9 A detailed analysis of this issue would involve an analysis of the political
economy of higher education subsidies in general, and of tuition levels in particular. For example, a
change in the party controlling the State legislature or the governorship might be associated with a
change in higher education policies, and the variation induced by such changes might be viewed as
plausibly exogenous with respect to college choices, although of course this begs the question of why
the political environment changed.10
    7
      Keane and Wolpin (1997) used a dynamic programming model to analyze schooling and early career decisions in
a national labor market; they estimated that a $2,000 tuition subsidy, at the national level, would increase college
graduation rates by 8.4%. But this estimate was not based on observed responses to variation in actual tuition levels
(indeed the data set did not contain any information about tuition). Instead, the model was used to infer the cost of
attending college from data on wages of high school and college graduates, under the assumption that observed schooling
decisions were made so as to maximize expected net present values of lifetime earnings. The essential argument can
be illustrated by considering a hypothetical data set in which 50% of the people choose college, and the present value
of lifetime earnings is $10,000 higher for college graduates, and there are zero-mean normally distributed payoff shocks
attached to each choice. The estimated tuition cost would then be $10,000, and the effect of a $2,000 tuition subsidy
would be inferred from the estimated distribution of the payoff shocks, by computing the probability that the shocks
favor the non-college alternative by a positive amount less than $2,000.
   Keane and Wolpin (2001) also estimated a related model of college choices, emphasizing the relationship between
parental resources, borrowing constraints, and college enrollment (but with no consideration of spatial differences). A
major result is that borrowing constraints are binding, and yet they have little influence on college choice. Instead,
borrowing constraints affect consumption and work decisions while in college: if borrowing constraints were relaxed,
the same people would choose to go to college, but they would work less and consume more while in school.
    8
      Kane (2006) gives the example of California spending a lot on community colleges while also having low tuition.
    9
      Card and Lemieux (2001) analyzed changes in college enrollment over the period 1968-1996, using a model of
college participation that included tuition levels as one of the explanatory variables. The model includes State fixed
effects, and also year fixed effects, so the effect of tuition is identified by differential changes in tuition over time within
States – i.e. some States increased their tuition levels more or less quickly than others. The estimated effect of tuition
is significant, but considerably smaller than the results in the previous literature (which used cross-section data, so
that the effect is identified from differences in tuition levels across States at a point in time).
   10
      Aghion et al. (2009) used a set of political instruments to distinguish between arguably exogenous variation in State
expenditures on higher education and variation due to differences in wealth or growth rates across States. The model
allows for migration, and it considers both innovation and imitation. Higher education investments affect growth in
different ways depending on how close a State is to the “technology frontier”. Each State is assigned an index measuring


                                                               5
    As was shown in Figure 2.2 above, differences in support for higher education across States are
highly persistent in recent years. Goldin and Katz (1999) show that these differences are in fact
persistent over a much longer period of time, and they explain why:

           “To sum up, newer states with a high share of well-to-do families and scant presence
       of private universities in 1900 became the leaders in public higher education by 1930.
       They remain so today.”

As Bound et al. (2004) point out, some of these differences across States might be related to other
unmeasured differences in factors affecting college choices. For example, heavy industries requiring
a lot of engineers and scientists might be located in places where conditions are favorable in terms of
availability of natural resources, but unfavorable in that they happen to be populated by people who
are skeptical about the value of higher education. In that case, the business community might push
for more investment in public universities, and this would lead to a downward bias in estimates of the
response to policy variables. On the other hand, Goldin and Katz (1999) argue that wealthier families
are more likely to expect that their children will go to college, and indeed when they use automobiles
per capita as a proxy for the level of wealth in the State, they find a positive relationship between
wealth and public expenditures on higher education; this would lead to an upward bias in estimates
of the response to policy variables. But although bias in one direction or the other cannot be ruled
out, it seems reasonable to expect that differences in State policies arising from circumstances that
prevailed many years ago would not be strongly related to unmeasured differences in determinants
of college choices for recent cohorts (such as the NLSY79 cohort analyzed in this paper).
    Bound et al. (2004) and Groen (2004) sidestep the issue of what causes changes in the number of
college graduates in a State, and focus instead on the relationship between the flow of new graduates
in a State and the stock of graduates working in that State some time later. They conclude that this
relationship is weak, indicating that the scope for State policies designed to affect the educational
composition of the labor force is limited. The empirical results presented here indicate that it is
important to understand the sources of the variation in the flow of new graduates before drawing
policy conclusions. This is discussed in Section 6 below.


4     A Life-Cycle Model of Expected Income Maximization
The empirical results in Kennan and Walker (2011) indicate that high school graduates migrate
across States in response to differences in expected income. This paper analyzes the college choice
and migration decisions of high-school graduates, using an extension of the dynamic programming
model developed in Kennan and Walker (2011). The aim is to quantify the relationship between
college choice and migration decisions, on the one hand, and geographical differences in college costs
and expected incomes on the other. The model can be used to analyze the extent to which the
distance to the frontier, based on patent data. In States close to the frontier, the estimated effect of spending on research
universities is positive, but the estimated effect is negative for States that are far from the frontier. The model explains
this in terms of a tradeoff between using labor to innovate or to imitate.


                                                             6
distribution of human capital across States is influenced by State subsidies for higher education. The
basic idea is that people tend to buy their human capital where it is cheap, and move it to where
wages are high, but this tendency is substantially affected by moving costs.
      Suppose there are J locations, and individual i’s income yij in location j is a random variable
with a known distribution. Migration and college enrollment decisions are made so as to maximize
the present value of expected lifetime income. Let x be the state vector (which includes the stock
of human capital, ability, wage and preference information, current location and age, as discussed
below), and let a be the action vector (the location and college enrollment choices). In the basic
dynamic discrete choice model,11 , the utility flow is specified as u(x, a) + ζa , where ζa is a random
variable that is assumed to be iid across actions and across periods and independent of the state
vector. It is assumed that ζa is drawn from the Type I extreme value distribution. Let p(x0 | x, a)
be the transition probability from state x to x0 , if action a is chosen. The decision problem can be
written in recursive form as
                                     V (x, ζ) = max (v(x, a) + ζa )
                                                   a

where
                                                           X
                                v(x, a) = u(x, a) + β           p(x0 | x, a)v̄(x0 )
                                                           x0

and
                                           v̄(x) = Eζ V (x, ζ)

and where β is the discount factor, and Eζ denotes the expectation with respect to the distribution of
the vector ζ with components ζa . Then, using arguments due to McFadden (1974) and Rust (1994),
we have
                                                           Na
                                                           X
                                 exp (v̄(x)) = exp (γ̄)          exp (v(x, k))
                                                           k=1

where Na is the number of available actions, and γ̄ is the Euler constant. Let ρ (x, a) be the probability
of choosing a, when the state is x. Then

                                  ρ (x, a) = exp (v (x, a) + γ̄ − v̄ (x))

      The function v is computed by value function iteration, assuming a finite horizon, T . Age is
included as a state variable, with v ≡ 0 at age T + 1, so that successive iterations yield the value
functions for a person who is getting younger.

4.1      Nested and Sequential Choices
In the basic model, payoff shocks affecting enrollment and migration decisions are drawn indepen-
dently from the Type I extreme value distribution. This is too restrictive: for example, enrollment
choices might be more predictable than migration choices (or vice versa).
 11
      See Rust (1994).



                                                       7
   Suppose the choices are arranged in an array with m rows (for locations), and n columns (for
enrollment choices). The model associates continuation values vij with row i and column j, and
there are payoff shocks ζi associated with each row, and κζj0 associated with each column, where the
shocks are drawn independently from the Type I extreme value distribution, with κ > 0. Then if
row i has been chosen, the column choice is determined by

                                       j = arg max vik + ζi + κζk0
                                                                              
                                                  k

The (conditional) probability of choosing column j is
                                                           v 
                                                      exp κij
                                         ρ (j | i) = n
                                                        exp vκik
                                                     P           
                                                       k=1

and the expected value of the row, v̄i , is given by

                                                               n
                                                                                   !κ
                                                                            v 
                                                                              ik
                                                               X
                                exp (v̄i ) = exp (κγ̄)               exp
                                                                             κ
                                                               k=1

If row i is chosen before the column shocks are realized (with the understanding that these shocks
will be realized before the column is chosen) then the row choice is determined by

                                          i = arg max (v̄s + ζs )
                                                       s

The probability of choosing row i is

                                                            exp (v̄i )
                                           ρ0 (i) =    m
                                                       P
                                                               exp (v̄s )
                                                       s=1

and the expected value of the whole array is

                                         m
                                                           !
                                         X
                      v̄0 = γ̄ + log           exp (v̄s )
                                         s=1
                                          m                     n
                                                                                   !κ !
                                                                            v 
                                                                              sk
                                         X                      X
                          = γ̄ + log           exp (κγ̄)              exp
                                                                              κ
                                         s=1                    k=1
                                                                                    κ 
                                                                   m       n     v 
                                                                                   ij  
                                                                   X      X
                          = (1 + κ) γ̄ + log m + log                       exp
                                                                                   κ
                                                                   i=1      j=1




                                                        8
The choice probabilities are then given by

                          Prob (dij = 1) = ρ (j | i) ρ0 (i)
                                                                              n
                                                                                                         κ
                                                                                               vik
                                                                               P                     
                                                             vij                      exp      κ
                                                     exp        κ           k=1
                                              =     n                     m
                                                                             n
                                                                                                             κ
                                                                    vik
                                                    P                                           vsk
                                                                                                         
                                                          exp
                                                                          P   P
                                                                    κ                    exp      κ
                                                    k=1                 s=1        k=1

If κ = 1 (or if m = 1 or n = 1), this reduces to the standard logit formula for the choice probabilities.
       The Nested Logit Model discussed by McFadden (1978) gives these same choice probabilities,
but with a different interpretation: the continuation value associated with each choice is specified
as vij + yij , where yij is a generalized extreme value random vector, with joint distribution function
F (y) given by

                                                                        m
                                                                                   !
                                                                        X
                                            F (y) = exp −                     Yi
                                                                        i=1
                                                1
                                                          n          y 
                                                                       ij
                                                          X
                                             Yi κ   =            exp −
                                                                       κ
                                                           j=1


subject to the restriction 0 < κ ≤ 1 (which ensures that the density function is non-negative).12
In this interpretation all of the shocks are realized before any choices are made. In the present
context, the period length is taken to be a year, and the timing of the location and enrollment
choices within the year is necessarily fuzzy, so various interpretations are possible, and each is just
a rough approximation of the way that decisions are actually made. The estimated version of the
model assumes that location choices are made before enrollment choices (but the reverse ordering
gives similar results).

4.2      State Variables and Flow Payoffs
Let ` = `0 , `1 denote the current and previous location, let ω be a vector recording wage information
               

at these locations, and let ξ denote current enrollment status (with the convention that ξ = 0 means
that the individual is not enrolled in college, and otherwise ξ represents the college type). The state
vector x consists of `, ω, education level achieved so far, ability, parental education, family income,
home location and age.13
       The deterministic part of the flow payoff is specified as



uh (x, j) = α0 (e) + α1 1 − T `0          w g, e, b, `0 , ω, ξ + α2 Y `0 + αH χ `0 = h − Ch `0 , ξ − ∆ (x, j)
                                                                                             

  12
    See Börsch-Supan (1990). Note that the sequential choice interpretation allows κ > 1.
  13
    As in Kennan and Walker (2011), a limited (location) history approximation is used to reduce the size of the state
space in a way that takes advantage of the low migration rates seen in the data.




                                                            9
Here the first term refers to consumption values associated with different education levels. The second
term refers to after-tax wage income in the current location; the gross wage depends on age, schooling
and ability, as discussed above, and T `0 is the tax rate in the current location. This is augmented
                                          

by the amenity variable Y `0 . The parameter αH is a premium that allows each individual to have
                               

a preference for their home location (χ denotes an indicator). The cost of attending a college of type
ξ in location ` for a person whose home location is h is denoted by Ch (`, ξ), with Ch (`, 0) = 0. The
cost of moving from `0 to `j is represented by ∆ (x, j).

4.3     Enrollment Decisions
In simple models of higher education choices, high school graduates choose whether to give up four
or five years worth of earnings at high school wages in order to earn a college wage premium for the
remaining forty years or so. In practice, the choices are more complicated. While many students
enroll in college immediately after finishing high school, and stay in college continuously until they
graduate, many others enroll in college after first spending some time in the labor force, or leave
college without finishing a degree, either permanently or temporarily, on enroll in two-year colleges,
with the possibility of subsequently transferring to a four-year college.14 Accordingly, the model
analyzed here treats college choices as the outcome of a sequence of decisions on whether to enroll
in one of several types of college, with uncertainty about whether enrollment will lead to graduation
with a degree.
      The specification of the model involves the usual tradeoff between realism and computation; in
particular, since there are many locations, and location is an essential state variable, it is necessary
to use a coarse specification of the other state variables so that the state space does not become too
big. For this reason, there are just three levels of schooling: high school (12 or 13 years of schooling
completed), some college (14 or 15 years) and college graduate (16 years or more).
      In each period, there is a choice of whether to enroll in college. There are four types of college:
community colleges, other public colleges and universities, and private colleges at two quality levels.15
The college types differ with respect to tuition, State subsidies, financial aid, graduation probabilities,
and psychic costs and benefits. Enrollment choices are influenced by ability, parental schooling and
family income, represented by permanent state variables, which are restricted to just two values,
high or low.16

4.4     Wages
The wage of individual i in location j at age g in year t is specified as

                           wijt = µj (ei ) + υij (ei ) + G(ei , Xi , gi ) + εijt (e) + ηi
 14
    Agan (2014) presents a detailed description of the various paths taken by college students, using NLSY79 data.
 15
    Fu (2014) uses a similar set of college types in her analysis of equilibrium in the college admissions market.
 16
    Again, binary state variables are used here in order to keep the state space manageable.




                                                        10
where e is schooling level, µj is the mean wage in location j (for each level of schooling), υ is a per-
manent location match effect, G(e, X, g) represents the effects of observed individual characteristics,
η is an individual effect that affects wages in the same way in all locations, and ε is a transient effect.
The random variables η, υ and ε are assumed to be independently and identically distributed across
individuals and locations, with mean zero. It is also assumed that the realizations of υ and η are
seen by the individual (although υij (ei ) is seen by i only after moving to j with education ei ).
       The function G is specified as a piecewise-quadratic function of age g, with an interaction between
ability and education:
                                             
                                             θ b + y ∗ − c (g − g ∗ )2         g ≤ ge∗
                                               e     e     e      e
                                G(e, b, g) =
                                             θ b + y ∗                         g ≥ ge∗
                                                  e      e

where b is measured ability, ye∗ is the peak wage for education level e, and ge∗ is age at the peak.
Thus both the shape of the age-earnings profile and the ability premium are specified separately for
each level of education, with four parameters to be estimated (θe , ye∗ , ce , and ge∗ ).17
       The relationship between wages and actions is governed by the difference between the quality
of the match in the current location, measured by µj (e) + υij (e) + G(e, b, g), and the prospect of
obtaining a better match in another location or at a higher level of schooling. The other components
of wages have no bearing on migration or enrollment decisions, since they are added to the wage in
the same way no matter what decisions are made.

4.4.1      Stochastic Wage Components

Since the realized value of the location match component υ is a state variable, it is convenient to
specify this component as a random variable with a discrete distribution, and compute continua-
tion values at the support points of this distribution. For given support points, the best discrete
approximation F̂ for any distribution F assigns probabilities so as to equate F̂ with the average
value of F over each interval where F̂ is constant. If the support points are variable, they are chosen
so that F̂ assigns equal probability to each point.18 Thus if the distribution of the location match
component υ were known, the wage prospects associated with a move to State k could be represented
by a distribution with equally weighted support points µ̂k + υ̂ (qr ) , 1 ≤ r ≤ R, where υ̂ (qr ) is the qr
quantile of the distribution of υ, with
                                                             2r − 1
                                                      qr =
                                                              2R
for 1 ≤ r ≤ R. The distribution of υ is in fact not known, but it is assumed to be symmetric around
zero. Thus for example with R = 3, the distribution of µj + υij in each State for each education
                                                                      1
level is approximated by a distribution that puts mass                3   on µj (the median of the distribution of
  17
     This is a version of the “flat-spot” specification developed by Heckman et al. (1998). In the present context, the
model uses expected earnings at ages outside the range of the data to explain enrollment and migration choices at
younger ages, and assuming that earnings are constant after the peak limits the possibility that the model might
generate spurious explanations of these choices driven by implausible earnings at later ages.
  18
     See Kennan (2006)



                                                             11
                         1
µj + υij ), with mass    3   on µj ± υ 0 , where υ 0 is a parameter to be estimated.
    Measured earnings in the NLSY are highly variable, even after controlling for education and
ability. Moreover, while some people have earnings histories that are well approximated by a concave
age-earnings profile, others have earnings histories that are quite irregular. In other words, the
variability of earnings over time is itself quite variable across individuals. It is important to use
a wage components model that is flexible enough to fit these data, in order to obtain reasonable
inferences about the relationship between measured earnings and the realized values of the location
match component. The wage components at each education level are specified as in Kennan and
Walker (2011). The fixed effect η is assumed to be uniformly and symmetrically distributed around
zero, with three points of support, so that there is one parameter to be estimated. The transient
component ε should be drawn from a continuous distribution that is flexible enough to account for the
observed variability of earnings. It is assumed that ε is drawn from a normal distribution with zero
mean for each person, but with a variance that differs across people. Specifically, person i initially
draws σε (i) from a uniform discrete distribution with two support points (which are parameters to
be estimated), and subsequently draws εit from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard
deviation σε (i), with εit drawn independently in each period.

4.5    College Costs
Aside from consumption values and expected income, all of the variables in the model that affect
college choices do so by changing the costs associated with being in college. Earnings while enrolled
in college are ignored. The college cost depends on ability, b, and on age, g (relative to an initial age
g0 which is set to 19). The cost also depends on resident and nonresident tuition rates, τr (`, ξ) and
τn (`, ξ), expenditure on higher education, y (`, ξ), financial aid (scholarships), s (`, ξ), and parents’
education and family income. Let dm and df be indicators of whether the mother and the father
have some college education, and let yf be an indicator of whether family income is high or low. Let
Ξ be the set of upper-tier colleges. The cost of attending a college of type ξ is specified as

C (`, ξ) = δ0 (ξ) + δ1 (ξ) τ (`, ξ) + δ2 (ξ) E (`, ξ) + δ3 b + δ4 bχ (ξ ∈ Ξ) + δ5 dm + δ6 df + δ7 y + δ8 (g − g0 )
               + (δ9 (ξ) + δ10 b + δ11 dm + δ12 df + δ13 yf ) s (`, ξ) + (δ14 + δ15 b) χ (e = 1) + δ16 χ (ξ = ξ−1 ) χ (e < 2)

where tuition is given by

                               τ (`, ξ) = χ (` = h) τr (`, ξ) + χ (` 6= h) τn (`, ξ)

(with τr = τn for private colleges). For each college type ξ, δ0 (ξ) measures the disutility of the effort
involved in taking college courses (offset by the utility of life as a student); effort cost depends on
ability (δ3 ), especially in upper-tier colleges (δ4 ), and the cost may be higher as students advance
through college, especially for low-ability students (δ14 + δ15 b).19 The tuition measures are averages
  19
     In general it is not possible to distinguish between the nonpecuniary costs of college (δ0 ) and the nonpecuniary
benefits of having a college education (α0 ). The income coefficient is identified by the migration component of the


                                                         12
over each college type within a State; it is assumed that the actual net tuition is a linear function of
the State average tuition measures, and δ1 (ξ) represents the slope of this function, for each college
type. Similarly, δ2 (ξ) measures the extent to which higher education expenditures reduce the cost of
college, without specifying any particular channel through which this effect operates. The effect of
scholarships is also measured separately for each college type, and in addition it depends on ability,
parental education, and family income. The point here is that scholarships are largely allocated on
the basis of merit or need; a college that has a large scholarship budget is more attractive (given
tuition and expenditure levels), but the size of the scholarship budget is obviously more relevant for
students who are more likely to be eligible for scholarships. Finally, persistence in enrollment choices
is captured by the parameter δ16 .

4.6    Moving Costs
Moving costs are specified as in Kennan and Walker (2011). Let D `0 , j be the distance from the
                                                                       

current location to location j, and let A(`0 ) be the set of locations adjacent to `0 (where States are
adjacent if they share a border). The moving cost is specified as

      ∆ (x, j) = γ0 (e) + γ1 D `0 , j − γ2 χ j ∈ A `0 − γ3 χ j = `1 + γ4 g − γ5 nj χ j 6= `0
                                                                                        


Thus the moving cost varies with education. The observed migration rate is much higher for college
graduates than for high school graduates, and the model can account for this either through differ-
ences in potential income gains or differences in the cost of moving. The moving cost is an affine
function of distance (which is measured as the great circle distance between population centroids).
Moves to an adjacent location may be less costly (because it is possible to change States while re-
maining in the same general area). A move to a previous location may also be less costly, relative to
moving to a new location. In addition, the cost of moving is allowed to depend on age, g. Finally, it
may be cheaper to move to a large location, as measured by population size nj .

4.7    Transition Probabilities
The state vector can be written as x = (x̃, g), where x̃ = e, `0 , `1 , x0υ and where x0υ and x1υ index
                                                                           

the realizations of the location match component of wages in the current and previous locations. Let
qb (e, ξ) denote the probability of advancing from education level e to e + 1, for someone with ability
model. So the proportion who would choose college is known if there is no college cost, and if there is no difference
between education levels except that college graduates earn more. Suppose the prediction is that the proportion going
to college is 80%, and suppose that only 30% choose college in the data. The model might explain this by saying that
going to college is costly. Alternatively, it might be explained by saying that there are nonpecuniary payoffs associated
with the different education levels. The specification of costs and returns used here imposes an exclusion restriction
that distinguishes one from the other: the transition probabilities are more favorable for high-ability people, but the
nonpecuniary benefits of having a college education are the same for both types. This assumption is arbitrary. But
the main point of the model is not to make these distinctions, but rather to estimate the responses to changes in the
policy variables.




                                                           13
b who is enrolled in a college of type ξ, where qb (e, 0) = 0. The transition probabilities are as follows
         
                                              j = `0 ,         x̃0 = e + 1, `0 , `1 , x0υ , g 0
                                                                                         
         
            qb (e, ξ)       if                                                                   =g+1
         
                                                   `0 ,        x̃0 = e, `0 , `1 , x0υ ,     g0
                                                                                     
           1 − qb (e, ξ)     if               j=                                                  =g+1
         
         
         
         
         
                                              j = `1 ,         x̃0 = e + 1, `1 , `0 , x1υ , g 0
                                                                                         
          qb (e, ξ)         if                                                                   =g+1
         
         
   0
       
                                                   `1 ,        x̃0 = e, `1 , `0 , x1υ ,     g0
                                                                                     
p x |x =   1 − qb (e, ξ)     if               j=                                                  = g + 1,
              qb (e,ξ)
         
                                               / `0 , `1 , x̃0 = (e + 1, j, `0 , xυ ),      g0
                                                 
                             if               j∈                                                  = g + 1, 1 ≤ xυ ≤ R
         
         
         
                R
             1−qb (e,ξ)
         
                                               / `0 , `1 , x̃0 = (e, j, `0 , xυ ),          g0
                                                 
                             if               j∈                                                  = g + 1, 1 ≤ xυ ≤ R
         
         
         
         
                R
                  0      otherwise
         


5         Empirical Results
5.1        Data
The primary data source is the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 Cohort (NLSY79);
data from the Census of Population are used to estimate State mean wages and parental income
and education distributions, and data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) are used to measure tuition and college expenditures and financial aid. The NLSY79
conducted annual interviews from 1979 through 1994, and changed to a biennial schedule in 1994.
The location of each respondent is recorded at the date of each interview, and migration is measured
by the change in location from one interview to the next. Only the migration information from 1979
through 1994 is used here, but wage information is available (biennially) through 2013, and this is
used in order to obtain better estimates of the lifetime wage profile.
         In order to obtain a relatively homogeneous sample, only white non-Hispanic male high school
graduates (or GED recipients) are included; the analysis begins at age 19. The (unbalanced) sample
includes 12,895 annual observations on 1,281 men. Summary statistics on college enrollment for this
sample are shown in Table 1.
         Wages are measured as total wage and salary income, plus farm and business income, adjusted
for cost of living differences across States (using the ACCRA Cost of Living Index). The State effects
{µj (e)} are obtained from 1980 and 1990 Census data, using median wage regressions with year and
age and State dummies, applied to white males who have recently entered the labor force (so as to
minimize selection effects due to migration).20 The tax rate T `0 is measured as the sum of federal
                                                                 

and State average tax rates for 1984, as calculated by the NBER TAXSIM model.21
    20
     Since wages include location match effects, if mean State wages were estimated using data for everyone currently
working in the State, the estimated match effect distribution would be biased.
  21
     See http://users.nber.org/˜taxsim/allyup/.




                                                          14
                                   Table 1: College Enrollment, NLSY
                                  Enrollment Counts
                                  Public low                             469     17%
                                  Public high                          1,497     53%
                                  Private low                            138      5%
                                  Private high                           737     26%
                                  Subtotal                             2,841
                                  Average years enrolled                 3.7
                                  Not enrolled                        10,054
                                  Total (person-years)                12,895
                                  Ever enrolled in college
                                  No                                     523     41%
                                  In-State only                          565     44%
                                  Out-of-State only                       98      8%
                                  Both                                    95      7%
                                  Total (persons)                      1,281
This table gives college enrollment counts for white non-Hispanic males in the core NLSY79 sample
with at least 12 years of schooling, starting at age 19, and observed over the period 1979 − 1994.


5.1.1      Tuition and Subsidies

In the model, each State has one representative college of each type,22 and all of these colleges are
available choices for everyone.23 Tuition rates were estimated by computing enrollment-weighted
averages of real “sticker prices” for each college type, using IPEDS data for 1980 and 1984. Students
attending college in their home State are assumed to pay tuition at the resident rate, while others
pay the non-resident rate, allowing for a few reciprocity agreements across States.24 The home State
is defined as the State in which the individual last went to high school.
       State subsidies to higher education might affect either the cost or the quality of education.
For example, given the level of tuition, the cost of attending college is lower if there is a college
within commuting distance, and the cost of finishing college is higher if graduation is delayed due
to bottlenecks in required courses. From the point of view of an individual student, an increase in
tuition paid by other students has much the same effect as an increase in subsidies, in the sense
that it increases the resources available for instruction and student support services. But because
tuition also acts as a price, it seems more informative to model the effect of direct subsidies, holding
tuition constant. This means that the effect of tuition should not be interpreted as a movement
  22
     There are a few exceptions: there are no private colleges in Wyoming (aside from Wyoming Technical Institute,
a for-profit operation of dubious repute), and there are no upper-tier private colleges in Montana, Nevada and South
Dakota. Thus these alternatives are excluded from the choice set in the dynamic programming model.
  23
     This does not mean that every high school graduate is free to choose Harvard. There are 43 colleges in Massachusetts
that are classified as upper-tier (including Harvard), and the assumption is that every high school graduate can get
into at least one of these colleges.
  24
     Minnesota has tuition reciprocity agreements with Wisconsin and with North and South Dakota; there is a similar
agreement between Oregon and Washington State.




                                                           15
                                            Table 2: College Costs
                                                                   Mean       S.D.
                                 Tuition                         ($1983)
                                 Public, low, Resident               617
                                                                       252
                                 Public, low, Nonresident          1,708
                                                                       658
                                 Public, high, Resident            1,116
                                                                       366
                                 Public, high, Nonresident         2,902
                                                                       847
                                 Private, Low                      3,507
                                                                       846
                                 Private, High                4,705 1,571
                                 Expenditure (per potential student)
                                 Public, low                    103     89
                                 Public, high                   644    233
                                 Private, Low                    48     45
                                 Private, High                  204    214
                                 Financial Aid (per potential student)
                                 Public, low                    8.3    6.2
                                 Public, high                  39.1   21.3
                                 Private, Low                   9.7    8.6
                                 Private, High                 27.0   26.6
The unit of observation in this table is a State. The tuition levels are enrollment-weighted averages
of real “sticker prices” within each State for the years 1980 and 1984. The expenditure and financial
aid variables are totals over all colleges of each type within each State, divided by the number of
high school graduates aged 22-36.

along a demand curve, since a college that charges high tuition, holding subsidies constant, can use
the additional tuition revenue to improve the quality of the product, or to reduce other components
of college costs.
    Subsidy measures were constructed by adding federal, State and local appropriations and grants
over all public colleges in the IPEDS files, by State, and by college level, the lower level being defined
as community colleges, and the upper level as all other public colleges. Similarly, the financial
aid variables measure total expenditures on scholarships, by State and college level.25 Since these
expenditure aggregates involve populations of different sizes, the expenditure and financial aid figures
are divided by the number of potential students, measured as the number of high school graduates
in the State aged 22-36 in the 1990 Census. Summary statistics are shown in Table 2

5.1.2    College Choices

As is well known, there is a strong relationship between college choices and parental education levels.
For the sample used here, this relationship is summarized in Table 3, for low-ability and high-ability
  25
     These    data   were    obtained     from    the    IPEDS    finance   files  for    1980    and     1984   (e.g
nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter/data/F1984 Data Stata.zip); the expenditure variable includes expenditures on
Instruction, Research, Public service, Academic support (excluding libraries), Student services, Institution support,
and Educational Mandatory Transfers. The financial aid variable includes Scholarships (unrestricted) and Scholarships
(restricted). The IPEDS files for 1981 − 83 are not available.


                                                         16
                            Table 3: Ability, Parents’ Education and Schooling
                                         Neither Parent went to College
                                         High School  Some College College                Total
                         Years              12-13         14-15         16+
                       Low Ability           375           33            34                442
                                           84.8%          7.5%         7.7%               62.3%
                       High Ability          128           56            84                268
                                            47.8%        20.9%         31.3%              37.7%
                           Total             503           89           118                710
                                            70.8%        12.5%         16.6%
                                          Both Parents went to College
                       Low Ability            41           19            19                 79
                                            51.9%        24.1%         24.1%              29.7%
                       High Ability           24           44           119                187
                                            12.8%        23.5%        63.6%               70.3%
                           Total              65           63           138                266
                                            24.4%        23.7%         51.9%
Most of the parents of the 1, 281 men in the analysis sample did not go to college. In 710 cases,
neither parent went to college, and the top panel shows educational outcomes for the sons of these
parents, classified according to whether the AFQT score was above or below the median. In 266
cases, both parents went to college, and the bottom panel shows the outcomes for these cases.


students, where the ability measure is an indicator of whether the AFQT percentile score is above
or below the median in the full sample (which is 63).
       For example, if both parents went to college, there is a 52% chance that their sons will graduate
from college, and this rises to 64% if the son is in the top half of the distribution of AFQT scores.
There is also a strong relationship between AFQT scores and college choices, but note that sons
whose parents went to college are much more likely to have high AFQT scores.

5.2      College Choices and Migration
Maximum likelihood estimates of the model parameters are shown in Table 4. The parameters
of the wage process were estimated separately, using the most recent data (including the biennial
interviews);26 these parameters were treated as known when estimating the parameters governing
college choice and migration decisions.27
       The estimates of the parameters governing migration decisions are similar to the estimates in
  26
    The wage unit is $10, 000 (at 1983 prices).
  27
    Surprisingly, the direct effect of the (binary) AFQT score is relatively weak (conditional on the education level).
Ability is of course strongly correlated with earnings, but the estimated earnings process attributes this largely to a
strong relationship between ability and educational attainment.
   Recall that the fixed effect η is assumed to be uniformly and symmetrically distributed around zero, with three
points of support; the estimate in Table 4 is that the positive support point is $1, 138 (regardless of education level).
And the transient component ε is drawn from a uniform mixture of two zero-mean normal distributions, with standard
deviations that vary across education levels, ranging from $593 to $4, 484.



                                                           17
                    Table 4: College Enrollment Choices and Migration, White Males
                Utility Parameters
                                      θ̂        σ̂θ
A. Consumption value of education
Some College                α0 (1)   -0.256     0.053
College Graduate            α0 (2)   -0.010     0.171
B. Flow Utility
Income                      α1        0.098     0.010
Climate                     α2        0.010     0.004
                              H
Home Premium                α         0.164     0.009
C. Moving Cost
High School                 γ0 (1)    4.613     0.252
Some College                γ0 (2)    4.090     0.268
College Graduate            γ0 (3)    4.122     0.283
Distance                    γ1        0.312     0.062
Adjacent Location           γ2        0.886     0.080
Previous Location           γ3        0.164     0.009
Age effect                  γ4        2.305     0.113
Population                  γ5        0.083     0.010
D. College Cost                                                                           Wage Parameters
Disutility, college: Pub lo δ0 (1)    1.113     0.273                        High School    Some College            College
Disutility, college: Pub hi δ0 (2)   -0.084     0.376
                                                                              θ̂      σ̂θ     θ̂     σ̂θ       θ̂             σ̂θ
Disutility, college: Pvt lo δ0 (3)    1.800     0.445
                                                        Peak Wage            1.801   0.015    2.400 0.041     2.367      0.041
Disutility, college: Pvt hi δ0 (4)    0.927     0.395
                                                        Age at Peak         38.334   0.376 44.961 1.327 48.922           0.713
Tuition: Public lo          δ1 (1)    1.138     0.373
                                                        Curvature            1.175   0.053    0.943 0.120     1.285      0.073
Tuition: Public hi          δ1 (2)    2.146     0.187
                                                        AFQT                 0.139   0.024    0.124 0.044     0.150      0.040
Tuition: Private lo         δ1 (3)   -1.599     0.561
                                                        Location match       0.424   0.009    0.911 0.022     0.892      0.017
Tuition: Private hi         δ1 (4)   -0.087     0.224
                                                        Transient s.d. 1     0.593   0.002    0.791 0.007     0.789      0.005
Spend/Student: Pub lo       δ2 (1)  -17.703     2.121
                                                        Transient s.d. 2     2.651   0.009    3.831 0.053     4.484      0.030
Spend/Student: Pub hi       δ2 (2)    0.656     0.763
                                                                                          All Education Levels
Spend/Student: Pvt lo       δ2 (3)   11.460    29.693
                                                                                       θ̂                     σ̂θ
Spend/Student: Pvt hi       δ2 (4)   -7.160     2.899
                                                        Individual Effect            1.138                   0.012
Ability effect on cost      δ3       -0.279     0.160
Ability×upper tier          δ4       -0.312     0.074
Mother’s education          δ5        0.069     0.032
Father’s education          δ6       -0.125     0.033
Family Income               δ7       -0.067     0.029
Age effect                  δ8        0.279     0.160
Financial Aid: Pub lo       δ9 (1)  -17.762    37.030
Financial Aid: Pub hi       δ9 (2)   21.243     9.867
Financial Aid: Pvt lo       δ9 (3) -119.044   128.454
Financial Aid: Pvt hi       δ9 (4)   32.017    23.137
Ability×aid                 δ10     -41.933     7.302
Mother-ed×aid               δ11     -41.628     6.953
Father-ed×aid               δ12      -3.550     7.191
Family income×aid           δ13      -7.318     7.100
extra cost, upper ed level δ14        0.868     0.257
hi ability, upper ed        δ15       0.483     0.174
enrollment persistence      δ16      -1.421     0.102
E. Payoff shocks
Enroll/migrate shocks       κ         0.504     0.032       18
Kennan and Walker (2011). The estimated income coefficient in this model reflects both migration
and college choice decisions; as in the migration model, the effect is highly significant. Ability and
parental education levels have strong effects on college costs (as would be expected, given the data
in Table 3). The sequential structure of the payoff shocks substantially improves the model fit,
and the estimate of κ indicates that migration decisions are much less predictable than enrollment
decisions. The estimated moving costs are decreasing in the level of education, reflecting the positive
relationship between education and migration rates in the data. The age coefficients for both moving
and enrollment costs are quite significant. If these coefficients were zero, the model could still explain
why younger people are more likely to enroll in college, just as they are more likely to move: these
are both investment decisions, and if the net return is positive, it is better to invest sooner rather
than later. The estimates indicate that this human capital explanation is insufficient to fully explain
why observed enrollment and migration rates are decreasing in age.

                      Table 5: Estimated College Transition Probabilities
                                              Low AFQT       High AFQT
                               Initial Grade 12-13 14-15 12-13 14-15
                                      e         0      1       0       1
                                Next Grade    14-15   16     14-15    16
                                           ξ
                      Public Lower-Tier 1 22.7% 16.5% 33.6% 10.7%
                      Public Upper-Tier 2 50.7% 32.4% 57.8% 33.0%
                      Private Lower-Tier 3 55.2% 22.5% 57.1% 36.2%
                      Private Upper-Tier 4 42.8% 28.9% 56.2% 34.8%
                                                    Standard Errors
                      Public Lower-Tier 1 3.3%       6.2%    3.9%   6.0%
                      Public Upper-Tier 2 4.3%       4.6%    3.0%   3.0%
                      Private Lower-Tier 3 6.3% 10.0% 4.7%          8.7%
                      Private Upper-Tier 4 4.0%      6.6%    3.3%   3.8%
This table contains the estimated values of the parameters qb (e, ξ), which were specified in Section
4.7 . For example, if someone in the lower half of the AFQT distribution who has completed 12 or
13 of schooling enrolls in an upper-tier public college, there is a 50.7% chance that this person will
have completed 14 or 15 years one year later.

   For public colleges, higher tuition has a strong negative effect on enrollment, and expenditure per
(potential) student has a strong positive effect for community colleges (but the expenditure effect is
insignificant for other public colleges). There is considerable variation in tuition levels for private
colleges, but since this variation is not determined at the State level, the effect of differences in private
college tuition cannot easily be inferred from location choices, as is done here for public colleges.

5.3    Goodness of Fit
The ability of the model to fit the data might be measured in various ways. Two such measures
are shown in Figure 5.1. The figure on the left shows the actual and predicted numbers of college


                                                     19
graduates at age 30 (for States with at least 10 observations at this age), with a regression line and
a 45-degree line superimposed. Although the fit is far from perfect, the model gives a reasonably
good description of the cross-State variation in graduation rates. The figure on the right shows the
predicted and actual timing of college graduation. Again, the fit is reasonable, although the model
misses the jump in graduation rates around age 23, as might be expected given that the model does
not allow for heterogeneous transition probabilities.28

                                                                                            Figure 5.1: Goodness of Fit
                                                Goodness of Fit: College graduates at age 30                                   Goodness of Fit: Proportion of college graduates by age




                                                                                                                         .35
            8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22




                                                                                                                    OH
 College graduates at age 30: NLSY data




                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                     NJ




                                                                                                                         .25
                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                MN                        MI

                                                                                     TX




                                                                                                                         .15
                                                                           PA          CT           WI
                                                                           IA
                                                                     NC                            NY


                                                                                                                         .1
                                                           IN
                                                                     IL
                                                                                                         CA              .05
       6




                                                AL   FL MO
                                                                MA
                                                                                                                         0
  4




                                           MT
                                                                                                                               20      21     22     23     24      25    26     27      28      29        30
                         2




                                           WV                                                                                                                      age
                                           3     4   5       6    7   8     9    10 11 12 13 14          15    16
                                                         College graduates at age 30: Model prediction                              College graduates: NLSY data     College graduates: Model prediction



The figure on the left plots the actual numbers of college graduates at age 30 in the NLSY data
against the numbers predicted by the model (for each State with at least 10 NLSY observations at
this age); a regression line and a 45-degree line are superimposed. The figure on the right plots actual
and predicted rates by age, using data for all States.



6                                         Effects of Changes in Tuition Levels and State Expenditures
The results in Table 4 indicate that college enrollment decisions are affected by tuition and expendi-
ture and financial aid levels, while expected income differences affect both enrollment and migration
decisions. The question then is whether changes in State policies regarding tuition and expenditures
have long-term effects on the educational composition of the State’s labor force, as opposed to tran-
sient effects that are undone by migration, as suggested by Bound et al. (2004). The main point of
the model is that it can answer questions of this kind.
                         Suppose for example that Michigan reduces tuition, or increases expenditures. The effects of
such changes are presumably small for high school graduates in Alaska or Louisiana, but perhaps
not so small for students from Michigan, or neighboring States. Moreover, the effects depend on
     28
    Suppose 50% of college students will eventually graduate. In the model, this is achieved by taking repeated draws
from the transition probability distribution, until two successful transitions occur. In the data, there are some people
who will graduate with much higher probability, and they will get through the system quickly, and there will be others
who never get through. This is a kind of mover-stayer problem, and it could be handled by allowing for two unobserved
types (in addition to the two observed ability types). But this would make the model much more complicated. In the
model without this kind of heterogeneity, the transition probability is such that the right number of people get through
in the end, but this is achieved by spreading the process over more periods.


                                                                                                                    20
individual characteristics. The model has 800 types, classified by home location, and by four binary
characteristics (ability, family income, and mother’s and father’s education). In order to estimate
the effects of changes in college costs (or wages) it is necessary to use the respective value functions
to compute the responses for each type, and then construct a suitably weighted average over types.
The main complication here is that parental education and family income vary considerably across
States. To deal with this, data from the 1970 Census were used to identify households with children
aged 5-13 (corresponding to the ages of the individuals in the NLSY data), and the family income
and parental education data for these children were then tabulated, by State.
       The proportion of high-ability types in each State is estimated using the AFQT scores and the
parental education and household income data in the NLSY sample. Surprisingly, the binary family
income variable doesn’t help explain ability differences (there is a slight relationship if parental
education variables are excluded, but there is no effect given parental education). And if just one
parent has been to college, it doesn’t really matter which one. The estimated ability proportions are
applied to the parental education data from the 1970 Census.

6.1      Equilibrium Wage Effects
If policy changes affect the educational composition of the labor force, relative wages might also be
affected. It is true that in the long run, if each individual State is considered as a small open economy,
the factor price equalization theorem implies that wages are invariant to local changes in the supply
of labor at different education levels.29 But there is an extensive literature that considers the supply
and demand for labor without dealing with the general equilibrium effects underlying the factor price
equalization theorem, analyzing the empirical relationship between the return to education and the
relative supplies of workers at different education levels.30 Building on this literature, Fortin (2006)
estimated that the “own-cohort relative supply effect” is about −0.2, meaning that a 10% increase
in the relative supply of college graduates in a State generates a 2% reduction in the college wage
premium, within cohorts spanning 10 years. The policy effect estimates presented below are based
on the assumption that wages do not change, as would be true if the assumptions of the factor
price equalization theorem are empirically valid. But in case wages do actually change, it is clearly
of interest to determine whether such changes are large enough to undo the direct effects of policy
changes, and the results from Fortin (2006) will be used for this purpose.

6.2      Simulation Results: Effects of Changes in Policy Variables
The evolution of the population distribution in the model is computed by iterating the transition
matrix of the Markov chain on the state space. The model specifies choice probabilities ρ (x, a),
where x is the state vector, and a is the choice variable; the next state x0 is then determined by the
transition probabilities q (x, a, x0 ). There is a frequency distribution p (x) over current states, and
  29
    Similarly, factor price equalization implies that immigration does not affect wages; see Kennan (2013)
  30
    See     Katz      and     Murphy       (1992)    and    the     many      thousands      of  references   thereto
(scholar.google.com/citations?user=MAqEdFMAAAAJ).



                                                         21
  the model implies a transition matrix T from p (x) to p0 (x) given by
                                                      X             X
                                        T (p) (x) =         p (t)         ρ (t, a) q (t, a, x)
                                                      t∈X           a∈A

  The effects of changes in the policy variables are computed by first iterating the transition matrix
  implied by the values of the policy variables used in the estimation, and then doing the same thing
  for the new values of the policy variables, and comparing the population distributions.31

                                Table 6: Effects of Policy Changes: Michigan
                                                 Population at Age 36                                             Revenue
                                  Current Location                Home Location                                Taxes Tuition
                             Graduates      Some            High          Graduates       Some      High
 Increase (20%)                             College         School                        College   School
Tuition   Michigan            -11.2%        -2.4%         6.2%             -12.9%         -2.4%     6.5%         25.2       2.1
              elsewhere        -0.16%        0.00%        0.05%             -0.03%         0.01%    0.01%       -82.1       2.5
Spending      Michigan        0.03%         0.42%        -0.16%            0.02%          0.45%     -0.17%     -10.3        2.6
              elsewhere       0.001%        0.016%       -0.005%            0.001%        0.004%    -0.002%       2.3       1.2
 Decrease (20%)
Tuition   Michigan            12.7%          1.7%        -6.6%             14.3%           1.6%     -6.9%      -13.6     -45.0
              elsewhere        0.19%         -0.02%      -0.07%             0.05%         -0.02%    -0.02%      76.4       -4.6
Spending      Michigan        0.11%        -1.36%        0.43%             0.12%         -1.47%     0.45%         9.2     -0.3
              elsewhere       0.001%       -0.015%       0.004%            0.000%        -0.004%    0.001%       -1.1      -1.0
   The estimated model is used to simulate decisions made by 300, 000 people of each type, distributed
   equally over the three wage bins, with each person starting in the home location at age 19. There are
   800 types, classified by home location, and by four binary characteristics (ability, family income, and
   mother’s and father’s education). The resulting distribution over residence locations and education
   levels at age 36 is tabulated, using type weights corresponding to the distribution of types in the
   NLSY data. This is done using the actual tuition and expenditure levels in the data, and re-done
   using alternative values of these policy variables, and the differences in the outcomes are shown in
   the Table. For example, when the tuition level in Michigan is increased by 20% (with everything
   else held constant), the number of college graduates working in Michigan at age 36 falls by 11.2%,
   when compared with the corresponding number in the baseline simulation (using the actual tuition
   level). And among men whose home location was Michigan (regardless of where they were living
   at age 36), the number of college graduates falls by 12.9%.
   The last two columns use the simulated data for the baseline and alternative levels of the policy
   variables to compare the net effects of policy changes on State revenues, computed as the present
   values of expenditures and tax and tuition revenues, from age 19 to age 60, with a discount factor
   of .95.


      Some illustrative results are shown in Table 6, taking Michigan as an example; results for some
  other large States are shown in Tables 7 and 8. The population distributions over locations and
    31
       Note that there is no need to simulate actual choices, so there is no simulation error in these calculations (aside from
  rounding errors arising from repeated multiplication of large probability matrices that have some very small elements
  associated with unlikely choices).



                                                               22
                            Table 7: Effects of Tuition Reductions(20%)
                                  Population at Age 36                               Revenue (present values)
                      Current Location             Home Location                     Taxes           Tuition
                Graduates      Some      High     Graduates    Some       High      ∆%     $      ∆%         $
                               College   School                College    School
 California      3.6%          -1.0%     -3.6%        3.5%     -1.2%      -3.9%     0.19%    56.3   -12.3%    -149.2
  Florida        5.9%          0.4%      -4.1%        6.9%      0.1%      -4.9%     0.27%    16.2   -10.0%     -44.8
   Illinois      9.4%          1.0%      -6.1%       10.8%      0.9%      -6.5%     0.15%    26.7    -6.9%     -71.9
Massachusetts    3.2%          0.1%      -3.2%        3.4%      0.1%      -3.4%    -0.12%   -14.6    -8.8%     -45.6
 Michigan        12.7%         1.7%      -6.6%       14.3%      1.6%      -6.9%    -0.08%   -13.6    -4.3%     -45.0
 New York        7.6%          0.2%      -5.8%        8.1%      0.0%      -6.2%     0.05%    17.6    -8.7%    -165.4
Pennsylvania     13.4%         3.5%      -6.1%       17.9%      3.8%      -6.4%    -0.17%   -33.4     2.0%      19.9
    Texas        4.2%          0.4%      -2.8%        4.4%      0.2%      -3.0%     0.33%    48.6   -13.3%     -80.5
 Wisconsin       9.6%          1.1%      -5.1%       10.6%      1.0%      -5.4%    -0.13%   -11.3    -6.9%     -34.7
                                           See the   note below Table 6


  educational attainment are compared at age 36, with location defined alternatively as current or
  home location. These tables also show the effects of policy changes on State revenues.
      Table 6 shows that 20% changes in tuition or expenditures generate substantial (and roughly
  symmetric) changes in the proportions of college-educated men. The tuition effects are generally
  larger than the expenditure effects, although expenditure changes do seem to influence the number
  of people who have some college education, with generally smaller effects on the number of graduates
  (which is consistent with the coefficient estimates in Table 4). The estimated effects vary considerably
  across States. To some extent this variation arises because a 20% change in tuition or expenditures
  corresponds to different dollar amounts, depending on the initial level. But there is still considerable
  cross-State variation even if the changes are rescaled to represent equal dollar amounts in each State.
  The most striking result is that, contrary to the findings in Bound et al. (2004), changes in the policy
  variables have substantial long-term effects on the educational composition of the local population
  many years after the fact, despite some leakage due to migration.
      Although the effects of tuition reductions are not exactly revenue-neutral, the loss of tuition
  revenue is largely offset by the increased tax revenue generated by a more educated labor force.
  Indeed the estimates in Table 7 indicate that although net revenue generally falls somewhat, there is
  actually an increase in net revenue in the case of Pennsylvania, while the effects are revenue-neutral
  for Michigan and Illinois.
      Bound et al. (2004) found a fairly weak relationship between flows of new college graduates and
  subsequent stocks of graduates in the labor force at the State level, suggesting that there is relatively
  little scope for State policies that aim to increase the proportion of college graduates in the State
  labor force by investing more in the State’s public colleges. The interpretation of this finding is that
  increases in the flow of college graduates generated by tuition reductions or expenditure increases
  in the State do not have much effect on long-term stocks because workers are mobile (and college
  graduates are particularly mobile). One problem with this interpretation is that there is no analysis


                                                        23
                       Table 8: Effects of Increases in Expenditures(20%)
                                       Population at Age 36                                 Revenue
                          Current Location              Home Location                    present values
                     Graduates    Some       High      Graduates    Some       High     Taxes Tuition
                                  College    School                 College    School
    California          4.2%        7.5% -10.3%         4.4%            7.9%   -11.4%   -153.4    17.9
     Florida            5.5%        7.4%     -7.8%      7.3%            8.6%    -9.6%    -22.9    51.9
      Illinois         9.41%       0.98% -6.12%        10.79%          0.87%   -6.53%    26.7     -71.9
   Massachusetts       0.03%       0.42% -0.16%         0.02%          0.45%   -0.17%     -3.0     1.2
    Michigan           0.03%       1.53% -0.56%         0.05%          1.64%   -0.58%    -10.3     2.6
    New York           0.21%       1.40% -0.70%         0.25%          1.49%   -0.74%    -22.9    51.9
   Pennsylvania        -0.27%      0.26% 0.03%         -0.36%          0.28%   0.03%      -1.3     -4.8
       Texas           4.19%       0.37% -2.82%         4.45%          0.23%   -3.04%    48.6     -80.5
    Wisconsin          9.56%       1.06% -5.10%        10.64%          0.96%   -5.43%     -1.3     -0.1
                                       See the note below Table    6


of what caused the flow increase, and there are good reasons to expect that the proportion of the flow
increase that “sticks” in the State is not invariant with respect to alternative causes of the increase.
One example is that if the increased flow of new graduates was generated by attracting students from
other States, then it is likely that many of these students would return home or move elsewhere after
graduation, whereas an increase in the number of students from this State would be associated with
a strong tendency to remain in the State after graduation. In contrast, this paper analyzes specific
policy changes, keeping track of the effects of these changes on the choices made by individuals who
differ in various respects, and in particular allowing for migration decisions that are strongly affected
by individuals’ home locations. This gives sharper conclusions, especially with respect to the leakage
of college graduates due to migration. Indeed, the results indicate that the leakage due to migration
is negligible.
    This analysis can be illustrated by considering the effects of changes in resident tuition rates,
with non-resident rates held constant, and vice versa. Table 9 shows the results of simulating these
effects. Clearly, the increases in the proportion of college graduates in a State’s labor force shown in
Table 7 are almost entirely attributable to the effects of tuition reductions for residents of that State.
Reductions in nonresident tuition do lead to increases in the proportion of college graduates, but these
effects are very small. One can also ask whether the additional graduates tend to stay in the State
that reduced tuition rates. Again, the answer depends heavily on whether the change was directed
at residents or nonresidents; in the case of a change in resident tuition, the proportion of stayers
is high, while in the nonresident case, the proportion is much lower (especially for non-peripheral
States).

6.2.1      National Tuition Rates

Given the sizable effects of tuition changes, and the cross-State dispersion in tuition levels, it is natural
to consider the effects of a national tuition policy. For example, tuition levels in California are lower

                                                      24
          Table 9: Effects of Resident and Nonresident Tuition Reductions(20%)
                             Population at Age 36                Revenue (present values)
                        Resident             Nonresident        Resident        Nonresident
                  Graduates Stayers Graduates Stayers Taxes Tuition Taxes Tuition
   California       3.23%      81.9%       0.42%      54.3%  -6.5 -169.5      62.7    20.3
    Florida         4.89%      83.7%       1.02%      52.3%  -7.9     -51.2   24.0     6.4
     Illinois       3.64%      77.8%       0.16%      42.2%  -8.5     -83.0   35.2    11.0
  Massachusetts     1.39%      72.1%       0.05%      36.6% -30.9     -50.0   16.3     4.4
   Michigan         12.16%     73.8%       0.53%      35.1% -39.5     -59.3   25.9    14.3
   New York         2.67%      75.7%       0.11%      38.9% -52.3 -170.3      69.9     4.9
  Pennsylvania      5.72%      73.3%       0.16%      35.1% -54.0       9.1   20.6    10.8
      Texas         1.13%      84.1%       0.13%      59.3%   7.2     -78.9   41.4    -1.6
   Wisconsin        3.39%      74.1%       0.18%      34.2% -27.3     -44.4   16.0     9.7
“Stayers” means the proportion of the national increase in graduates found in the State where the
tuition rate changed.


than in all other States except for Texas, and the proportion of college graduates in California is
high. If all States set tuition at the California (resident) level, would there be a substantial increase
in the proportion of college graduates in the country as a whole? And if so, how costly would this
be, in terms of lost tuition revenue, net of the increase in tax revenue?
       Answers to these questions are shown in Table 10. Tuition levels in public universities and
community colleges in all States are set at the California in-State levels, and income tax rates are
adjusted so that the reduction in tuition revenue is offset by an increase in tax revenue. The results
are quite striking. When California tuition levels are applied uniformly in all States, the proportion
of college graduates increases by a factor of about one-third. The increase is distributed unevenly,
with much larger increases in high-tuition States (like Pennsylvania), and much smaller increases in
low-tuition States (like Texas), but the overall result is a dramatic increase in the number of college
graduates.32 Moreover, the tax increase required to offset the lost tuition revenue is very small: a
1% surcharge yields a small surplus.33

6.2.2      General Equilibrium Effects

The estimates in Table 10 assume that changes in the proportion of college graduates have no effect
on wages. As was mentioned in Section 6.1 above, the results from Fortin (2006) can be used to
obtain a rough idea of the quantitative importance of this assumption. Suppose the ratio of college
graduates to high school graduates increases by 60% (which is about the right magnitude according
to Table 10, if the some college group is ignored). The Fortin estimate says that a 10% increase in
the relative supply means a 2% reduction in the college wage premium, and if this is extrapolated,
  32
     There is actually a substantial increase in the proportion of college graduates among California residents, even
though there is no change in tuition levels there, because some California residents take advantage of the reduced
tuition levels in other States.
  33
     The average tax rate in the baseline simulation is 8.92%; the results in Table 10 were generated by multiplying the
tax rate in each State by a factor of 1.01, meaning that the average tax rate rises to 9.01%


                                                          25
         Table 10: Effects of Revenue-Neutral National Tuition Reductions(20%)
                                    Population at Age 36
                       Current Location                Home Location
                              Some       High               Some       High
                Graduates College School Graduates College School Taxes Tuition
 California        10.8%      -4.8%     -6.8%     6.6%      -5.3%     -5.3%  766   -90
  Florida          28.6%      -1.4% -15.1%        21.1%     -1.9% -13.8%     235  -197
   Illinois        41.0%      -4.4% -22.4%        43.2%     -4.6% -22.8%     312  -413
Massachusetts      12.1%      -6.0% -13.5%        14.8%     -4.9% -13.1%    -134  -226
 Michigan          57.1%      -3.3% -25.9%        62.6%     -3.3% -26.5%      68  -449
 New York          32.0%      -5.8% -22.5%        32.6%     -5.8% -22.8%     293  -898
Pennsylvania       80.2%      3.1%     -30.1%     98.8%     3.8%     -30.8%  111  -374
    Texas          9.2%       -4.2%     -2.0%     3.2%      -3.9%     -0.4%  372    -6
 Wisconsin         36.6%      -3.7% -17.4%        38.5%     -3.7% -17.5%      42  -175
      US           31.2%      -3.2% -17.2%        31.2%     -3.2% -17.2%    6167 -6158
See the note below Table 6. Tuition levels in all States are set at the California in-State levels, and
an income tax surcharge (1% of the prior tax) is imposed to balance the budget at the national level.


the implication is that the wage premium falls by about 12%. It turns out that if high school wages
are increased by 6% and college wages are decreased by 6%, the results in Table 10 are not much
affected – there is still a very large increase in the proportion of college graduates.


7    Conclusion
There are big differences across States in the extent to which higher education is subsidized, and the
State subsidies are apparently motivated to a large extent by a perceived interest in having a highly
educated labor force. There are also substantial wage differences across States, and previous work
has found that these generate sizable supply responses in NLSY data. In the absence of moving costs,
income maximization implies that human capital should be acquired in locations where it is cheap,
and subsequently deployed in labor markets where the return is high, implying that differences in
State policies have little effect on the educational composition of the labor force. But moving costs
are important, and most people have a strong preference for their home location. The paper uses
a dynamic programming model of income-maximizing college enrollment and migration decisions,
allowing for locational preferences and moving costs, and uses it to estimate the extent to which the
educational composition of the labor force is affected by inter-State differences in higher education
financing policies.
    The model is estimated on NLSY79 data for white male high school graduates. The results
suggest that more generous subsidies actually do have significant effects on college enrollments,
particularly when the subsidies take the form of tuition reductions. Moreover, the effects of higher
education financing policies on the educational level of the local labor force are apparently long-
lasting: the extent to which they are dissipated through migration is very slight. A particularly


                                                   26
striking implication of the estimated model is that a national tuition policy, set at a uniformly low
level (corresponding to the actual level for California residents), would yield a very large increase in
the proportion of college graduates, and the resulting increase in income tax revenue would almost
completely offset the loss in tuition revenue.




                                                  27
References
Agan, Amanda Y., “Disaggregating the Returns to College,” January 2014. Unpublished, Princeton
  University.

Aghion, P., L. Boustan, C. Hoxby, and J. Vandenbussche, “The Causal Impact of Education
  on Economic Growth: Evidence from the United States,” 2009. Unpublished, Harvard University.

Bishop, Kelly C., “A Dynamic Model of Location Choice and Hedonic Valuation,” November 2012.
  Unpublished, Washington University in St. Louis.

Börsch-Supan, Axel, “On the compatibility of nested logit models with utility maximization,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 1990, 43 (3), 373–388.

Bound, John, Jeffrey Groen, G.Gábor Kezdi, and Sarah Turner, “Trade in university
  training: cross-state variation in the production and stock of college-educated labor,” Journal of
  Econometrics, 2004, 121 (1-2), 143 – 173. Higher education (Annals issue).

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and
  the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” The Journal of Political Economy,
  1992, 100 (1), 1–40.

   and Thomas Lemieux, “Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Postwar Period: What Went
  Wrong in the 1970s?,” in Jonathan Gruber, ed., An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior Among
  Youth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, January 2001, pp. 439–482.

Dynarski, Susan, “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on College
  Attendance,” National Tax Journal, 2000, 53 (3 Part 2), 629–662.

Dynarski, Susan M., “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College Atten-
  dance and Completion,” The American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 279–288.

Fortin, Nicole M., “Higher-Education Policies and the College Wage Premium: Cross-State Evi-
  dence from the 1990s,” American Economic Review, September 2006, 96 (4), 959–987.

Fu, Chao, “Equilibrium Tuition, Applications, and Admissions and Enrollment in the College Mar-
  ket,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (2), 225–281.

Gemici, A., “Family migration and labor market outcomes,” January 2011. Unpublished, New York
  University.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative
  Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999, 13 (1), 37–62.

Groen, Jeffrey A., “The effect of college location on migration of college-educated labor,” Journal
  of Econometrics, 2004, 121 (1-2), 125 – 142. Higher education (Annals issue).

                                                28
Heckman, James J, Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber, “Explaining Rising Wage In-
  equality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Het-
  erogeneous Agents,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1 (1), 1 – 58.

Kane, Thomas J., “Public Intervention in Post-Secondary Education,” in E. Hanushek and
  F. Welch, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, Amsterdam, New York and
  Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, 2006, pp. 1369 – 1401.

  , “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 2007, XLII (3), 555–582.

Katz, Lawrence F and Kevin M Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
  Demand factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (February), 35–78.

Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “The Career Decisions of Young Men,” Journal of
  Political Economy, June 1997, 105 (3), 473–522.

  and    , “The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints on Educational Attainment,”
  International Economic Review, 2001, 42 (4), 1051–1103.

Kennan, John, “A Note on Discrete Approximations of Continuous Distributions,” 2006. Unpub-
  lished, University of Wisconsin–Madison.

  , “Open Borders,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2013, 16, L1–L13.

   and James R. Walker, “The effect of expected income on individual migration decisions,”
  Econometrica, January 2011, 79 (1), 211–251.

McFadden, Daniel D, “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior,” in Paul Zarembka,
  ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press, 1974.

McFadden, Daniel L., “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location,” in F. Snickars A. Karlqvist,
  L. Lundqvist and J. Weibull, eds., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, North Holland:
  Amsterdam, 1978, chapter 3, pp. 75–96.

Rust, John P., “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in R.F. Engle and D.L.
  McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: Elsevier
  Science, North-Holland, 1994, pp. 3081–3143.




                                                 29
