NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOSS AVERSION IN POLITICS
Alberto Alesina
Francesco Passarelli
Working Paper 21077
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21077

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We thank Roland Benabou, Stefano DellaVigna, Martin Dufwenberg, Nicola Gennaioli, Edoardo
Grillo, David Laibson, Jessie Shapiro, Ken Shepsle, Andrei Shleifer and participants at a NBER Poltical
Economics Conference, and seminars in Amsterdam, IMT Lucca, Rome, Turin, for very useful comments.
Luca Riva provided comments and excellent editing. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alberto Alesina and Francesco Passarelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Loss Aversion in Politics
Alberto Alesina and Francesco Passarelli
NBER Working Paper No. 21077
April 2015
JEL No. H0
ABSTRACT
We study loss aversion in majority voting. First, we show a status quo bias. Second, loss aversion
implies a moderating effect. Third, in a dynamic setting, the effect of loss aversion diminishes with
the length of the planning horizon of voters; however, in the presence of a projection bias, majorities
are partially unable to understand how fast they will adapt. Fourth, in a stochastic environment, loss
aversion yields a significant distaste for risk, but also a smaller attachment to the status quo. The application
of these results to a model of redistribution leads to empirically plausible implications.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Francesco Passarelli
Bocconi University
Department of Institutional Analysis
and Management
via Rontgen, 1
20136 Milan, Italy
francesco.passarelli@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

According to Kahnemann and Tversky, (1979) individuals “normally perceive outcomes as gains and losses, rather than as …nal states of wealth or welfare”(p. 274).
Gains and losses are relative to a reference point, and “losses loom larger than
gains” (p. 279). Loss aversion in individual decision making is corroborated by
experimental evidence.1 However, loss aversion has not been much incorporated in
social choice models.2
In the present paper we show that loss aversion leads to signi…cant deviations
from “standard” results of majority voting, which may also help explain some empirical puzzles when applied to choices regarding redistributive policies. We present
a model of unidimensional political choice where the voters di¤er in their evaluation of the relative costs and bene…ts of di¤erent levels of such policy. We assume
throughout the paper that the reference point is the “status quo”. This seems realistic, since bene…ts and costs of political reforms are normally assessed relative to the
current situation for given existing policies. Without loss aversion, the policy chosen
would be the one preferred by the median voter, and the status quo is irrelevant.
With loss aversion the status quo matters. For any initial policy level, a mass of
voters would vote for the status quo, even if their rationally preferred policy di¤ered
from it. In fact changing policy implies losses and bene…ts, but the former weigh
more. This generates a sort of political endowment e¤ect: once the policy chosen by
the majority becomes the new status quo, a larger majority of voters does not want
to change it. A majority in favor of a change in the status quo materializes only
if a su¢ ciently large shock in the environment occurs. Moreover, if the status quo
changes, the voting outcome is still a¤ected by the initial status quo. We then show
that loss aversion determines a moderating e¤ect: the most extreme types prefer
less extreme policies.
In a multi-period setting, voters take the dynamic e¤ect of their loss aversion
in future periods into account, where a period is de…ned as the length of time
in which the status quo becomes the new reference point. The voters put less
weight on their current experience of loss, so that they are more prone to change
the current status quo. Since this is more likely to happen among young voters
with a longer horizon, we characterize a new intergenerational con‡ict about policy
reforms; it is a con‡ict which does not hinge on di¤erences in economic returns. It
is instead a psychological reason: the old do not want to bear the psychologically
costly commitment to a change today, because their future horizon in which to enjoy
1

See Barberis (2013), DellaVigna (2009) and Rabin (1998) for a discussion of loss aversion, and
extensive references to the empirical literature.
2
“There are areas of economics where prospect theory has not been applied very extensively,
even though it has the potential to o¤er useful insights. Public …nance, health economics, and
macroeconomics are three such …elds.” (Barberis, 2013, p. 190).

2

the bene…ts of it is shorter. In addition, loss aversion increases the political cohesion
(reduces ideological di¤erences) amongst those with a shorter time horizon, raising
their chance to play a pivotal role.
If voters are also subject to a projection bias (Loewenstein et al., 2003), they
are partially unable to understand how fast they will adapt to a new policy; only
later they realize that they became accustomed to the new equilibrium faster than
they thought, and that adaptation was also less painful than previously expected.
We show that, in the presence of a projection bias, changes in any period are less
radical than without it. However, thanks to the same mechanism of fast adaptation,
voters are willing to make further changes in subsequent periods.
We then apply the model to a speci…c policy problem: the choice of a tax rate to
provide a public good (in the text) or to …nance a lump sum redistribution (in Appendix), in a model á la Meltzer and Richard (1981). The status quo bias discussed
above implies that even a relatively large departure from the initial income distribution (and thus distribution of preferences for tax rates and public goods) leads
to no changes in policy. This result may help rationalize why the well documented
increase in income inequality in the US and in other countries, has not (thus far)
lead to a radical increase in redistributive policies. Secondly, and related to that,
even a relatively high level of inequality may not lead to “expropriatory” levels of
the tax rates.3 Third, we show results concerning the time horizon of voters: loss
aversion weighs more in the decisions of individuals with a shorter horizon, say with
a shorter life span (assuming imperfect intergenerational altruism). We use a simple
overlapping generation model which clearly shows that societies which are growing
older tend to exert more resistance to changes in policy.
We then move to considering a risky environment. We explore how loss averse
voters make their choices when there is uncertainty about the outcome resulting
from a policy. We address three questions: …rst of all how the behavior of loss
averse voters is di¤erent from risk averse voters? Second, suppose a policy change
is opposed to a safe status quo. When does the majority choose the reform? Third,
how does risk a¤ect the level of policy chosen? We show that when the environment
is more uncertain loss averse voters are more prone to make reforms, but there is
also more disagreement about what kind of reform to make.
Recent empirical literature suggests that indeed people display loss aversion when
they make political decisions. Charité et al. (2014) explore empirically how reference points and loss aversion shape individuals’ preferences for redistribution. In
a laboratory experiment they …nd that agents who are assigned the role of social
planners redistribute much less from rich to poor when recipients are aware of their
3

The relationship between inequality and redistribution has generated much empirical research
(see Acemoglu et al. (2013) for a survey). Several works report a negative relationship (e.g.,
Persson and Tabellini, 2003; Borge and Rattso, 2004). Other works point in the opposite direction
(e.g., Perotti, 1996; Gil et al., 2004; Scheve and Stasavage, 2012).

3

initial endowments. The authors claim that redistributors take into account that
the loss experienced by the rich is larger than the bene…t enjoyed by the poor.
Other models predict a status quo bias, but for very di¤erent reasons. Fernandez
and Rodrik (1991) show that when an individual cannot identify herself as winner
or loser beforehand, even a reform that bene…ts a majority gets voted down, because
pivotal individuals attach low probability to the event of being among the winners.
Uncertainty plays a crucial role in their model. By contrast, with loss aversion
the status quo bias does not hinge on uncertainty. In Alesina and Drazen (1990)
an ine¢ cient status quo may survive for a while, because of a war of attrition
between con‡icting groups which blocks policy reform. In Krehbiel (1998) and in
the extensive subsequent literature on pivotal voting, the status quo bias may occur
because the majority’s ability to act is tempered by the executive veto and …libuster
procedures, which operate in practice as a super-majority threshold. Di¤erently
from us, this model predicts that the status quo is an equilibrium only when it is a
moderate policy.4
In our dynamic model, a voter chooses the policy today taking into account that
it will represent the status quo policy tomorrow (i.e., tomorrow’s reference point).
By choosing the policy today, voter also choose their tomorrow’s reference point.
Then, they are able to dampen, at least partially, the adverse consequences of loss
aversion. This policy behavior is reminiscent of an optimal commitment strategy
when individuals su¤er self-control problems (e.g., Laibson, 1997; Amador et al.,
2006). The idea that voters predict that in the future they will “acclimate” to the
policy chosen today ties our model to the literature on endogenous reference points
(Köszegi and Rabin, 2006 and 2007). Speci…cally, their idea of choice acclimating
personal equilibrium is similar to our idea that the psychological cost of changing the
policy today is borne only today, and not tomorrow. Di¤erently from us, that literature focuses on stochastic environments; we rather point at multiperiod choices and
intergenerational con‡ict, which constitutes a realistic political environment. In an
intertemporal choice setting with loss averse individuals, Köszegi and Rabin (2009)
show that if an agent cares much more about contemporaneous rather than prospective gain-loss utility, then the ex ante optimal plan may not be time consistent. In
our model, time inconsistency eventually derives from a projection bias.
A rich theoretical literature considers the relationship between inequality and
redistribution, based upon the Meltzer and Richard (1981) model. Particularly
relevant for us are the papers which rationalize why a majority would not expropriate
(or at least tax at very high rate) the rich. Bénabou and Ok (2001) suggest that
the reason why we do not observe large-scale expropriation in modern democracies
is the Prospect for Upward Mobility (POUM) hypothesis; some evidence consistent
with this hypothesis is provided in Alesina and La Ferrara (2005). Concern for
4

See Krehbiel (2008) for extensive references to other similar models.

4

fairness may also be critical as in Alesina and Angeletos (2005).5 Our explanation
is di¤erent. Note that in those models even small changes in say social mobility or
perception of fairness would lead to a change in policy; in our model a status quo
bias implies stickiness of policies.
A relatively small literature studies the role of loss aversion in collective choice.
Herweg and Smith (2014) consider bilateral monopoly (a buyer vs a seller). They
show that, should a shock occur, loss aversion would reduce the chance of renegotiating an existing contract. In other words, parties would be likely to unanimously
agree on keeping the current agreement (i.e., the status quo), even when the latter is
materially ine¢ cient with respect to a new agreement. Likewise we show that, also
in a majority voting model, the status quo is quite likely to be the outcome when
there are shocks. But, as stated above, the status quo bias is only one (and perhaps
the less unexpected one) of the consequences of introducing loss aversion into a majority voting model. Other papers which have studied how loss aversion may a¤ect
policy outcomes include Grillo (2014) regarding information transmission, Freund
and Ozden (2008) and Tovar (2009) regarding trade policy, Rees-Jones (2013) on tax
sheltering and Bernasconi and Zanardi (2004) on tax evasion. Milkman et al. (2009)
present laboratory evidence that policy bundling reduces the harmful consequences
of loss aversion.
Finally, this paper contributes to the recent but growing literature on behavioral
political economy. Bendor et al. (2011) present political models with boundedly
rational voters. Glaeser (2006) informally points out that the presence of bounded
rationality makes the case for limiting the size of government. Krusell et al. (2010)
examine government policies for agents who are a¤ected by self-control problems.
Lizzeri and Yariv (2012) study majority voting when voters are heterogeneous in
their degree of self-control. Bisin et al. (2015) present a model of …scal irresponsibility and public debt. Passarelli and Tabellini (2013) study how emotional unrest
a¤ects policy outcomes. DellaVigna et al. (2014) claim, and experimentally test,
that voter turnout in large elections can be explained by the positive return of voting
on citizens’social image. Ortoleva and Snowberg (2015) point at imperfect information processing which can exacerbate di¤erences in ideology, fuelling extremeness
in political behavior.
The outline of the paper is as follows: section 2 lays out the basic model; section 3 introduces loss aversion and derives several results in a static setting; section
4 generalizes the model to a multiperiod setting; section 5 presents a speci…c example of how loss aversion shapes individual preferences for public good provision
and income taxation; section 6 introduces uncertainty about policy outcomes and
investigates the relationship between loss aversion and risk aversion; the last section
concludes. The Appendix contains proofs for all Propositions, as well as extensions
5

See Alesina and Giuliano (2011) for a review of the literature on preference for redistribution.

5

of sections 5 and 6.

2

A Model of Social Choice

Consider a society with a continuum of individuals/voters, heterogeneous in some
parameter (t), which we call type. Let F (t) be the distribution of t, which is common
knowledge. Heterogeneity may arise because of any aspect which a¤ects individual
preferences (e.g., income, wealth, ideology, productivity, etc.). This society has to
choose a unidimensional policy p 2 R+ . Any policy entails bene…ts and costs, which
can be di¤erent across individuals. Let V (ti ; p) be the indirect utility function of
individual i:
V (ti ; p) = B(ti ; p) C(ti ; p)
where B(ti ; p) and C(ti ; p) are indirect bene…t and cost functions for individual i, respectively.6 In order to ensure the existence of a unique majority voting equilibrium,
we also assume that, for any p and any ti :
A1. Bene…ts are increasing and concave in the policy:
A2. Costs are increasing and convex in the policy:

@B(ti ;p)
@p

@C(ti ;p)
@p

> 0,

> 0,

@ 2 B(ti ;p)
@p2

@ 2 C(ti ;p)
@p2

< 0;

0;

A3. Types are indexed such that higher types bear higher marginal costs and/or
enjoy lower marginal bene…ts from the policy: @Bp@t(tii ;p) 0, @Cp@t(tii ;p) 0;
A4. The equilibrium is interior:

@B(ti ;0)
@p

>

@C(ti ;0)
.
@p

Thus, for all types, V (ti ; p) is concave in p and, for any ti , there is a unique
policy which maximizes indirect utility V (ti ; p), call it pi , which solves:7
Bp (ti ; p) = Cp (ti ; p)
By A3, we have that:
@pi
0
(1)
@ti
This implies that higher types vote for lower policies.8 Then, under majority rule,
the policy outcome is the median type’s bliss point (pm ). This is not necessarily
6

This assumption that individuals bracket separately bene…ts and costs is without loss of generality under rationality. It becomes a relevant assumption under loss aversion. We further discuss
this point below.
7
By A1 and A2 the SOC is satis…ed.
8
We use this convention of higher types preferring lower policies because it will immediately
link to our application to a voting model on tax rate, and income will be the identi…er of types
(cf. section 5).

6

the choice of a social planner. The latter would maximize the sum of individuals’
utilities:
Z
[B(t; p) C(t; p)] dF (t)
(2)

Then the …rst best (p ) solves the following equation:

(3)

Bp (p) = Cp (p)

The social planner sets the policy in order to equalize average marginal bene…ts,
Bp (p), and average marginal costs, Cp (p).

3

Social Choice with Loss Aversion

Let pS be the status quo policy. Increasing the policy (i.e., p > pS ) entails more
bene…ts and larger costs (like paying more taxes for more public good). Let > 0 be
the parameter which captures loss aversion, thus higher costs yield a psychological
experience of loss, which amounts to
C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS ) . Vice versa, reducing
S
the policy (i.e., p < p ) entails a gain as lower costs (e.g., less taxes), but also a loss
in terms of lower bene…ts (less public good). The psychological component of the
loss of bene…ts is B(ti ; pS ) B(ti ; p) .
The reference point for the voters is the status quo. In reference-dependent
models, the way one de…nes the reference point is obviously critical. Here we use the
status quo, not only for the sake of simplicity, but also because it appears su¢ ciently
realistic: in the political debate bene…ts and costs of reforms are normally assessed
against current policy. Our de…nition of the reference point is then backward-looking.
Of course one might believe that voters do not (or do not only) look backward
when they evaluate policy reforms. They might instead contrast reforms against a
forward-looking reference point re‡ecting their aspirations, goals, or expectations.9
The indirect utility with loss aversion, V (ti ; p j pS ), is given by the material
indirect utility of the policy, V (ti ; p), minus the psychological loss due to possible
departures from the status quo:

V (ti ; p j pS ) =

V (ti ; p)
V (ti ; p)

C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS )
B(ti ; pS ) B(ti ; p)

9

if p pS
if p < pS

For instance, Passarelli and Tabellini (2013) compute reference policies from an individual
notion of fairness. They claim that citizens engage in protests when they feel they have been
trated unfairly. Their paper is an instance of how political reference points may form endogenously.
On endogenous reference points, Köszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) and Ok et al. (2015) represent
breakthrough contributions.

7

This formulation implies reference dependent utility as in Köszegi and Rabin (2006).10
When computing losses and gains, individuals bracket indirect bene…ts and costs
separately. This is the case when the primitive utility function of V (ti ; p j pS ) satis…es the decomposability property (Tversky and Kahnemann, 1991). For instance,
the primitive utility functions in the public …nance model of section 5, and the model
with lump sum redistribution in Appendix satisfy decomposability. This property is
common in reference dependence literature, and it is essential to derive implications
from loss aversion.11
The optimality condition (w.r.t. p) is then:
Bp (ti ; p) (1 + )Cp (ti ; p) R 0
(1 + )Bp (ti ; p) Cp (ti ; p) R 0

if p pS
if p < pS

Voter i sets her desired policy, pi , according to the following rule:
8
if ti < t
< Bp (ti ; p) (1 + )Cp (ti ; p) = 0
S
p=p
if t ti t^
pi solves
:
(1 + )Bp (ti ; p) Cp (ti ; p) = 0
if ti > t^

(4)

where t is implicitly determined by Bp (t; pS ) (1+ )Cp (t; pS ) = 0, and t^ is implicitly
determined by (1 + )Bp (t; pS ) Cp (t; pS ) = 0. Observe that t < t^, and both t^ and
t depend on the status quo policy.

3.1

Status quo bias

By (4), an individual’s most preferred policy depends not only on her type, but also
on the current level of the policy, the status quo. Speci…cally, the population is split
in three groups (cf. Figure 1): 1. a group of intermediate types (i.e., all i such that
t ti t^) who want to keep the status quo; 2. a group of high types (i.e., ti > t^)
who want a lower level of the policy; 3. a group of low types (i.e., ti < t) who want
a higher amount of the policy.12
10

Experienced indirect utility, V (ti ; p j pS ), has two additively separable components: standard
indirect utility, V (ti ; p), and an indirect gain-loss utility (x(p)), where
n
o
+
+
x(p)
C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS ) + B(ti ; pS ) B(ti ; p)

max f0; zg. Our V (ti ; p) is related to what Köszegi-Rabin de…ne consumption utility.
with z +
Our indirect gain-loss utility, (x(p)), meets three out of four of Köszegi-Rabin’s assumptions
(2006, p. 1139). Their assumption A3 does not hold here: we do not assume any change in the
concavity of V (ti ; p j pS ). We focus on loss aversion only, and we do not consider diminishing
sensitivity.
11
Cf. Köszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) and Herweg and Schmidt (2014).
12
Herweg and Schmidt (2014) have similar expressions for the range of intertia, but in a completely di¤erent setting. Their range is a subset of the possible states of the world. Ours is a
subset of the set of voters’types.

8

If the median is in the …rst group, the policy outcome is the status quo. Note
that t is decreasing in and t^ is increasing in it. Thus the size of the range of types
voting for the status quo is increasing in the amount of loss aversion .
pi

pi

pS

0

•

•

tˆ

ti

ti

0
Bliss points with rational voters

Bliss points under Loss Aversion

Figure 1: The relationship between bliss points and types
Proposition 1 (Equilibrium)
i) If tm 2 t; t^ , then the policy is the status quo;
ii) If tm < t, then the policy outcome is pm > pS ;
iii) If tm > t^, then the policy outcome is pm < pS .
Hence, we have shown a status quo bias: the status quo policy does not change
even when a majority of voters without loss aversion would change it.
pi

pm2

pS2

p1m

p S1

tm

0

ti

Figure 2: Equilibria with di¤erent status quo policies
The existing status quo also in‡uences how the majority would like to change
it if tm 2
= t; t^ . More speci…cally, suppose pS is so low that the median wants to
9

increase the policy. In this case she “overweighs” the increases in the costs, and
chooses a relatively low policy. Now suppose that pS is so high that the median
wants to reduce it. She now overweighs the sacri…ce of giving up the policy. Then
she chooses a however high policy. Thus, the same median will choose a low policy
when pS is low, and higher policy when pS is high. This point is shown in Figure 2.
If the status quo is low (pS1 ) the majority chooses p1m . If the status quo is high (pS2 )
that same majority chooses p2m > p1m . In a way, the status quo continues to exert
an in‡uence on the policy outcome even when the majority is willing to abandon it.
The following Proposition establishes this result.
Proposition 2 (Entrenchment)
Consider two cases: a) the majority decides to change a low status quo for a higher
policy; b) the same majority decides to change a high status quo for a lower policy.
In the …rst case the majority ends up choosing a policy that is lower, compared to
the second case.
Under loss aversion, societies which had chosen, “high”policies in the past (e.g.,
high level of redistribution, generous welfare state, strict regulation) will continue
to opt for rather high levels of it, even when they choose to reduce those levels. Vice
versa, societies with a history of low levels of the policy, will keep choosing rather
low levels when they opt for an increase. This is an additional explanation of policy
entrenchment; similar patterns might be caused, for instance, by habit formation.

3.2

Moderation

With this framework it is possible to prove a moderating e¤ect. When individuals are
loss averse, the distances among their ideal policies are lower: those who demand
more p overweigh the increases in cost; this dampens their demand for a policy
expansion. On the contrary, those who would like to reduce p overweigh the loss of
bene…ts; thus they desire to reduce the policy by a lesser amount. As individuals
become more loss averse, the number of those who prefer the status quo increases,13
thus further dampening polarization.
Proposition 3 (Moderation)
Loss aversion leads all low types (i.e., ti < t) to demand for less p, and all high
types (i.e., ti > t^) to demand for more p.
Lower polarization implies that if the median’s tastes are far from the average,
the political distortion is smaller in the presence of loss aversion.
13

Recall that t is decreasing in
Appendix).

and t^ is increasing in it (cf. the proof of Proposition 3 in

10

Ortoleva and Snowberg (2015) claim that, in case of imperfect information, voters might display overcon…dence; i.e., they might underestimate the degree of correlation of their signals. The consequence would be ideological extremeness, rather
than moderation. Thus loss aversion and overcon…dence yield opposite predictions.
Of course our …nding and theirs are not mutually inconsistent, since they are driven
by two totally di¤erent behavioral distortions, loss aversion instead of overcon…dence, whose relative relevance might be di¤erent in di¤erent contexts.

3.3

Inertia

The standard model without loss aversion predicts that even small shocks that a¤ect
the median of the distribution would lead to a change in policy. That is no longer
true in the presence of loss aversion. Suppose at time 1 the majority has set a new
status quo, pS1 . This new status quo de…nes the interval t1 ; t^1 , and the median
(t1m ) is approximately at the center of this interval. When the majority sets a new
status quo, there will be a number of types both above and below t1m that prefer the
status quo. At time 2, a shock that a¤ects the median of the type distribution
occurs. If is small, the median still lies in the interval. Thus, the status quo set
at time 1 survives the shock. In order to change the status quo, the shock at time
2 has to be su¢ ciently large. In a way, the majority waits until times are ripe for a
change, even when a majority of voters would be better o¤ with a di¤erent status
quo. More formally,
Proposition 4 (Inertia and political endowment)
i) Let the median a time 2 be t2m = t1m + . The majority changes the policy only
if the shock that hits type distribution is su¢ ciently large. Speci…cally, the change
occurs only if either > t^1 t1m 0, or < t1 t1m 0.
ii) After the new policy has been set up at time 2, more than the strict majority of
people do not want to change it.
The second part of the Proposition is what we call the political endowment e¤ect.
The idea is the following. If the shock at time 2 is su¢ ciently large, the policy
changes. But only the bare majority of voters cast votes in favor. All voters to the
left of the median would prefer a lower policy. All those to the right prefer a higher
one. Once the new policy has been set up and a certain amount of time has passed,
this policy becomes the new reference point. The latter shapes voters’preferences.
Speci…cally, some voters to the left and to the right of the median change their
minds and start considering this new policy their most preferred one. This means
that, if no other big shocks occur, that same policy would beat any other alternative
with more than the simple majority cast votes in favor.
The political endowment e¤ect hinges on the fact that a change in the policy
yields a change in the reference point for subsequent periods, and the latter yields
11

a change in voters’ (reference dependent) preferences. It might help explain why
reforms that had hard time to be approved, gain popularity amongst people some
time later.
Note the connection between our model of voting on a political reform, and
renegotiating an existing contract in a market situation. Our idea that the status
quo is a political reference point, then parallels the idea that an existing contract
represents a reference point in case of renegotiation (Hart and Moore, 2008; Herweg
and Schmidt, 2014; Bartling and Schmidt, 2015).

4

A Dynamic Model

In a multi period economy, in any period the policy set by the majority represents
the status quo of the next period. In fact, we de…ne a period the length of time
in which a certain outcome becomes the status quo. Voters have an incentive to
choose the policy taking that into account, in order to dampen the adverse e¤ects
of loss aversion. However, this fully holds only if individuals correctly assess their
future preferences, and take into account how their choices today will a¤ect those
preferences in the future. Loewenstein et al. (2003) cast doubt on this kind of ability:
they claim, and verify experimentally (see also Loewenstein and Adler, 1995), that
individuals are subject to a projection bias, which leads them to systematically
overestimate the extent to which their future preferences resemble their current
ones.
In this new dynamic setting, all individuals live n periods, indexed by k (k =
1; ::; n), with no discounting for future utility. The majority choose the policy in each
period. At period k, the policy of period k 1 (pk 1 ) becomes the new the status quo.
Thus, pk 1 is a policy variable in period k 1, while in period k it is a predetermined
state variable. In period 1, the (exogenous) status quo policy is p0 = p 1 .14 In each
period bliss points are sequentially rational and maximize residual lifetime utility
from that period onwards. In order to account for a projection bias, we follow
Loewenstein et al. (2003) in assuming that predicted utility is a weighted average
between two utility functions with di¤erent reference points: the current status quo,
and the one-period lagged status quo. More precisely, in period k, voter i’s predicted
utility is an average of i’s true preferences (with the current reference point, pk 1 )
and her past preferences (with reference point pk 2 ):15
V~ (ti ; pk j pk 2 ; pk 1 ) = (1

) V (ti ; pk j pk 1 ) +

14

V (ti ; pk j pk 2 )

(5)

For simplicity we assume that p 2 = p 1 .
Observe that, despite voters look forward in anticipating the e¤ects of their current policy
choices on future utility, still their reference point is backward-looking (the current status quo,
and the one-period lagged status quo).
15

12

parametrizes the projection bias (0
1): if = 1, then i perceives that her
preferences in period k will not change as a result of a change in the status quo,
pk 1 ; when = 0, she has no projection bias. With this formulation, a voter thinks
ex ante she will need two periods to get completely accustomed to the new policy,
while ex post she actually accustoms after a single period. Loss aversion is , and
projection bias is . Proposition 5 below states (and Appendix proves) that the
)
. Suppose there
median makes her policy choice as if her loss aversion were (1+
n
is no projection bias ( = 0). Then voters choose according to n , rather than .
The reason is the following. Loss aversion derives from a psychological cost that
is borne at the time the change occurs. The psychological cost of a policy change
today is borne today only, while the material bene…ts of that change are enjoyed
also in the future. In a way, living for n periods gives the voter the chance to spread
the psychological cost over n periods. This is why perceived loss aversion is lower if
residual life is longer. This implies that harmful consequences of loss aversion are
lower if residual life is longer.
)
. The
Suppose there is projection bias ( > 0). Perceived loss aversion is (1+
n
higher the projection bias the smaller the propensity to change. The reason is that
ex ante the voter thinks she will bear the cost of change for two periods, while
ex post the cost is gone after one single period. The projection bias also yields
dynamic inconsistency: suppose the median changes the policy in period k = 1. In
the second period, she realizes that she has fully adapted to the new policy, faster
than she thought. Thus in period 2 her actual utility turns out to be di¤erent from
the predicted one. Had she known that, she would have made a di¤erent plan, with
a bigger change. Her …rst period plan was optimal ex ante, but it turns out to be
suboptimal ex post.
Proposition 5 (Time inconsistency)
In the presence of a projection bias parametrized by , a majority of loss averse
voters living for n periods,
)
, and
i) Sets the policy at period 1 as if the loss aversion parameter were (1+
n
plans to keep that policy unchanged in all subsequent periods;
ii) The same majority at period 2 eventually changes the former plan, setting a
new policy and re-planning to keep this new policy unchanged in all later periods;
)
the perceived loss aversion parameter is (1+
.
n 1
iii) This process of plan revisions may continue, and eventually it stops after a …nite
number of periods.
For n going to in…nity loss aversion becomes irrelevant regardless of the value
of . Projection bias and loss aversion may explain why often policy reforms are
timid at the beginning, while in later periods they are made progressively more
radical. The reason is that only later people realize that adaptation is not as costly
13

as previously thought. This model shows that majorities with a longer residual life
are less biased by the status quo.

5

An example: Fiscal Policy

This section applies the framework described above to a basic Meltzer and Richard
model with public good provision.16 The policy consists in the provision of a nonexcludable public good …nanced by a proportional income tax. Agents enjoy utility
from consumption of a private good (ci ) and the public good (g) that we measure
here in per capita terms. Instead of a public good, we could have a lump sum
redistribution; the results are identical (see the Appendix).
Let the utility function be quasi-linear in ci , and concave and increasing in g:
u(ci ; g) = ci + H(g)

(6)

(H 0 > 0, H 00 < 0). Individuals are heterogeneous in income: let yi be the income
of individual i, and denote by y the average income. Denote with m the individual
with the median income. The government budget is balanced and the prices of c
and g are normalized to 1. Indirect utility of voter i is then:
yi
g
V (yi ; g) = yi + H(g)
y
Her most preferred level of g is:
gi = H 0

1

yi
y

(7)

Policy preference functions are single peaked and the bliss points negatively depend
on individual incomes: richer individuals want a smaller government because the
private cost of one unit of public good yyi is higher for them. The equilibrium
is the median voter’s most preferred policy (gm ). The normative implication is
that the majority rule, or Downsian electoral competition, implements the social
optimum only if the median voter’s income equals the average income. If instead
the income distribution is skewed toward the right (i.e., ym < y), the voting outcome
is overspending and overtaxation.

5.1

Loss aversion

Let g S be the status quo amount of public good. Lower public good provision or
additional taxes are both a loss, while more public good or tax reductions are a
16

The model of this section is a stylized version of Meltzer and Richard (1981) as presented by
Persson and Tabellini (2000, pp. 48-50).

14

gain. Under loss aversion indirect utility is:
V (g; yi j g S ) =

V (yi )
V (yi ; g)

yi
(g
y

gS )
H(g S )

H(g)

if g g S
if g < g S

The bliss point, i.e., the most preferred amount of g is:17
8
y (1+ )
>
if yi < y
> H0 1 i y
<
gS
if y yi y^
gi =
>
>
y
0
1
i
: H
if yi > y^
y(1+ )

(8)

Suppose that median income declines by a small amount compared to the mean,
i.e., inequality increases, at least according to this measure. In the standard model
that would always imply a change in policy: higher taxes and more public good.
In the model with loss aversion, instead, an increase in income inequality may lead
to no changes in taxation as long as the change in inequality does not push the
parameter values outside the range in which the status quo prevails. This result
helps in rationalizing for instance why a large increase in income inequality in the
US and in other countries has not been accompanied by an immediate increase in
redistributive policies.
In addition, with loss aversion, the marginal cost of more public good is higher
and the marginal bene…t of less public good is lower. Therefore, compared to the
standard Meltzer and Richard model, the rich increase their demand for public good
and the poor reduce theirs.18 The level of disagreement about the size of government
is lower in a loss averse society. This result may help rationalize why the poor would
not impose an expropriatory level of taxation and the rich might accept a certain
moderate level of taxes. In other words the moderation e¤ect help making sense of
non extreme forms of taxation in democracies.

5.2

Old and Young Majorities

As pointed out by the general model, when the bene…ts of a policy change can be
enjoyed for several periods, the voters take into account the multi-period e¤ects of
loss aversion. This implies that, other things being equal, younger majorities are
more prone to change the status quo.
17

Where y

yi > y^ then H 0

1
0 S
(1+ ) H (g )y,
1

yi (1+ )
y

and y^

(1 + ) H 0 (g S )y. If yi < y then H 0

1

yi (1+ )
y

> g S and if

< g S (cf. Proposition 1). Finally observe that both y and y^ negatively

depend on the status quo, g S (cf. proof of Proposition 3).
18
An alternative and not mutually exclusive argument for why the poor may not want to aggressively expropriate the rich is the Prospect for Upward Mobility (POUM) hypothesis by Bénabou
and Ok (2001).

15

Suppose the population is split in two generations, the young and the old. In
order to focus on the speci…c e¤ects of loss aversion, let us assume that the two
generations are the same in all respects except residual life: the old live only the next
n periods; the young live the next nl periods (l > 1). Loss aversion and projection
bias parameters are the same for both young and old. By Proposition 5, the old
)
, and the young as if
make their political choices as if their loss aversion were (1+
n
(1+ )
loss aversion were nl . This implies that there are less young voters entrenched
in the status quo, compared to old voters. It may happen that the majority of
young voters want a change in policy, but the majority of old voters do not. The
reason does not rely on di¤erences in material interests. It is instead a psychological
reason: the old do not want to bear the psychologically costly commitment to a
change today, because their future horizon in which to enjoy the bene…ts of that
commitment is shorter. The policy outcome depends on the population shares: older
societies, where the share of young people is low, are more likely to remain with the
status quo.
We illustrate this point with a parametric example. Assume the two generations
are the same in all respects (i.e., income distribution, utility functions, loss aversion).
Income is uniformly distributed in 12 ; 32 . Thus ym = y = 1 in both groups. Let the
utility from the public good be H(g) = ln(g). The socially e¢ cient level of public
good is g = H 0 1 (1) = 1. Assume that the status quo is g S = 32 , a level which is
n
socially too high. It is easy to see that, by Proposition 5, for any (1 + )
,
2
the median of the old generation prefers to keep the (ine¢ cient) status quo (cf. the
upper graph in Figure 3), whereas the median of the young generation prefers the
nl
(cf. the lower graph in Figure 3). Thus, for any
status quo only if (1 + )
2
n
nl
(1
+
)
,
the
majority
of
young voters wants to change g (for less public
2
2
good) and the majority of old voters does not want to change.
How will society eventually choose? Let a be the share of old voters in the society, and (1 a) the share of young voters (0 a 1). The old voters who do not
)
. The
want to reduce g are the ones whose income is lower than y^old = 32 1 + (1+
n
young voters who do not want to reduce g are the ones whose income is lower than
)
y^young = 32 1 + (1+
. Since in both groups income distribution is uniform in
nl
h
i
h
i
(1+ )
(1+ )
1 3
2
1
2
1
; , there are a 3 (1 + n ) 2 old voters, and (1 a) 3 (1 + nl ) 2
2 2

young voters who prefer the status quo to any g < g S . If these two masses
ofh voters are not smaller
than ha half of the population,
the status quo survives:
i
i
(1+ )
(1+ )
2
2
1
1
1
a 3 (1 + n ) 2 + (1 a) 3 (1 + nl ) 2
. Solving this inequality
2
yields the condition for the status quo:
a

nl 2 (1 + )
2 (1 + ) (l 1)
16

(9)

gi

gS
go

0
gi

ym

)
y old

yi

gS
go

0

)
y young ym

yi

Figure 3: The majority of young voters want to change. The majority of old voters
do not.
This inequality tells us that older societies (higher a) are more likely to remain
stuck with the status quo, whereas societies where young generations live longer
than older generations (higher l) are more likely to abandon it. If both young and
old live longer (high n), the status quo is less likely. Of course stronger loss aversion
(higher ) and larger projection bias (higher ) make reforms less likely.19 The idea
that older societies are more static and less prone to reforms seems realistic enough.
9
, n = 1,
Finally, we can document a sort of paradox: suppose that (1 + ) = 10
n
nl
1
and l = 2. In this case, 2
(1 + )
! 2
(1 + )
1: the majority
2
of young voters would like to change the status quo, and the majority of old voters
1
would like to retain it. By (9), if a
the society remains with the status quo.
9
Despite the fact that old voters are only one ninth of the population, the entire
society sticks to the status quo. Because of loss aversion and shorter residual life,
policy preferences in the old generation are much less dispersed around the status
quo. The share of people who want the status quo is much higher in the older group.
In other words, loss aversion raises the political cohesion among old voters, raising
their chance to play a pivotal role.
19

Indeed, (9) is more likely to be satis…ed when a is large and/or the RHS is low. As for the
latter, observe that it decreases in l (since (1 + ) > n2 ) and in (1 + ), and it increases in n.

17

The result that older societies are more conservative when it comes to redistribution is strongly supported by the vast empirical evidence on both US and European
countries, as summarized by Alesina and Giuliano (2011). The evidence shows that
age of the respondent is inversely correlated to preferences for redistribution holding constant the level of income of the respondent and a host of other individual
characteristics. Thus age in itself, controlling for "everything" else (so to speak), is
a strong determinant of tastes for redistribution as implied by our model.

6

Risk and Loss Aversion

In this section we explore how loss averse voters make their choices when there is
uncertainty about the outcome resulting from a policy. We return to the static
case, and we address three questions: …rst how the behavior of loss averse voters is
di¤erent from risk averse voters? Second, suppose a policy change is opposed to a
safe status quo. When does the majority choose the reform? Third, how does risk
a¤ect the level of policy chosen?
We use the model of individual decision by Köszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) by
amending it in two directions in order to make it suitable for studying the collective
policy choice. First, unlike Köszegi and Rabin, our voters not only choose whether
to pass a “risky” reform or not. They also choose the size of the reform. In other
words, voters not only choose whether insure themselves or not, but they also choose
the level of risk in case they do not insure. Second, voters are di¤erent in types, so
they have di¤erent evaluations of the risk embodied in any reform.
Consider a policy with uncertainty about its bene…ts.20 For any level of the
policy, the bene…ts depend on a random variable , the state of the world. If the
state is good (i.e., = g > 0) then the bene…ts are high. If the state is bad (i.e.,
= b > 0) bene…ts are low. The distribution of is common knowledge. The state
is good with probability q, and bad with probability (1 q). For simplicity, voters’
bene…t functions are the same for all types: B(ti ; p; ) = B(p; ).21 Also we assume
b
B(p; g ) = B(p + g ), and B(p; b ) = B(p
).

6.1

Risk averse voters with no loss aversion

Individual i’s expected utility is
E [V (ti ; p; )] = q B(p +

g

) + (1

20

q) B(p

b

)

C(ti ; p)

(10)

This is a simplifying assumption. Not much hinges on it: one could also consider uncertainty
regarding costs, or both costs and bene…ts; the model would be only slightly di¤erent.
21
We make this assumption because, for simplicity, we want to abstract away from any source of
heterogeneity other than ti . In a more realistic world, uncertainty can be di¤erent across voters.

18

Suppose E( ) = 0. The concavity of B( ) leads to risk aversion: if the amount of
risk is su¢ ciently large, then all voters would prefer to pay a premium to insure
themselves against policy uncertainty. However, this does not necessarily imply
that voters prefer a lower p when the policy is risky. Consider the FOC to maximize
E [V (ti ; p; )]:
E [Bp (p; )] = Cp (ti ; p)
b
where E [Bp (p; )] q Bp (p + g ) + (1 q) Bp (p
). If Bp is convex, despite risk
aversion, voters want a larger policy in the presence of risk. The reason is that a
marginal increase of p yields a marginal bene…t in the good state that is substantially
higher than the marginal bene…t in the bad state. This leads to a higher demand
for p compared to the case without risk. Vice versa, If Bp is concave, voters want a
lower amount of p when there is risk.
Suppose now that risk is over modest stakes (i.e., g and b are su¢ ciently small),
Rabin’s calibration theorem implies that B( ) is approximately linear in p (Rabin,
2000). In this case, with E( ) = 0, voters choose the same level of the policy with
or without uncertainty. The Proposition below summarizes these results.

Proposition 6 If the expected outcome of two plans is the same, then risk averse
voters
i) Always choose the less risky plan in case of large-scale risk;
ii) Are indi¤erent between the two plans in case of small-scale risk.
iii) All voters demand more (less) policy when the plan is more risky and marginal
bene…ts are convex (concave).
iv) The equilibrium policy is the median’s bliss point.
How to interpret these results? Suppose the status quo is an available risk-free
option. Voters regard it as a form of insurance against risk: if they do not change
in the policy they will not have to bear any risk. If risk is modest, voters that
maximize expected utility endorse a “risky”reform whenever the expected outcome
is better than the status quo. If risk is large, they require the expected bene…ts of
the risky reform to be su¢ ciently larger than the bene…ts of the risk-free status quo.
But what happens when the status quo is not a risk-free option? This is the case
when the environment becomes risky, even if the policy is unchanged (e.g., during
an economic crisis). Proposition 6-iii says that in this case all voters want to change
the current policy in the same direction (say, either more or less policy, if Bp ( ) is
either convex or concave, respectively). Observe that, despite voters still di¤er in
their bliss points, all their bliss points move in the same direction. In a sense, all
them agree on making the same kind of change (i.e., either more p, or less p).

19

6.2

Loss averse voters

Let us assume that the bene…ts from the reference point (pS ) are evaluated with
certainty. If voters choose a risky reform, p, then the bene…ts will be either B(p+ g ),
or B(p b ). Figure 4 shows the reform’s bene…t function in the good state, B(p+ g ),
b
g
and in the bad state, B(p
). Consider pS
, and pS + b . The former (latter)
is the level of risky reform that ensures the status quo bene…ts in the good (bad)
state. The idea is that in the good (bad) state one needs a smaller (bigger) amount
of p to ensure the current level of bene…ts.22
Benefits

B( p + θ g )

a

b

B( p S )

B( p − θ b )

a

b

0

•

pS −θ g

pb

•

pS

pa

•

pS +θ b

policy

Figure 4: Bene…t functions in di¤erent states of the world
How would voters choose p? If they choose p within the interval pS ; pS + b
they feel two behavioral losses: the …rst one is the usual loss due to the fact that
costs are higher than the status quo; the second one is the expected loss of bene…ts
that would occur in the bad state. Take for instance the policy pa in Figure 4.
The …rst loss is
C(ti ; pa ) C(ti ; pS ) ; a way to contain it is sticking with the
b
status quo. The second loss amounts to B(pS ) B(pa
) , and it occurs with
probability (1 q). This second loss is the segment aa in Figure 4, and it occurs only
because the reform is uncertain. A way to contain this second loss is demanding a
higher p. Thus, within the interval pS ; pS + b , voters have to solve a trade-o¤: on
the one hand, they would like to stick with the status quo; on the other hand, they
22

We are implicitly assuming that and p are substitute. For instance, if e¢ ciency in government
spending is larger (i.e., higher ) we need less taxes (lower p) to provide the same level of public
goods.
One might imagine that and p are complementary. Say, longer life expectancy (a positive
shock) implies more taxes to keep the same level of health care or retirement bene…ts. In this case,
one may still be using the same model. Formally, the only change that is needed to be done is in
the “sign” of . In case of complementarity, a “positive” shock means that we are in the “bad”
state, b ; and vice versa.

20

desired policies
pl

pS +θ b

ph

pS
pS −θ g

0

•

•

•

tl

t h tˆ

•

types

Figure 5: Under loss aversion fewer voters want the status quo
would like to demand more p. Of course this trade-o¤ is di¤erent across voters. We
will see that some of them end up choosing more p than the status quo.
g S
If p is chosen within the interval pS
; p , voters expect a loss of bene…ts,
but only in the bad state. No other feelings of loss occur because costs are lower
than the status quo. Take policy pb in Figure 4. The expected loss is “only”
b
(1 q) B(pS ) B(pb
) , (cf. segment bb in Figure 4). If the state is good,
bene…ts are larger than the status quo, despite the fact that the policy is lower. The
chance that bene…ts may be larger than the status quo reduces the expected feeling
of loss if p < pS , leading some voters to prefer a lower policy than pS .
Bliss points of loss averse voters when there is no risk are shown by the solid
line in Figure 5. The dotted line shows voters’desired policy with risk. Take type
tl in Figure 5: with no risk, she wants the status quo; with risk, she wants a policy
pl > pS . The reason is that, in the presence of risk, demanding a higher policy is a
way of reducing the feeling of loss of bene…ts in the unlucky state. Take now type
th : if there is no uncertainty she desires pS ; if there is risk she wants a policy that is
lower than the status quo: ph < pS . The reason is that with ph the loss of bene…ts
occurs only in the bad state. This smaller expected loss of bene…ts leads this voter
to demand for less policy. The Appendix proves that, under uncertainty, those who
want less (more) policy instead of pS are the types su¢ ciently close to t^ (t). These
results are summarized by Proposition 7.
Proposition 7 (Uncertainty: smaller status quo bias)
Suppose the reference point is the status quo policy. If E(Bp (pS ; )) = Bp (pS ), the
status quo bias is smaller when there is uncertainty. Speci…cally,
i) The mass of intermediate types who want to keep the status quo policy is smaller;
ii) Some high types want a lower policy;
21

iii) Some low types want a higher policy.
iv) The equilibrium policy is the median’s bliss point.
Thus, loss averse voters are more prone to change when there is risk.23 But this
does not imply that they like risk. On the contrary, loss aversion predicts strong
distaste for any order of risk, in particular …rst-order risk aversion in pS (Rabin,
2000).24
Proposition 8 (Uncertainty: …rst-order risk aversion) If the expected outcome of
two plans is the same, loss averse voters always turn down the riskier plan.
Moreover, compared to risk averse voters, loss averse voters always demand a higher
risk premium to pass any plan.
What is the di¤erence between loss aversion and risk aversion? First, if pS
is an available risk-free option, loss aversion predicts a stronger bias towards the
status quo than simple risk aversion. Thus there might be risky reforms that are
passed under risk aversion, and are not passed under loss aversion. It cannot be
the opposite. Second, and perhaps most surprising, voters’ bliss points do not
move in the same direction: some voters want more policy, some others want less.
Roughly speaking, voters’policy preferences about reforms are “mixed up”by risk.
This might help explain why people’s disagreement about “the right thing to do”
increases during turbulent periods. This result is alien to the model with simple risk
aversion. Third, in a risky environment when also pS entails risk, loss averse voters
become less attached to the status quo. This lower attachment is due to the fact
that their willingness to change increases for many, although in opposite directions.
Several authors have argued that periods of crisis generate impetus for large
reforms, such as …scal crises, hyperin‡ation, major recessions, banking crises (see
Alesina and Passalacqua (2015) for a survey). It is quite reasonable to assume that
uncertainty is also higher in crises periods, although the severity of the crisis itself
and the amount of uncertainty are two separate variables. To be sure, other models
are consistent with the “crisis leading to reform”idea. However the argument that
large reforms are less likely to occur when there is no uncertainty about a reasonably
acceptable and certain status quo, even when the latter may be far from …rst best
seems intuitively reasonable. More empirical research on this point is needed.
So far we have assumed that the bene…ts from pS are known and evaluated
with certainty. This assumption is appropriate when the status quo represents an
available risk-free option, or when voters simply do not expect risk, as in the case
23

E(Bp (pS ; )) = Bp (pS ) in Proposition 7 represents a su¢ cient condition. The Appendix shows
that the Proposition above holds whenever E(Bp (pS ; )) is not too di¤erent from Bp (pS ).
24
Expected utility functions are not di¤erentiable in pS . This implies …rst-order risk aversion
(cf. Appendix for details).

22

the environment has become uncertain, but voters did not have enough time to
internalize it. If instead they expect the risk in pS , the introduction of a stochastic
references point á la Köszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) seems more appropriate.25
What happens in this case? The Appendix shows that when risk is anticipated
more voters want the status quo, compared to the case of deterministic reference
point. The reason is that when also the outcome of pS is uncertain, voters face
background risk in their reference point. This risk enters their indirect utility and
it is correlated to the risk of any other level of p they might choose. Because of
this correlation, there is no chance to diversify risk by choosing a di¤erent p. On
the contrary, choosing a di¤erent level of p increases the amount of risk that they
have to face. This raises their incentive to choose the status quo, explaining why
the status quo bias is larger when the reference point is stochastic.26

7

Conclusions

In this paper we have explored how loss aversion with the status quo as reference
point, a¤ects the political equilibrium in a voting model. A society needs to choose
the level of a certain policy which has bene…ts and costs. Individuals di¤er in
their evaluation of these bene…ts and costs and everybody su¤ers from loss aversion.
Without loss aversion, the equilibrium policy would be the one most preferred by
the median voter, but the initial status quo would be irrelevant. With loss aversion,
instead, the results are di¤erent. First, we show a status quo bias, that is for
any initial status quo a positive mass of voters would prefer the latter, whereas
their preferences would be possibly di¤erent with a di¤erent status quo, or under
rationality. Thus, small shocks to preferences (or to the environment) do not lead to
changes of policies; the shocks have to be su¢ ciently large to overcome the status quo
bias. In other words societies become very averse to change even when reforms would
be collectively welfare improving. Second, we show a path dependence: the voting
equilibrium depends on the initial status quo. Societies with a certain attitude
in past policies (say, large government size, strong regulation, etc..) continue to
25

Köszegi and Rabin’s idea that reference points are agents’probabilistic beliefs about outcomes
inspires our idea that if the voters expect the status quo not to be risk-free, then the reference
policy must be stochastic. In our model the reference point is …xed. This is the limiting case of
Köszegi and Rabin’s “....UPE/PPE behavior when the decision maker ... has …xed expectations
formed independently of the relevant choice set” (Köszegi and Rabin, 2007, p. 1052).
Unlike Köszegi and Rabin we do not study endogenous reference points, although they would
represent a nice extension of our approach.
26
The idea that, compared to a deterministic reference point, with a stochastic reference point
voters are less willing to change is related to Köszegi and Rabin (2007, Proposition 2) and to
Barberis, Huang and Thaler’s (2006) idea that loss averse decision makers are only second-order
risk averse when they face uncorrelated background risk.

23

display the same policy attitude even when they make changes. Third, loss aversion
implies a moderating e¤ect: the most extreme types –who would want to move the
status quo –have more moderate ideal policies than without loss aversion. Fourth,
in a dynamic setting, the e¤ect of loss aversion diminishes with the length of the
planning horizon of voters. Younger societies are more prone to change; however,
loss aversion also favors the political cohesion of older generations, increasing their
chance to a¤ect the social choice. This sheds a novel light on the intergenerational
con‡ict about policy reforms.
As a policy example we use the Meltzer and Richard (1981) model with a public
good (in the text) or with lump sum redistributions (in the Appendix). We derive
several empirically plausible implications; one is that even relatively large increases
in income inequality, which in the model without loss aversion would lead to more
taxes and more public goods (or transfers), may not lead to a change in the status
quo. A related point is that even with very large increases in inequality the level of
redistribution with loss aversion would be lower than without it. We also show that
older societies are more conservative in the sense they are more subject to the e¤ect
of loss aversion which lead to a stronger status quo bias. Finally, we investigate the
interaction of loss aversion and risk aversion in a stochastic environment in which
the results of policies are not known with certainty. Risk enhances willingness to
change in the society, but also disagreement about what kind of change.
Our analysis has been exclusively positive. Many normative aspects spring to
mind. To begin with how can one evaluate the costs of loss aversion in a majority
rule model? To what benchmark should welfare be compared? Are certain voting
rules more e¤ective than others to mitigate the welfare cost of loss aversion? These
fascinating subjects are left for future research.

24

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo and James A. Robinson
(2013): “Democracy, Redistribution and Inequality”, in Anthony A. Atkinson and François Bourguignon (eds), Handbook of Income Distribution, North
Holland.
[2] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005): “Fairness and Redistribution”, American Economic Review, 95(4), pp 960-980.
[3] Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991): “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?”,
American Economic Review, 81(5), pp. 1170-1188.
[4] Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2011): “Preferences for Redistribution”,
in Alberto Bisin, Jess Benhabib and Matthew Jackson (eds), Handbook of Social
Economics, pp. 93-132, North Holland.
[5] Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2005): “Ethnic Diversity and Economic
Performance”, Journal of Economic Literature, 43(3), pp. 762-800.
[6] Alesina, Alberto and Andrea Passalacqua (2015): “The Political Economy of
Public Debt”, mimeographed.
[7] Amador, Manuel, Iván Werning and George-Marios Angeletos (2006): “Commitment vs. Flexibility”, Econometrica, 74(2), pp. 366-396.
[8] Barberis, Nicholas C. (2013): “Thirty Years of Prospect Theory in Economics:
A Review and Assessment”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1), pp. 173196.
[9] Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang and Richard H. Thaler (2006): “Individual
Preferences, Monetary Gambles, and Stock Market Participation: A Case for
Narrow Framing”, American Economic Review, 96(4), pp. 1069-1090.
[10] Bartling, Björn and Klaus M. Schmidt (2015): “Reference Points, Social Norms,
and Fairness in Contract Renegotiation”, Journal of the European Economic
Association, Vol. 13.1, pp. 98-129.
[11] Bénabou, Roland and Efe A. Ok (2001): “Social Mobility and the Demand for
Redistribution: The Poum Hypothesis”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116(2), pp. 447-487.
[12] Bendor, Jonathan, Daniel Diermeier, David A. Siegel and Michael M. Ting
(2011): A Behavioral Theory of Elections, Princeton, Princeton University
Press.
25

[13] Bernasconi, Michele and Alberto Zanardi (2004): “Tax Evasion, Tax Rates,
and Reference Dependence”, FinanzArchiv, 60, pp. 422-445.
[14] Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri and Leeat Yariv (2015): “Government Policy
with Time Inconsistent Voters”, The American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
[15] Borge, Lars-Erik and Jorn Rattso (2004), “Income Distribution and Tax Structure: Empirical Test of the Meltzer–Richard Hypothesis”, European Economic
Review, 48, pp. 805-826.
[16] Charité, Jimmy, Raymond Fisman and Ilyana Kuziemko (2014): “Reference
points and demand for redistribution: Experimental evidence”, mimeographed.
[17] DellaVigna, Stefano (2009): “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the
Field”, Journal of Economic Literature, 47(2), pp. 315-372.
[18] DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier and Gautam Rao
(2014a): “Voting to Tell Others”, NBER Working Paper No. 19832.
[19] DellaVigna, Stefano, Attila Lindner, Balazs Reizer and Johannes F. Schmieder
(2014b): “Reference-Dependent Job Search: Evidence from Hungary”,
mimeographed.
[20] Downs, Anthony (1957): An Economic Theory of Democracy, Harper Collins.
[21] Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik (1991): “Resistance to Reform: Status
Quo Bias in the Presence of Individual- Speci…c Uncertainty”, The American
Economic Review, 81(5), pp. 1146-1155.
[22] Freund, Caroline and Ça¼
glar Özden (2008): “Trade Policy and Loss Aversion”,
The American Economic Review, 98(4), pp. 1675-1691.
[23] Gil, Ricard, Casey B. Mulligan and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004): “Do Democracies have di¤erent Public Policies than Nondemocracies?”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 18, pp. 51-74.
[24] Glaeser, E. L. (2006): “Paternalism and Psychology”, The University of
Chicago Law Review, 73(1), pp. 133-156.
[25] Grillo, Edoardo (2014): “Reference Dependence and Politicians’ Credibility:
the Hidden Cost of Raising Voters’Expectations”, mimeographed.
[26] Hart, Oliver and John Moore (2008): “Contracts as Reference Points”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), pp. 1-48.

26

[27] Herweg, Fabian and Klaus M. Schmidt (2014): “Loss Aversion and Ine¢ cient
Renegotiation”, The Review of Economic Studies, 01, pp. 1-38.
[28] Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis
of Decision under Risk”, Econometrica, 47(2), pp. 263-292.
[29] Köszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2006): “A Model of ReferenceDependent Preferences”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1221(4), pp. 11331165.
[30] Köszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2007): “Reference-Dependent Risk Attitudes”, American Economic Review, 97(4), pp. 1047-1073.
[31] Köszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2009): “Reference-Dependent Consumption Plans”, American Economic Review, 99(3), pp. 909-936.
[32] Krehbiel, Keith (1998): Pivotal Politics: A Theory of US Lawmaking, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
[33] Krehbiel, Keith (2008): “Pivots”, in Barry R. Weingast and Donald A.
Wittman (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, New York: Oxford University Press.
[34] Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kurusçu and Anthony A. Smith (2010): “Temptation
and Taxation”, Econometrica, 78, pp. 2063-2084.
[35] Laibson, David (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112(2), pp. 443-477.
[36] Lizzeri, Alessandro and Leeat Yariv (2012):
mimeographed.

“Collective Self-Control”,

[37] Loewenstein, George and Daniel Adler (1995), “A Bias in the Prediction of
Tastes”, Economic Journal, vol. 105(431), pp. 929-937.
[38] Loewenstein, George, Ted O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin (2003): “Projection Bias In Predicting Future Utility”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 118(4), pp. 1209-1248.
[39] Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard (1981): “A Rational Theory of the Size
of Government”, Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), pp. 914-927.
[40] Milkman, Katherine L., Mary Carol Mazza, Lisa L. Shu, Chia-Jung Tsay and
Max H. Bazerman (2009): “Policy Bundling to Overcome Loss Aversion: A
Method for Improving Legislative Outcomes”, Harvard Business School, Working Paper N. 09-147.
27

[41] Ok, Efe, Pietro Ortoleva and Gil Riella (2015): “Revealed (P)Reference Theory”, American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 1, pp. 299-321.
[42] Passarelli, Francesco and Guido Tabellini (2013): “Emotions and Political Unrest”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP9446.
[43] Perotti, Roberto (1996): “Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: what
the data say”, Journal of Economic Growth, 1, pp. 149-187.
[44] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000): Political Economics: Explaining
Economic Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[45] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003): The Economic E¤ects of Constitutions, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[46] Ortoleva, Pietro and Erik Snowberg (2015): “Overcon…dence in Political Behavior”, American Economic Review, (forthcoming).
[47] Rabin, Matthew (1998): “Psychology and Economics”, Journal of Economic
Literature, 36(1), pp. 11-46.
[48] Rabin, Matthew (2000): “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem“, Econometrica, 68(5), pp. 1281-1292.
[49] Rees-Jones, Alex (2013): “Loss Aversion Motivates Tax Sheltering: Evidence
From U.S. Tax Returns”, mimeographed.
[50] Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage (2012): “Democracy, War and Wealth:
Lessons from Two Centuries of Inheritance Taxation,”American Political Science Review, 106(1), pp. 82-102.
[51] Tovar, Patricia (2009): “The E¤ects of Loss Aversion on Trade Policy: Theory
and Evidence”, Journal of International Economics, 78, pp. 154-167.
[52] Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1991): “Loss Aversion in Riskless
Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106(4), pp. 1039-1061.

28

8
8.1

Appendix
Proofs

Proof. Proposition 1 Recall that t is implicitly determined by Bp (t; pS ) (1 +
)Cp (t; pS ) = 0, and t^ is implicitly determined by (1 + )Bp (t; pS ) Cp (t; pS ) = 0.
Thus, for any “intermediate”type ti 2 t; t^ , the optimality condition is
Bp (ti ; p) (1 + )Cp (ti ; p)
(1 + )Bp (ti ; p) Cp (ti ; p)

0
0

if p pS
if p < pS

thus the bliss point is pi = pS .
For any “high”type, ti > t^,
Bp (ti ; pS ) (1 + )Cp (ti ; pS ) < 0
(1 + )Bp (ti ; pS ) Cp (ti ; pS ) < 0
Thus the bliss point is lower than the status quo, pi < pS :
iii) For any “low”type, ti < t,
Bp (ti ; pS ) (1 + )Cp (ti ; pS ) > 0
(1 + )Bp (ti ; pS ) Cp (ti ; pS ) > 0
Thus the bliss point is larger than the status quo, pi > pS .
Implicit di¤erentiating (4) w.r.t. ti , and using A1-A3 yield
8 B (t ;p ) (1+ )C (t ;p )
pt i i
pt i i
>
<0
if ti < t
<
Bpp (ti ;pi ) (1+ )Cpp (ti ;pi )
@pi
=
0
if t ti
>
@ti
: (1+ )Bpt (ti ;pi ) Cpt (ti ;pi ) < 0
if ti > t^
(1+ )Bpp (ti ;pi ) Cpp (ti ;pi )

t^

Therefore bliss points are unique and (weakly) monotone in types. The policy
outcome is the median’s bliss point. QED
Proof. Proposition 2 Both t and t^ negatively depend on pS : by the de…nition of
t and t^ in the text, if follows that:
@t
=
pS

Bpp (t; pS )
Bpt (t; pS )

(1 + )Cpp (t; pS )
< 0 and
(1 + )Cpt (t; pS )

@ t^
=
pS

(1 + )Bpp (t^; pS )
(1 + )Bpt (t^; pS )

Cpp (t^; pS )
<0
Cpt (t^; pS )

By (4), if pS is su¢ ciently low, then tm < t. In this case the policy outcome pm
solves Bp (tm ; p) (1 + )Cp (tm ; p) = 0. If pS is su¢ ciently high, then tm > t^. In this
case pm solves (1 + )Bp (tm ; p) Cp (tm ; p) = 0. By A1-A2, Bp (tm ; p) is decreasing in
29

p and Cp (tm ; p) is increasing. Thus the policy outcome is lower in the former case.
QED
Proof. Proposition 3 By (4), it follows that without loss aversion (i.e., = 0)
the bliss points of all types equal the bliss points in the rational model. Implicit
di¤erentiating (4) yields,
@pi
<0
if ti < t
@
@pi
>0
if ti > t^
@
With loss aversion, the bliss points of low types are smaller, and decreasing in the
loss aversion coe¢ cient. The bliss points of high types are larger, and increasing in
the loss aversion coe¢ cient. Moreover,
@t
@

<0

@ t^
@

>0

Therefore, the higher , the more people prefer the status quo. QED
Proof. Proposition 4
i) The proof of this part is trivial, thus we omit it.
ii) Consider the case in which the shock is positive and it is su¢ ciently high:
0. Thus t2m > t^1 : the median at time 2 is beyond the “inertia”
> t^1 t1m
range, thus the majority votes for the policy preferred by the new median. This
policy is lower than the status quo, p2m < pS1 . Consider any type tj > t2m . At
the time vote occurs her reference point is the status quo at time 1, pS1 . Thus,
j’s most preferred policy is lower that the policy that is voted by the majority:
p2j = pj (pS1 ) < p2m . Thus only the simple majority cast votes in favor of the new
policy. Immediately after the new policy has been set up, the latter becomes the
new status quo: pS2 = p2m > pS1 . A new inertia range is de…ned. Speci…cally, the
upper bound is t^2 > t^1 , where (1 + )Bp (t^2 ; pS2 ) Cp (t^2 ; pS2 ) = 0. If tj t^2 , then
her most preferred policy becomes the new status quo. Suppose at time 3 voting
occurs. Voter j’s bliss point is p3j = pj (pS2 ) = pS2 . Suppose a policy p3 < pS2 is
posed against the status quo. All voters whose type is lower than the median’s will
vote against. They represent a half of population. In addition, another positive
mass of voters, namely all j-types tj 2 t2m ; t^2 , will also vote against. Thus pS2
wins against any lower alternative with more than the simple majority of votes.
Following the same argument it easy to prove that pS2 also beats any higher alternative with more than the simple majority in favor. QED
Proof. Proposition 5 For expositional convenience we split the proof in two parts.
We start by assuming that there is no projection bias; then, in the second part, we
consider it.

30

First part. Assume there is no projection bias ( = 0), so that at any period
k perceived utility equals actual utility: V~ (ti ; pk j pk 2 ; pk 1 ) = V (ti ; pk j pk 1 ). Let
us prove for k > 1, the majority has no incentive to change the policy set at period
1. We proceed backwards: in period n, each individual i chooses her policy in order
to maximize her residual lifetime utility, V (ti ; pn j pn 1 ):
pni 2 arg max
pn

V (ti ; pn )
V (ti ; pn )

[C(ti ; pn ) C(ti ; pn 1 )]
[B(ti ; pn 1 ) B(ti ; pn )]

if pn pn
if pn < pn

This maximization yields the individual bliss points in period n:
8
s.t. pn > pn
< Bp (ti ; pn ) (1 + )Cp (ti ; pn ) = 0
pn = pn 1
otherwise
pni solves
:
n
n
(1 + )Bp (ti ; p ) Cp (ti ; p ) = 0
s.t. pn < pn

1
1

1

(11)
1

For each i, pni is unique and it is weakly decreasing in ti . Thus the equilibrium
policy is the median’s bliss point, pnm (which solves (11) above for i = m). This
equilibrium solution is a function of the state variable, pn 1 . Let pnm = G(pn 1 )
denote this function.
At time n 1, any individual chooses pin 1 taking into account the consequences of
her choice on the future equilibrium outcome:
pni

1

2 arg max V (ti ; pn
pn

1

1

j pn 2 ) + V (ti ; G(pn 1 ) j pn 1 )

(12)

For expositional convenience, let us consider the median voter. Below, we show
that the median voter’s bliss point is the equilibrium policy. We now prove that the
median has no incentive to choose pn 1 6= G(pn 1 ); i.e., in period n 1 she does
not want to choose a policy that is di¤erent from the policy that she will choose in
period n in equilibrium.
Suppose, by contradiction that she does. Say that she maximizes lifetime utility,
s.t. pn 1 < G(pn 1 ). Assume also that pn 1 > pn 2 . In this case, after some
algebraic manipulation, we can re-write the objective function in (12) as:
B(tm ; pn 1 )

C(tm ; pn 1 ) + B(tm ; G(pn 1 ))

C(tm ; G(pn 1 ))

C(tm ; G(pn 1 ))

C(tm ; pn 2 )

Recall that pn 1 > pn 2 . Thus maximizing this function w.r.t. pn
solution which solves:
@B(tm ; pn 1 )
@pn 1

@C(tm ; pn 1 ) @B(tm ; pnm ) @pnm
+
@pn 1
@pnm
@pn 1

31

1

yields an interior

@C(tm ; pnm ) @pnm
(1 + )
=0
@pnm
@pn 1

n

Since pn 1 < pnm = G(pn 1 ), by implicit di¤erentiating (11), G0 (pn 1 ) = @p@pnm1 = 0.
Thus, if pn 2 < pn 1 < pnm , the last two terms of the above equations are zero, then
the equation which pins down the median’s most preferred policy in period n 1 is
@B(tm ; pn 1 )
@pn 1

@C(tm ; pn 1 )
=0
@pn 1

Observe that in this case the policy is chosen rationally, i.e., the policy is the
same as the one in the case with no loss aversion. But this is a contradiction, because
if the median chooses the policy rationally in period n 1, then she will have no
chance to increase her utility in period n other than keeping that policy unchanged.
Thus, the policy that she chooses at n 1 must be the same policy that she will
choose at period n. But this contradicts the assumption that pn 1 < pnm .
Applying the same rationale, it can be proved that a contradiction arises also in
the other three cases: 1. pn 2 > pn 1 < pnm ; 2. pn 2 < pn 1 > pnm ; 3. pn 2 > pn 1 >
pnm . This proves that pn 1 = pnm : in period n 1 the median sets the policy at a
level that she is not willing to change in period n.
In period n 2, by applying the same argument as above, it follows that pn 2 =
pnm 1 : the median at period n 2 sets a policy that she will not be willing to change
at period n 1. But the latter is the same policy that she will choose at period n;
then pn 2 = pnm 1 = pnm . Applying this same argument recursively, we end up with
p1 = p2m =
= pnm : the …rst period policy is set at a level that the median will not
be willing to change in any subsequent period.
We can see now how the median sets p1 . Recall that the median’s choice at period
= p2m = G(p1 ).
2 – and in all subsequent periods – depends on p1 ; thus pnm =
n
2
= pm , experienced utility in any period from 2 till n
Moreover, since pm =
is constant and equal to V (tm ; G(p1 ) j p1 ). Lifetime utility at period 1 is then
V (tm ; p1 j p0 ) + (n 1)V (tm ; G(p1 ) j G(p1 ), and p1 is set to maximize it. After some
algebraic manipulation, we can rewrite lifetime utility as:
n B(tm ; p1 )
n B(tm ; p1 )

n C(tm ; p1 )
n C(tm ; p1 )

[C(tm ; p1 )
[B(tm ; p1 )

C(tm ; p0 )]
B(tm ; p0 )]

if p1 p0
if p1 < p0

Maximizing this function w.r.t. p1 , and using the result above yield the following
optimal choice path:
8
s.t. p1 > p0
< Bp (tm ; p1 ) (1 + n )Cp (tm ; p1 ) = 0
p1 = p0
otherwise
(13)
p1m solves
:
(1 + n )Bp (tm ; p1 ) Cp (tm ; p1 ) = 0
s.t. p1 < p0
and p2m = ::: = pnm = p1m

(14)

This proves that the median sets the policy at the …rst period as if her loss
aversion were n , and she is not willing to change it in all subsequent periods.

32

It only remains to prove that the median’s bliss point, p1m in (13) is the equilibrium policy in all periods. To see this, consider an individual i with ti < tm . She
would like a policy that is (weakly) higher than the median’s policy in any period.
At the last period period (n), given pn 1 , she can only vote sincerely (cf. the proof
of Proposition 1). In period n 1, she has no incentive to vote strategically for a
n 1
policy that is lower than the median’s equilibrium, pm
, because if she did the only
n 1
e¤ect would be passing a p
that would bias the median towards a lower policy
in period n. Thus, she votes sincerely also in period n 1.
Applying this argument recursively, it follows that she always vote sincerely, at
least starting from period 2 onwards. Things are similar in period 1: in this period
she has no incentive to vote for a policy that is higher than the median’s equilibrium,
p1m , because if she did the only strategic e¤ect would be passing a p1 that would
bias the median towards a lower policy in period 2, and in all subsequent periods.
Therefore, the best thing she can do in period 1 is voting for a policy that is lower
than (or equal to) p1m . Thus, p1i
p1m for any ti > tm . Equivalently, p1i
p1m for
any ti < tm . The equilibrium in the …rst period is p1m (cf. 13), and it is also the
equilibrium in all subsequent periods (cf. 14).
Second part. Assume there is projection bias, 2 (0; 1]. Let us proceed backward.
In period n, any individual i chooses her policy in order to maximize her perceived
residual lifetime utility V~ (ti ; pn j pn 2 ; pn 1 ), as de…ned by (5):

pni 2 arg max
pn

8
V (ti ; pn )
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
V (ti ; pn )
>
>
:

(1
) [C(ti ; pn ) C(ti ; pn 1 )]
[C(ti ; pn ) C(ti ; pn 2 )]

if pn
and pn

pn 1
pn 2

(1
) [B(ti ; pn 1 ) B(ti ; pn )]
[B(ti ; pn 2 ) B(ti ; pn )]

if pn < pn 1
and pn < pn 2

This maximization yields the individual bliss points. As in the …rst part of this
proof, the equilibrium policy is the one preferred by the median, but it is a function
of the state variables pn 1 and pn 2 : pnm = T (pn 1 ; pn 2 ).
At time n 1, each individual chooses her most preferred policy, pin 1 :
n
o
n 1
n 1
n 3 n 2
n
n 2 n 1
~
~
pi 2 arg max V (ti ; p
j p ; p ) + V (ti ; p j p ; p )
pn

1

Again, one can easily verify that the equilibrium policies of periods 2; : : : ; n coincide
with the median’s plan to keep these policies unchanged: pnm =
= p2m = p1 .
1
We can now see how the median sets p : lifetime perceived utility at period 1 is
V (tm ; p1 j p0 ) + (1
)V (tm ; p2m j p1 )) + V (tm ; p2m j p0 ) + (n 2)V (tm ; p2m j p1 ).
Recall that the equilibrium policy at time 2 is p2m = T (p1 ; p0 ). Then we can re-write
33

perceived utility as V (tm ; p1 j p0 ) + (1
)V (tm ; T (p1 ; p0 ) j p1 ) + V (tm ; T (p1 ; p0 ) j
0
1 0
1
p ) + (n 2)V (tm ; T (p ; p ) j p ). After some algebraic manipulation, we obtain:
8
nB(tm ; p1 ) nC(tm ; p1 )
[C(tm ; p1 ) C(tm ; p0 )]
>
>
>
>
(1
) [C(tm ; T (p1 ; p0 )) C(tm ; p1 )]
>
>
>
>
[C(tm ; T (p1 ; p0 )) C(tm ; p0 )]
<

>
>
nB(tm ; p1 ) nC(tm ; p1 )
[B(tm ; p1 ) B(tm ; p0 )]
>
>
>
1
>
(1
) [B(tm ; p ) B(tm ; T (p1 ; p0 ))]
>
>
:
[B(tm ; p0 ) B(tm ; T (p1 ; p0 ))]

if
p1
and T (p1 ; p0 )

p0
p0

if
p1 < p0
and T (p1 ; p0 ) < p0

Maximizing this function w.r.t. p1 , and using the result above yields the following
@T
1 0
optimal choice path (observe that p2m = p1 implies that @p
1 (p ; p ) = 1):
8
(1+ )
if p1 > p0
< Bp (tm ; p1 ) (1 + n )Cp (tm ; p1 ) = 0
p1 = p0
if p1 = p0
p1m solves
(15)
:
(1+ )
1
1
1
0
(1 + n )Bp (tm ; p ) Cp (tm ; p ) = 0
if p < p
and p2m = ::: = pnm = p1m

(16)

This proves that the median sets the policy at the …rst period as if her perceived
)
loss aversion were (1+
, and she is not willing to change it in any subsequent period.
n
Observe that an increase in the projection bias parameter, , will increase perceived
loss aversion.
By the same argument as in the …rst part, it follows that the median’s plan above
is also the plan that the majority chooses at the …rst period.
Finally, we prove that this plan is time inconsistent: in period 2, after having
chosen p2m = p1m , the median realizes that her true utility is V (tm ; p2m j p1m ) instead
of V~ (tm ; p2m j p1m ; p0 ). Suppose that p1m > p0 ; by (15), true utility in period 2 (and
in later periods) is not maximized by p2 = p1m . This level is too low, so the median would have rather chosen a level such that Bp (tm ; p1 )
1 + n Cp (tm ; p1 ) = 0.
Thus, in period 2 there is scope to increase utility by choosing a di¤erent policy. This is the case if there exists a level of p2 > p1m which solves Bp (tm ; p2 )
1+

(1+ )
n 1

Cp (tm ; p2 ) = 0. In period 2 the median chooses the policy as if her loss

)
aversion parameter is (1+
. She is still subject to the projection bias as regards
n 1
the next period, and her residual life is n 1 periods. Moreover in period 2 she will
plan to keep the new policy unchanged for all later periods. This latter plan may
be time inconsistent as well: for the same reason, the median might be willing to
change it in period 3.
This process of plan revisions stops at period h if h is such that Bp (tm ; ph 1 )

1+

n (h 1)

Cp (tm ; p2 ) > 0 and Bp (tm ; ph )
34

1+

(1+ )
n h

Cp (tm ; p2 ) < 0. In words,

the policy chosen in period h 1 is ex post suboptimal, but in period h, because of
loss aversion and too short residual life, there is no incentive to change it. QED
b
Proof. Proposition 6 Recall that p = q(p + g ) + (1 q)(p
) is the expected
outcome of the risky plan, and assume E( ) = 0.
i) In case of large scale risk, the concavity of B( ) implies that for any i ad any p
it holds E [V (ti ; p; )] < V (ti ; p): all voters prefer the risk-free plan with the same
expected outcome. Moreover, by the concavity of B( ), between two risky plan all
voters prefer the less risky one; i.e., the plan which is second-order stochastically
dominant.
ii) Small-scale risk implies that V (ti ; p; ) is substantially linear in p (cf. Rabin’s
Calibration theorem), so voters are risk-neutral. Thus irrespective of risk, all voters
are indi¤erent between two policy plans with the same mean, while they always
prefer the plan with the highest expected outcome.
iii) The optimality condition which pins down voter i’s most preferred policy is:
E [Bp (p; )] = Cp (ti ; p). If Bp (p; ) is convex in p then for any p, E [Bp (p; )] > Bp (p).
This implies that the optimality condition is satis…ed for a higher value of p: all
voters prefer more p when the policy is risky.
iv) For any probability distribution of (i.e., for any q), by implicit di¤erentiating
the optimality condition above, it follows that voter i’s most preferred policy is
decreasing in ti . Thus the decisive voter is the median. QED

Proof. Proposition 7
i) Let tu ; t^u be the set of types that want the status quo when there is uncertainty.
As above, t; t^ is the set of types that want the status quo when there is no uncertainty. We have to show that t < tu and t^u < t^.
Voter i’s experienced indirect utility when there is uncertainty and the reference
point is the status quo is the following
8
E [V (ti ; p; )]
C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS )
if
p pS + b
>
>
>
>
E [V (ti ; p; )]
C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS )
<
if pS < p < pS + b
S
b
(1 q) B(pS ) B(p
)
E V (ti ; p; j p ) =
>
b
g
>
E [V (ti ; p; )]
(1 q) B(pS ) B(p
)
if pS
< p pS
>
>
:
g
E [V (ti ; p; )]
B(pS ) E [B(p; )]
if
p pS
(17)
In this function, E [V (ti ; p; )] is the expected utility without loss aversion (cf. equation 10). The additional terms weighed by capture loss aversion.
As pointed out earlier, t solves Bp (pS ) Cp (t; pS )
Cp (t; pS ) = 0, and t^ solves
Bp (pS ) Cp (t; pS ) + Bp (pS ) = 0. Similarly, tu solves E[Bp (pS ; )] Cp (t; pS )
b
Cp (t; pS ) + (1 q)Bp (pS
) = 0, and t^u solves E[Bp (pS ; )] Cp (t; pS ) + (1
b
q)Bp (pS
) = 0. Recall that Cp (t; pS ) is increasing in t. Since E[Bp (pS ; )] =
35

Bp (pS ), then t < tu and t^u < t^.
Observe that E(Bp (pS ; )) = Bp (pS ) is only a su¢ cient condition: in fact, we have
that t < tu and t^u < t^ as long as E(Bp (pS ; )) is not too di¤erent from Bp (pS ).
ii-iii) Take a type ti 2 t^u ; t^ . Without uncertainty, since ti < t^ then (1+ )Bp (ti ; pS )
Cp (ti ; pS ) > 0, and Bp (pS ) (1 + )Cp (ti ; pS ) < 0: she prefers the status quo. Under
b
uncertainty, since ti > t^u then E[Bp (pS ; )] Cp (ti ; pS ) + (1 q)B(pS
) < 0,
S
S
S
b
and E[Bp (p ; )] (1 + )Cp (ti ; p ) + (1 q)B(p
) < 0. Thus when there is
uncertainty this high type ti wants lower the policy w.r.t. the status quo. Similarly,
it is possible to prove that, under uncertainty, all types in t; tu want a policy that
is higher than the status quo.
iv) The proof consists in showing that the pi which maximizes (17) is weakly decreasing in t. This proof parallels the proof of Proposition 6.iv) above. Therefore,
we omit it. QED
Proof. Proposition 8 The …rst part of the Proposition follows from the concavity
of V (ti ; p; j pS ), which implies second-order risk aversion. By (17) and (10),
E V (ti ; p; j pS )
E [V (ti ; p; )], with strict inequality if p 6= pS . This implies
that, compared to risk averse voters, loss averse voters always demand a higher risk
premium to pass a plan. QED

8.2

Loss Aversion with Lump Sum Transfers

As in Meltzer and Richard (1981), the policy consists in a lump-sum transfer …nanced
by a proportional income tax. Individuals are heterogeneous in labor productivity
(xi ). The distribution of xi is common knowledge, and its average is normalized to
one: x = 1. Individuals are risk neutral and draw utility from consumption and
disutility from labor. Their utility is:
vi = ci

U (li )

where c is consumption, l is labor, and U ( ) is an increasing and convex function
with U (0) = 0. Labor is the only factor of production. The government can levy a
linear income tax and provide a non-negative lump sum transfer r. The budget
constraint of individual i is:
ci = xi li (1

)+r

The balanced public budget constraint is (the population size is one):
L=r

36

where L is total labor supply (and income). Individual labor choice is:
li 2 arg max xi li (1

)+r

U (li )

li

The individual optimality condition,
xi (1

U 0 (li ) = 0

)

yields individual labor supply:
li = U 0 1 (xi (1

))

Since U 0 1 ( ) is an increasing function, individual (and total) labor supply increases
in productivity and decreases in taxes.
Using the government budget constraint, the individual policy preference function (recall that x = 1) is:
Vi ( ) = li xi (1

)+ L ( )

U (li )

where L ( ) is the equilibrium total labor supply function. Recall that yi = li xi
and y = L ( ). Then,
yi
xi
Applying the envelop theorem, and maximizing, yields the optimality condition
(Meltzer and Richard, 1981, eq. (13), p. 920), which pins down the individuals’
bliss points:
@y
y+
yi 0
@
Bliss points are interior only for individuals whose labor productivity is lower than
the average, xi < 1 ! yi < y. All the other types want zero tax.
Let us now apply loss aversion. We assume that an individual brackets taxes
and transfers separately: i.e., she perceives the monetary amount of taxes that she
pays separately with respect to the amount of transfers that she receives. This is
consistent with the extensive literature and familiar observation that people treat
out-of-pocket expenses (taxes, in this case) di¤erently than opportunity costs (transfers, in this case). Let S be the status quo tax rate. By loss aversion, the indirect
utility is computed relative to the status quo, and losses are overweighed. Thus for
individuals who enjoy positive net transfers, it becomes:27
8
S
S S
yi (1
) yiS (1
) (1 + ) + y
y
>
S
>
if
>
yiS
yi
<
)
+
U
(
)
U
(
xi
xi
V ( ; yi j S ) =
S S
y
(1
)
y
(1 i S ) + y
y (1 + )
i
i
>
h
>
S
>
if
< S
yi
yi
:
U ( ) U ( ) (1 + )
Vi ( ) = yi (1

xi

27

Of course we constraint
curve.

and

)+ y

U

xi

S

to be lower than the tax rate that maximizes the La¤er

37

where yiS and y S are the status quo individual and total income, respectively. The
…rst line says that, by loss aversion, the voter overweighs the reduction of personal
income (a loss) when she decides for a tax increase. The second line says that she
overweighs the loss of transfers, and the increased disutility from labor, if the tax
rate decreases. By the envelope theorem, the optimality condition is then
(
S
y + @@ y yi (1 + ) R 0
if
@V
( ; yi j S ) =
@
if
< S
y + @@ y (1 + ) yi R 0
Starting from this point, all results of the model with public good provisions (in the
text) also hold in this model of lump sum redistribution.

8.3

Stochastic reference point

How do voters choose the policy when the environment is uncertain and they expect
risk? Voters are acclimatized to the stochastic environment, eventually because there
is no alternative risk-free policy plan. If the policy is the status quo, they expect to
b
enjoy either B(pS + g ) or B(pS
). The reference policy is stochastic: pS + g
b
with probability q, and pS
with probability (1 q).
Proposition 7 says that risk leads some voters to ask for more policy as a way to
mitigate the sense of loss that occurs in the bad state. Risk also implies that some
high types ask for less policy because there is the chance of a good state. However,
the anticipation of a bad outcome implies that, when the bad outcome occurs, voters
feel a lower sense of loss. This leads some low types to demand pS instead of a higher
policy. Vice versa, the anticipation of a good outcome implies that, when the bad
outcome occurs, the latter looms larger. This leads some high types to stick with pS
instead of asking for a lower level of p. In sum, when risk is anticipated both these
incentives are weaker. Thus, voters are less willing to deviate from the status quo.
Hence, we can state the following:
Proposition 9 When loss averse voters expect risk, the status quo bias is stronger
compared to unexpected risk.
Proof. All agents expect risk. If they choose the reference policy, pS , the outcome
b
is either pS + g with probability q, or pS
with probability (1 q).

38

Voter i’s experienced indirect utility, E V (ti ; p; j pS ) in this case is
8
E [V (ti ; p; )]
>
>
if p pS + b + g
>
S
>
C(t
;
p)
C(t
;
p
)
>
i
i
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
E [V (ti ; p; )]
>
>
if pS < p < pS + b +
>
>
C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS )
q(1 q)M
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:

E [V (ti ; p; )]
[q L + q(1 q)M + (1
2

2

[q L + q(1

if pS

q)2 Q]

E [V (ti ; p; )]
q)M + (1 q)qN + (1

q)2 Q]

g

b

pS

if p

<p

g

g

pS

b

(18)
b
with L = L(p; ) B(p + ) B(p + ); M = M (p; ) B(p + ) B(p
);
S
b
g
S
b
b
N = N (p; ) B(p
) B(p + ); Q = Q(p; ) B(p
) B(p
).
The rationale of E V (ti ; p; j pS ) above is the following:
S

g

g

S

g

L is the loss of bene…ts experienced when the agent expects the good state and
the good state actually occurs. This loss occurs with probability q 2 , and only
when she chooses p pS ;
M is the loss of bene…ts experienced when the agent expects the good state, but
the bad state actually occurs, so that bene…ts are lower than B(pS + g ). This
loss occurs with probability q(1 q), and only when she chooses p < pS + b + g ;
N is the loss of bene…ts experienced when the agent expects the bad state, but
b
the good state occurs; however bene…ts are lower than B(pS
). This loss
S
g
b
occurs with probability q(1 q), and only if she chooses p p
;
Q is the loss of bene…ts experienced when the agent expects the bad state, and
b
the bad state occurs; however bene…ts are lower than B(pS
). This loss
2
occurs with probability (1 q) , and only when she chooses p pS .
- when the agent chooses p > pS , the cost is higher than the status quo; the
usual experienced loss for higher cost is C(ti ; p) C(ti ; pS ).
Let tus ; t^us be the set of types that want the status quo when there is uncertainty and the reference policy is stochastic. This interval is di¤erent when the
reference policy is stochastic. Speci…cally, in order to prove this Proposition we
have to show that tus < tu and t^us > t^us where tu and t^u are de…ned in the proof of
Proposition 7. This implies that more people want to keep the status quo when the
reference policy is stochastic.
39

Consider tus : it solves E[Bp (pS ; )] Cp (t; pS )
Cp (t; pS )
q(1 q)Mp (pS ; ) =
S
S
b
0. Since Mp (p ; ) = Bp (p
), and since q(1 q) < (1 q), then it is easily
proved that tus < tu . Now consider t^us : it is implicitly de…ned by E[Bp (pS ; )]
Cp (t; pS )
q 2 Lq (pS ; )
q(1 q)Mp (pS ; )
(1 q)2 Qq (pS ; ) = 0, with Lq (pS ; ) =
S
g
S
S
b
Bp (p + ), and Qq (p ; ) = Bp (p
). By simple algebraic manipulation,
S
S
2
b
Lq (p ; )
q(1 q)Mp (p ; )
(1 q) Qq (pS ; ) > (1 q)Bp (pS
).
u
S
^
Recall by the proof of Proposition 7 that t solves E[Bp (p ; )] Cp (t; pS )+ (1
b
q)Bp (pS
) = 0. Thus, for any t, the LHS of the latter equation is always smaller
than the LHS of the equation above which de…nes t^us . Therefore, t^us > t^u . QED

40

