NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW INCREASING MEDICAL ACCESS TO OPIOIDS CONTRIBUTES TO THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE PART D
David Powell
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
Erin Taylor
Working Paper 21072
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21072

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

Previously circulated as "Does Prescription Drug Coverage Increase Opioid Abuse? Evidence
from Medicare Part D." This paper was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Drug
Abuse to the RAND Corporation (R01DA032693; PI: Rosalie Liccardo Pacula). We are grateful
for helpful comments from Abby Alpert, Chris Ruhm, seminar participants at USC, the 2014
Conference of the American Society for Health Economists, and the Southern California
Conference in Applied Microeconomics. We received especially valuable suggestions from our
discussants Marisa Domino and Mireille Jacobson. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by David Powell, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Erin Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Increasing Medical Access to Opioids Contributes to the Opioid Epidemic: Evidence
from Medicare Part D
David Powell, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Erin Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 21072
April 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. I13,I18,K42
ABSTRACT
Drug overdoses involving opioid analgesics have increased dramatically since 1999, representing
one of the United States’ top public health crises. Opioids have legitimate medical functions, but
improving access may increase abuse rates even among those not prescribed the drugs given that
opioids are frequently diverted to nonmedical use. We have little evidence about the causal
relationship between increased medical access to opioids and spillovers resulting in abuse. We
use the introduction of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Program (Part D) as a large and
differential shock to the geographic supply of opioids. We compare growth in opioid supply and
abuse rates in states with large 65+ population shares to states with smaller elderly population
shares with a focus on abuse among the Medicare-ineligible population. Part D increased opioid
utilization for the 65+ population, and we show that this increase in utilization led to significant
growth in the overall supply of opioids in high elderly share states relative to low elderly share
states. This relative expansion in opioid supply resulted in an escalation in opioid-related
substance abuse treatment admissions and opioid-related mortality among the Medicare-ineligible
population, implying meaningful spillovers to individuals who did not experience any change in
prescription drug benefits. The evidence suggests that increased opioid supply is associated with
economically-important levels of diversion for nonmedical purposes. Our estimates imply that a
10% increase in medical opioid distribution leads to a 7.4% increase in opioid-related deaths and
a 14.1% increase in substance abuse treatment admission rates for the Medicare-ineligible
population.
David Powell
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
powelld@nber.org
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
pacula@rand.org

Erin Taylor
RAND Corporation
1776 Main St
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Erin_Taylor@rand.org

1. Introduction
Drug overdose deaths have risen steadily for the past two decades, and by 2009 they
became the leading cause of preventable death from injuries in the United States, exceeding
deaths from motor vehicle accidents (CDC, 2012; CDC, 2015). Deaths from prescription opioids
have been the dominant driver of this epidemic. In 2014, prescription opioids were involved in
18,893 overdose deaths, more than heroin and cocaine combined and more than quadrupling the
number of opioid overdoses in 2000 (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2015). The current level
of opioid misuse is a “public health crisis” (Kolodny et al., 2015) and the CDC lists it in the top
five public health challenges (CDC, 2013) while noting that it is the “fastest growing drug
problem in the United States” (CDC, 2012) and “the worst overdose epidemic in [U.S.] history”
(Paulozzi, 2010).
While there are clear concurrent national trends in overdoses and increased medical
distribution of opioids since 1999 (e.g., Bohnert et al., 2011) as well as geospatial correlations
(Paulozzi and Ryan, 2006), there is little empirical evidence of the causal relationship between
increasing medical access to opioids and spillovers resulting in nonmedical opioid abuse. In fact,
there is little economic evidence concerning the underlying causes of the opioid epidemic more
generally. Understanding the externalities associated with access to medical care is fundamental
to optimal policy design when considering improving access to specific treatments or drugs.
Unlike many drugs associated with overdose deaths and other harms, opioids remain an
important medical tool which, in certain cases, are even believed to be underprescribed.1 Opioid
therapy is an effective tool for acute pain management, although the efficacy of opioids for
chronic non-cancer pain is limited (Dowell, Haegerich, and Chou, 2016). These drugs have
legitimate medical functions, and yet, they are also highly-addictive, prone to abuse, and
frequently diverted from their intended medical use. Consequently, expansions in health
insurance which increase medical access to these prescribed pharmaceuticals for a specific
population may have detrimental consequences on the broader population through non-medical
spillovers.

Greco et al. (2014) provides evidence that undertreatment of pain through opioid therapy is frequent for patients
with cancer. Chaparro et al. (2014) finds systematic evidence in the literature of the efficacy of short-term opioid
therapy.
1

2

Little is known about the broader non-medical spillovers of increasing access to opioids
and the role of these spillovers in the rising opioid epidemic. What is known is that two-thirds of
people who report nonmedical use of prescription pain relievers get them from a friend or
relative (SAMHSA, 2015). Recent guidelines from the CDC regarding prescribing opioids to
chronic pain patients (CDC, 2016; Dowell, Haegerich, and Chou, 2016) may be effective at
reducing the risk of abuse among these patients, but it will do less to influence abuse rates if
spillovers are the primary driver of recent trends.
The economics literature has studied the abuse of illegal drugs (Becker, Grossman and
Murphy, 1991; Grossman and Chaloupka, 1998; Jacobson, 2004), shocks to the supply of illegal
drugs (Dobkin and Nicosia, 2009; Galenianos, Pacula, and Persico, 2012), and misuse of legal
drugs (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009; Chaloupka, 1991; Manning et al., 1989). There is
surprisingly little work on negative spillovers associated with increasing medical access to
prescription drugs despite considerable evidence of a positive association between opioid
prescribing and opioid abuse (Dart et al., 2016; Bohnert et al., 2011). The economics literature
has also provided little evidence about the causal mechanisms underlying the opioid epidemic.
This paper studies the interaction of medical drug markets with illegal drug use. This
interaction is an important challenge for the opioid epidemic since, unlike illegal drug markets
for drugs such as cocaine and heroin, reduced supply is not a clear policy goal given the
legitimate medical benefits of pain relievers. A full welfare analysis of increasing access to
addictive opioids must account for the potential benefits and harms to the patient as well as the
broader externalities to the general population. The latter is the focus of this paper.
A primary motivation for this paper is identifying a causal link between medical access to
prescription opioids and spillovers resulting in opioid abuse. We exploit large and differential
geographic changes in opioid supply caused by an insurance expansion targeting a segment of
the population with differential concentrations across the country. These changes in opioid
supply are large and mimic the national growth in opioid access. Identification originates from a
significant insurance expansion in January 2006, with the implementation of the Medicare
Prescription Drug Benefit Program (“Part D”), which provides voluntary outpatient prescription
drug coverage to millions of Medicare beneficiaries. Safran et al. (2005) estimated that
approximately 25% of Medicare beneficiaries did not have any prescription drug coverage prior
to 2006. Several studies have shown that passage of Medicare Part D increased access and
3

utilization of prescription drugs among the elderly (Duggan and Morton, 2010, 2011; Zhang et
al., 2009; Ketcham and Simon, 2008).
At a more aggregate level, this expansion differentially affected states based on the
proportion of the population eligible for Medicare. States with a relatively large fraction of
individuals gaining prescription drug coverage due to Part D experienced a relative increase in
opioid supply (i.e., opioids distributed to the state). This has the potential to affect the Medicareineligible population if a primary access point is either elderly relatives/friends with multiple
concurrent opioid prescriptions or diverted opioids from medical facilities, pain clinics, and
pharmacies that care for elderly patients. While the elderly have a relatively modest rate of
unintentional opioid overdose deaths (Paulozzi et al., 2011), they are the legitimate medical users
of more opioid prescriptions than any other age group (Volkow et al., 2011). Moreover,
multiple opioid prescriptions from several providers at the same time – suggesting a high
potential for diversion – is fairly common among the Medicare population (Jena et al., 2014).
In this paper, we exploit the differential effects of the implementation of Part D on states
based on cross-sectional pre-Part D variation in elderly shares. This approach permits us to
account for national effects associated with Part D and other secular trends while also controlling
for fixed differences across states. Drawing on evidence presented below that states with higher
elderly shares have higher Part D enrollment and enrollment in Part D increased the amount of
opioids prescribed to individuals 65 years and older, we study whether the overall supply of
opioids increased disproportionately in high elderly share states, which we define using the 2003
percent elderly. Once we establish that the distribution of opioids (from producers) is higher to
states with a higher elderly share post-adoption of Medicare Part D, we then examine whether
this differential increase in opioid supply led to disparate growth in opioid abuse rates as
measured by overdose deaths and using a complementary measure of substance abuse
prevalence. While Part D also potentially affected prescription drug access for the Social
Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) population, we show that our results are not driven by any
systematic behavioral changes among individuals under 65 covered by Medicare.
This paper makes two primary contributions. First, this paper provides, to our
knowledge, the first causal evidence that increasing prescription opioid access increases
substance abuse and mortality for populations not gaining direct medical access. While
increased medical access to opioids is often blamed for the opioid epidemic, it has been difficult
4

to isolate the effect of increased access (due to affordability) from other concurrent health care
market factors (such as increased incidence due to a rise in diagnoses of musculoskeletal
conditions). It is challenging to experimentally replicate the dramatic expansion in access to
opioids or disentangle the historical time series increase from other national trends. We exploit a
large and geographically-varying increase in opioid access to mimic the national expansion.
This approach provides a useful and rare opportunity to observe the consequences over time of a
large and (conditionally) exogenous increase in opioid access.
Second, a large literature discusses the ramifications of Medicare Part D on the 65+
population but there is limited evidence of its effects on the under-65 population. This paper
provides evidence that Part D had important spillovers on the health of the population not
covered by the program.
This evidence is especially timely given the ongoing numerous insurance expansions as
part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and provides insight regarding the
possible contribution of previous insurance expansions, such as the Massachusetts Health Care
Reform and state Medicaid expansions. Health insurance expansions may affect opioid abuse
through several different and potentially off-setting channels. Health insurance increases
medical care utilization (Manning et al., 1988), which could lead to more prescriptions of pain
relievers for new conditions diagnosed. Alternatively, health insurance could improve access to
substance abuse treatments, particularly if such treatments are included as a benefit, which may
independently alter abuse-related outcomes. A key advantage of studying Medicare Part D is
that it only altered prescription drug access, not medical care utilization directly (especially for
the Medicare-ineligible population), allowing us to isolate the effects of opioid supply from
changes in substance abuse treatment access and other factors.
States with relatively large elderly shares experienced faster growth in opioid access due
to the implementation of Medicare Part D. Our approach allows us to study general equilibrium
spillovers at the state level resulting from this supply shock. Since we are not using individuallevel variation in Part D eligibility, we are not studying how individual medical access to opioids
puts individuals at risk of long-term opioid addiction. Instead, we use geographic-level variation,
comparing people in areas experiencing larger prescription drug expansions to those incurring
smaller expansions, isolating the consequences of broader opioid medical access on the general
population.
5

We find a strong positive relationship between elderly share and the growth in
prescription opioids distributed at the state level. Having established that 2003 elderly share
predicts growth in opioid access, we estimate difference-in-differences and event history models
to assess the differential impact of Part D on opioid substance abuse treatment admissions and
overdose deaths. We find significant effects on both outcomes and there is no evidence of
differential pre-existing trends. Our estimates imply that a 10% increase in medical access to
opioids leads to a 7.4% increase in opioid-related mortality and a 14.1% increase in substance
abuse treatment admissions. We provide evidence that these results are not due to individuals
gaining prescription drug access through SSDI, systematic state-level health insurance
expansions, or concurrent demand-side shocks for opioids. We also consider a wide range of
alternative causal pathways and provide evidence that Part D increased opioid abuse among the
under-65, non-SSDI population through diversion. Our evidence suggests that 73% of the
dramatic growth in opioid-related overdose deaths between 2000 and 2011 can be attributed to
spillovers resulting from increased medical access.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide background on
Medicare Part D and detail the data that we use to estimate our models. Section 3 describes our
empirical approach. We present results in Section 4. We close in Section 5 with a summary of
our main findings and the policy implications.

2. Background
2.1 Medicare Part D
On December 8, 2003, President George W. Bush signed the Medicare Modernization Act
(MMA), which created Medicare Part D. Part D was implemented in 2006 and provided
voluntary coverage of prescription drugs for those eligible for Medicare. The introduction of
Part D was the largest expansion to Medicare since its creation and in 2015, accounted for $89.8
billion in expenditures.2 Part D substantially reduced the out-of-pocket price of prescription
drugs, and empirical evidence has found that these reduced prices increased use of prescription
drugs among the 65+ population.

2

The 2016 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary
Medicare Insurance Trust Funds: https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trendsand-Reports/ReportsTrustFunds/downloads/tr2016.pdf (accessed August 27, 2016)

6

A large literature has studied the ramifications of Part D on prescription drug utilization
(e.g., Ketcham and Simon, 2008; Zhang et al. 2009) and drug prices (e.g., Duggan and Morton,
2010) as well as effects on nondrug medical care utilization (McWilliams et al., 2011). Related
work has examined plan choices among enrollees (e.g., Abaluck and Gruber, 2011; Ketcham et
al., 2012). Most of this research focuses on the targeted population. There is far less work
considering spillovers to the Medicare-ineligible population, which are potentially important
given the large size of the program.3
Medicare Part D represents a substantial national change in prescription drug access for
those with insurance through Medicare. We exploit the magnitude of this change and the
differential effects that it had across the country while accounting for the national, uniform
effects of Part D.
2.2 Data
Our empirical strategy is designed to estimate the spillovers from Part D so we primarily
focus on the under-65 population when studying our opioid abuse measures. We will also
present results for the 65+ population. Given the source of variation that we exploit, our
estimates for this group still reflect the effect of spillovers from Part D, not the direct effect of
increased individual access to prescription drugs. We discuss the sources for our data in detail in
this section.
2.2.1 Opioid Distribution
Information regarding the supply of prescribed opioids within the state is captured in the
Drug Enforcement Administration’s (DEA) Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders
System (ARCOS). The Controlled Substance Act of 1970 requires all manufacturers and
distributors to report their transactions and deliveries of all Scheduled II-V substances to the
Attorney General. ARCOS is the system that monitors and records the flows of these controlled
substances as they move from manufacturers to retail distributors at the local level (down to the
street address and zip code, although this level of disaggregation is not made publicly available).
Thus, ARCOS can be used to identify the distribution of specific opioid medications that are
prescribed for medicinal purposes. We construct a measure of the seven most commonly abused
One exception is Alpert et al. (2015) which shows that Part D increased direct-to-consumer drug advertising
(DTCA). The rise in DTCA increased prescription drug utilization in several chronic drug classes among the
population ages 40-60. Given that opioids are rarely advertised, DTCA is not a potential driving mechanism to
explain our results.
3

7

opioid analgesics (Paulozzi et al., 2011; Paulozzi and Ryan, 2006): fentanyl, hydrocodone,
hydromorphone, meperidine, methadone, morphine, and oxycodone (including OxyContin).4
Following prior work, we convert the total grams distributed per capita into morphine equivalent
doses drawing on standard multipliers used by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS).5 These were aggregated by state and year for the 2000-2011 time period.
2.2.2 Mortality
Information on opioid overdose deaths comes from the National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS), a census of deaths in the United States. We code deaths as related to prescription
opioid pain relievers using the ICD-10 external cause of injury codes (X40-X44, X60-64, X85,
or Y10-Y14) and drug identification codes (T40.2-T40.4), which indicate death by any opioid
analgesic. This coding follows the CDC classification system of deaths related to prescription
opioids.
We aggregate the data based on state of occurrence and year. Our primary results will
focus on ages 0-64, but we will also present estimates for smaller age groups and the 65+
population. We have data for 1999-2013 and use the full data set when presenting figures and
estimating event studies while relying on the 2000-2011 sample for our main results.
2.2.3 Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions
For complementary evidence, we use the Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS) to study
substance abuse treatment admissions. The TEDS is collected annually by state substance abuse
agencies at the request of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration
(SAMHSA). The data contain the majority of all publicly funded substance abuse treatment
admissions that occur within the United States, as all facilities that receive any government
funding (federal block grant funding, state treatment dollars, or even insurance dollars from
Medicaid, Medicare, or Tricare) are required to provide basic information. Private facilities that
only treat non-publicly insured individuals and that receive no federal or state grant monies are
the only facilities that are supposed to be excluded. However, states differ in the scope of
facilities covered due to differences in agencies responsible for licensing, certification and
accreditation, and disbursement of public funds for treatment. Moreover, the scope of
4

Our results are not meaningfully changed if we include other opioids (e.g., codeine) since the seven types listed
above dominate (in terms of use and strength) the other possible opioids that could be included in this metric.
5
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/Downloads/OpioidMorphine-EQ-Conversion-Factors-March-2015.pdf (last accessed April 8, 2016)

8

admissions captured by those facilities that do report to TEDS also varies across states, as some
states only report admissions for clients that were treated with public funds while others report
all admissions from within the facility (SAMHSA, 2013).
These exclusions are unlikely to cause problems for our empirical strategy for two
reasons. First, all our specifications include state fixed effects which will account for persistent
differences in state reporting over time. Second, our source of identification (the interaction of
2003 elderly share and the introduction of Part D) is unlikely to be correlated with changes in the
share of unobserved facilities missed by TEDS or changes in which admissions get reported at
the state level. Instead, our strategy is problematic only if state changes in “unobserved
facilities” or “admissions reported” are correlated with 2003 elderly share (and these systematic
changes coincided with Part D). In our analyses, we will test this assumption by removing
particularly problematic reporting states. We find little difference in the results whether we use
the full sample or a smaller sample in which we are more confident of consistent reporting
behavior. There is also no evidence that treatment admissions for other substances (e.g., heroin)
differentially increased in high elderly share areas due to Part D, suggesting that differential
reporting is not an issue.
The unit of observation in the TEDS is an admission, and information is retained on the
primary, secondary, and tertiary substances reported at the time of the admission, as well as
client demographics, expected source of payment, treatment setting, and treatment
characteristics. We use aggregated annual case-level data on admissions for the period 19922012. Our main analysis will use the 2000-2011 time period to narrow the time period closer to
the implementation of Part D date and to remain consistent across all data sources, though we
will also present event studies and figures that use data from all available years.
We include two substance categories in our metric of opioid abuse: “non-prescription
methadone” and “other opiates and synthetics.” The latter category includes “buprenorphine,
codeine, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, meperidine, morphine, opium, oxycodone, pentazocine,
propoxyphene, tramadol, and any other drug with morphine-like effects.” We include all
admissions in which one of these drugs is included as primary, secondary, or tertiary substances.6

6

Our results do not change meaningfully if we only count primary substances or if we exclude non-prescription
methadone treatments.

9

TEDS provides age in broad categories: 12-15, 15-17, 18-20, 21-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39,
40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55+. Consequently, to study the impact of Part D on under-65 age groups,
we rely on analyses of the 12-54 age group. We will also show results for smaller age groups as
well as the 55+ group. TEDS includes information on source of insurance, so we are able to take
out any non-elderly with Medicare insurance (i.e., the SSDI population) and test the sensitivity
of our results to including this group. Overall, the TEDS provides a useful, complementary
measure to study opioid abuse that may not be captured by the overdose rate.
2.2.4 Other Variables
We study changes in opioid abuse as a function of the percentage of the state population
ages 65+ in 2003. We choose 2003 because Medicare Part D was signed into law at the end of
that year, and hence 2003 is likely free of any possible anticipation effects (see Alpert, 2016).
We will show that our results are not sensitive to the choice of 2003 as a baseline. We use
population data from the Census to construct our population variables. We will also show
specifications including the state unemployment rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the
private health insurance rate from the Current Population Survey.
In analyses using our full set of controls, we also control for the adoption of prescription
drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) at the state level. Prescription drug monitoring programs
are recommended by the CDC and ONDCP as a useful strategy for combatting prescription drug
misuse and harms. The research evaluating these programs, however, is quite inconclusive in
terms of their impact on opioid prescribing and related harms (Patrick et al., 2016; Bao et al.,
2016; Maughan et al., 2015; Paulozzi and Stier, 2010). Nonetheless, there has been significant
growth in the adoption of PDMP programs across states during our sample period. Following
Patrick et al. (2016), we include measures of whether a state has an operational PDMP as well as
three specific dimensions of PDMPs that have been found previously to possibly deter improper
prescription drug misuse: (1) whether the PDMP requires real-time reporting and hence makes
information known about prescriptions available to physicians and pharmacists in a timely
fashion, (2) whether physicians are mandated to participate in the PDMP (as opposed to the law

10

only applying to pharmacies), and (3) whether the state PDMP monitors drugs on four or more of
the state’s controlled substance schedule guidelines.7
2.2.5 Descriptive Statistics
We include means for our outcomes and other variables in Table I. The percent elderly
in 2003 was 12.6% with a state-level standard deviation of 1.9%. This percent ranges from 6.2%
in Alaska and 8.5% in Utah to 15.4% in West Virginia and 17.0% in Florida, representing a
significant amount of variation in the Medicare-eligible population across states. The geographic
distribution of the percent elderly is shown in Appendix Figure A.1.
There was substantial growth in our opioid measures, as shown in Figure I, throughout
our entire analysis period. Distribution of opioid analgesics grew during this period, rising 118%
from 2000 to 2005 and then again another 89% between 2005 and 2010. Opioid overdose
deaths also show a significant rise during this time period, more than doubling from 2000 to
2005 followed by a 46% rise from 2005 to 2010. Substance abuse treatment admissions also
more than doubled between 2000 and 2005 and then doubled again from 2005 to 2010.
There appears to be a greater rise in opioid prescriptions and opioid deaths in the period
preceding the implementation of Medicare Part D than in the period following Medicare Part D.
Baseline differences account for much of this, but it is also possible that some state- and
national-level policies intended to curb opioid abuse have also altered these trends.
Consequently, it is important to account for time fixed effects while employing an empirical
strategy which exploits differential geographic shocks to opioid access.

3. Empirical Framework
Medicare Part D was implemented as a national program in 2006, but states were affected
differentially based on the fraction of their population eligible for Medicare benefits. While
there are multiple ways for individuals to become eligible for Medicare, we use cross-state

7

Like the Federal government, each state has developed their own guidelines for scheduling controlled substances to
help facilitate sentencing decisions related to drug offenders, which are mostly tried in state courts. Most states
follow the Federal Controlled Substance Act (CSA) (21 U.S.C. 811 et seq.) in their adoption of a five-tier
classification system, with those placed on the top most tier (e.g. Schedule I) indicating greatest potential for abuse
and little or no medical use, and those on the lowest tier (e.g. Schedule V) representing substances with low
potential for abuse and clear therapeutic benefits. However, states have taken different approaches in the placement
of particular drugs in specific tiers (see Chriqui et al., 2002 for more about state scheduling). A PDMP that monitors
drugs in multiple tiers has the greatest chance of capturing a range of overprescribing of opioids that can fall into
low and high classifications.

11

variation in the percentage of the population ages 65+ and find that this serves as a useful
predictor.8 We fix our population share variable in 2003; identification originates solely from the
introduction of Part D interacted with fixed state elderly shares. This strategy allows us to nonparametrically control for the independent effects of Part D (through year fixed effects) and fixed
elderly share (through state fixed effects). We do not use a time-varying elderly share measure
in the interaction term because there may be systematic migration that is correlated with opioid
abuse. For example, opioid abuse may be related to local economic downturns. If declining
economic conditions cause younger people to disproportionately migrate out of the state (i.e.,
increasing the percentage of the population 65+), then this source of variation is problematic.
We use the timing of Part D and cross-sectional differences in elderly share across states
for identification. We estimate the specification
′
𝑦𝑠𝑡 = 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝑋𝑠𝑡
𝛽 + 𝛿[%𝐸𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦𝑠,2003 × 1(𝑡 ≥ 2006)]+𝜀𝑠𝑡 , (1)

where 𝑦𝑠𝑡 is a measure of opioid-related distribution, abuse, or mortality for state s in year t. X is
a vector of time-varying covariates, including a time-varying measure of elderly share. We
evaluate the robustness of our findings to the inclusion of additional controls, including the
unemployment rate, the private insurance rate, the log of population size, and the PDMP policy
variables. Our baseline specification does not include these covariates because of concerns that
some of these variables may themselves be outcomes related to opioid abuse. Our estimates are
generally consistent whether these covariates are included or not.
We are interested in the estimate of 𝛿, which represents the differential change in the
outcome experienced by states with a high elderly share relative to other states. We expect this
estimate to be positive if Part D increased opioid access and, consequently, opioid-related
substance abuse. The specification accounts for time fixed effects and fixed differences across
states.

The dually-eligible population was eligible for prescription drug coverage through Medicaid before 2006, implying
that the change in prescription drug coverage was not a one-to-one relationship with elderly share. Given that we
are using initial elderly share as a predictor of growth in opioid access, prior Medicaid coverage should not affect
our results as long as it does not completely unravel the relationship between elderly share and the change in opioid
distribution (i.e., as long as there is still a “first stage”). We empirically verify that 2003 elderly share is correlated
with changes in opioid distribution. Our 2SLS estimates will appropriately scale the relationships between opioid
access and abuse outcomes.
8

12

Elderly share is not a perfect determinant of Medicare eligibility as Part D also increased
coverage rates for the non-elderly SSDI population. We are interested in isolating the impact of
Medicare Part D on a population not directly gaining access to prescription drug coverage
through Part D, and focusing on outcomes for the non-elderly population risks our inclusion of
non-elderly SSDI participants. We focus on elderly share because the SSDI population was
likely to have prescription drug coverage even before Part D and often experienced a decrease in
generosity upon implementation of Part D.9 One would therefore not anticipate seeing gains in
access after Part D implementation due to this population. Consequently, we think that elderly
share is the more appropriate measure. We provide evidence that any relationship between
elderly share and prescription drug access through SSDI is not driving our results by making use
of additional information included in TEDS that allows us to exclude SSDI Medicare recipients
from the analysis sample.
Equation (1) assumes that any differential effect begins in 2006, the enactment year of
Medicare Part D. However, the enrollment period in 2006 lasted until May 15 and there were no
penalties for late enrollment before that date. Consequently, enrollment in Part D was delayed
relative to subsequent years and we expect that there is potentially a delayed effect in our
analyses as well. We observe some evidence of a delayed effect in our event study analyses. In
Section 4.5.2, we present estimates when 2006 is excluded from the analysis.
We focus on substance abuse measures for the under-65 population, those not directly
affected by the introduction of Part D, but we will also present results for the 65+ population as
well. Since our outcomes are rates and our variation does not originate from individual-level
variation in Part D eligibility but, instead, from cross-state variation in the proportion of the state
that is eligible for Part D, we interpret these estimates as spillovers as well. The estimates for
each age group reflect the group’s propensity to acquire and abuse diverted opioids. Given the
relative rarity of nonmedical opioid use among the elderly population, we do not expect to
observe large spillover effects for this population.
Our outcome measures will typically be specified as deaths per 100,000 people or
substance abuse treatments per 100,000. When estimating the relationship between our
9

Individuals who have received Social Security Disability benefits for 24 consecutive months (“SSDI”) receive
Medicare benefits, but many also receive benefits from Medicaid; these beneficiaries are called “dual eligible.”
Prior to Medicare Part D, these dual eligible generally received prescription drug benefits through their state
Medicaid program.

13

interaction variable and the distribution of opioids, we use the log of morphine equivalent doses
per capita.10 We weight all regressions by state population, and standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the state level.

4. Results
4.1 Part D Enrollment & Prescription Opioid Use Among the Elderly
Our empirical strategy relies on the assumption that elderly share predicts changes in state
opioid supply due to Part D implementation. We will test this assumption explicitly in the next
section but, first, we explore intermediate outcomes which would suggest that we should expect
such a relationship. One condition for elderly share to predict growth in opioid access beginning
in 2006 due to Part D is that high elderly states have higher Part D enrollment. We use Part D
enrollment data from the CMS aggregated by state and year to test for this relationship. Part D
may impact access by providing prescription drug coverage to part of the population which
would not have had any coverage otherwise or by providing more generous coverage to people
who would have had coverage even in the absence of Part D. Both of these mechanisms are
important components.
Figure A.2 in the Appendix quantifies the relationship between elderly share and the Part D
enrollment rate (Part D enrollment divided by state population). It shows coefficient estimates
from cross-sectional year-by-year regressions of the Part D enrollment rate on 2003 elderly share
between 2006 and 2011, indicating that each additional percentage point of the state population
ages 65+ predicts an additional 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points of the population enrolled in
Medicare Part D. This relationship grows over time.
A second necessary condition is that enrollment in Medicare Part D increased the amount of
opioids prescribed to individuals 65 years and older. While several papers have identified an
impact of Medicare Part D on prescription drug utilization for the 65+ population, we are not
aware of any published analyses looking specifically at the effects on opioid utilization. 11 To

10

The results are qualitatively similar if we use levels (i.e., morphine equivalent doses per capita). We primarily rely
on the log of per capita doses because this outcome is skewed.
11
Kuo et al (2016) show that 90 day opioid use among the elderly insured through Medicare Part A, B and D rose
from 4.62% in 2007 to 7.35% in 2012, while Zhou et al. (2016) show using data from the 1999-2012 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey that Medicare became the largest payer of opioid pain relievers with the implementation
of Medicare Part D. Neither of the analyses specifically demonstrates that the adoption of Medicare Part D led to an
increase in access to opioids among those who became covered.

14

verify previous findings hold for opioids specifically, we conducted our own examination of the
impact of Medicare Part D insurance on the number of opioids prescribed by comparing opioid
prescriptions filled by a group of newly Medicare insured (those 66-71 years of age) to a sample
of near elderly (those 59-64 years of age) in the 2002-2009 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
(MEPS). A complete description of this analysis is included in Appendix Section A. The main
results and numerous sensitivity analyses demonstrate that Medicare Part D decreased the out-ofpocket price of opioids substantially (by 48%) and increased the number of annual prescriptions
by 0.174 relative to the 59-64 age group (representing a 28% increase). Despite the relatively
small sample in the MEPS,12 this estimate is statistically significant. This relationship suggests
that Part D had the potential to increase the supply of opioids in states with a large elderly share.
The impact of elderly share and the introduction of Part D on the growth in state opioid supply is
an empirical question and addressed in the next section.
4.2 State-Level Increases in Opioid Distribution
With evidence that Part D decreased the price of opioids for the Medicare-eligible
population and that this price decrease led to an increase in the number of opioid prescriptions
filled at the individual level, we now turn to our main models to examine whether pre-Part D
state elderly share is associated with an increased state supply of opioids. We estimate equation
(1) using the log of the morphine equivalent doses per capita from the ARCOS data as our
outcome variable and present our estimates in Table II. We estimate that a one percentage point
increase in the 2003 elderly share is associated with additional 2.9% growth in per capita opioid
distribution, equivalent to about 0.3 morphine equivalent doses per person. This estimate is
robust to the inclusion of the unemployment rate, the private insurance rate, and the log of
population (Column (2)). In Column (3), we add controls for PDMPs and the estimated effect
grows in magnitude further. The consistency of the estimates across models is suggestive that
there is not a time-varying confounder that is biasing our estimates.
We present event study results to understand the temporal relationship between fixed
elderly share and the log of per capita opioid distribution. We estimate equation (1) but allow

The literature studying the utilization effects of Part D often uses much larger data sets, usually claims data from
pharmacies.
12

15

the 2003 % Elderly variable to have a separate effect in each year. Figure II shows the point
estimates along with 95% confidence intervals. We normalize the estimates to zero in 2003. We
observe little evidence of differential trends before 2006 and the pre-2006 estimates are never
statistically distinguishable from zero. Higher elderly share is even associated with a decline in
opioid distribution between 2004 and 2005. Beginning in 2006, we observe a steady increase in
the estimated effect until 2011. With the exceptions of 2006 (partially-treated) and 2007
(significant at 10% level), the effect is statistically significant from zero at the 5% level in each
year after implementation.
Overall, we find convincing evidence that the introduction of Medicare Part D
differentially affected the geographic supply of opioids based on elderly share. In the next
sections, we analyze harms associated with this broader opioid availability.
4.3 Opioid Abuse Results
4.3.1 Graphical Evidence
Before we proceed to regression analysis, we show trends in abuse rates graphically. We
separate states into two categories based on the fraction of the population in 2003 that is 65 years
of age or older: those that are “above median” and those that are “below median.” We predict
that states with a larger elderly share should experience larger changes in opioid distribution
abuse when Part D is implemented in 2006 if spillovers are an important driving force of opioid
abuse.
Figure III shows the differential trends in per capita non-elderly mortality and substance
abuse treatment admissions. In the left panel, we see that the trends in per capita opioid-related
mortality for those aged 0-64 in high versus low elderly share states look similar. The levels are
also similar (4.19 deaths per 100,000 in the high elderly share states in 2005; 4.32 deaths in the
low elderly share states in 2005). After the enactment of Part D and especially by 2007, the
trends diverge and we observe large increases in mortality among the high elderly share states.
We will also provide complementary evidence of abuse outcomes by studying the
differential impact of Part D on opioid-related substance abuse treatment admissions among the
non-elderly (those aged 12-54). In the right panel of Figure III, we present the trends for the
above and below median states. We only use states which report treatment admissions for every
year 1992-2012, which includes 39 states. Before 2006, the above median and below median
16

states look similar. Upon implementation of Medicare Part D, the above median states incur a
relative increase in per capita substance abuse treatments, providing further evidence of an
increase in opioid abuse in states with high elderly share resulting from Part D. The increases in
mortality and substance abuse are occurring in the population not directly gaining medical access
to prescription drugs through Part D.
Overall, the graphical evidence is consistent across data sets and outcomes. We see no
evidence of different pre-existing trends based on fixed elderly share. After the implementation
of Medicare Part D, opioid abuse rates increase in the high elderly states relative to the low
elderly states.
4.3.2 Mortality Regression Estimates
We present our estimates of the differential impact of Medicare Part D on non-elderly
opioid-related mortality in Table III. The outcome variable is opioid-related deaths per 100,000.
We estimate that each additional percentage point of the percentage elderly is associated with
0.37 additional deaths per 100,000 people after the enactment of Part D (Column (1)). This
estimate is statistically significant from zero at the 1% level. In Column (2), we add timevarying controls and find that the estimate is robust to accounting for these factors. We control
for PDMP policy variables in Column (3) and estimate that each additional percentage point of
the percentage elderly is associated with 0.36 additional deaths per 100,000 people. Again, the
consistency of the estimates across the models is suggestive that the results are not being driven
by unobserved time-varying shocks.
Table IV breaks down the relationship between Part D expansion and opioid-related
mortality by sex and age group. The results show that the effect is larger for men across all age
groups and, for both men and women, largest for the 30-39 age group. Men and women have
similar age gradients. For men, each percentage point of elderly share leads to 1.1 additional
opioid-related deaths per 100,000 people for the 30-39 age group, more than twice as large as the
aggregate effect shown in Table III. The effect is 0.5 deaths per 100,000 people for the same age
group for women. We also estimate large effects for the other age groups highlighted by Case
and Deaton (2015). The age profile appears to increase from 20-29 to 30-39, and then steadily
decline at older ages, until ages 60+ where we observe no statistically significant effects at the
5% level.

17

Trend lines presented in Figure III suggest that pre-existing trends are not driving our
mortality estimates. We perform an event study using our continuous elderly share measure and
present the results in Figure IV. We use the full available data set (1999-2013) in the event
study. Before Part D, the effect of 2003 elderly share is never statistically significant from zero
and the effect even declines immediately prior to Part D implementation. After 2006, the
estimate increases and is statistically significant from zero in 2007 and several years after. While
it is often difficult to observe mortality policy responses given that deaths are rare events, we
observe consistent evidence even when disaggregating the effects by year.
4.3.3 Opioid Abuse Treatment Admissions
Opioid mortality, while extremely important from a public health perspective, is also a
somewhat rare outcome. A more common outcome indicative of problematic use or abuse of
opioids is treatment admissions. Because some states have historically been poor at reporting
these admissions consistently over time (e.g., Washington D.C., Georgia), we restrict most of our
analyses to states that report over the entire period, though we initially show results comparing
the full sample and the balanced sample.
In Table V, we present estimates for opioid-related substance abuse treatment admissions
for ages 12-54. The outcome variable is the number of treatment admissions per 100,000. In
Column (1), we use the full sample and estimate that a one percentage point increase in the
percentage of the state population ages 65+ in 2003 increases the rate of substance abuse
treatments by 16.99 treatments per 100,000 people. As we add controls and account for PDMP
adoption, our estimate remains relatively consistent in Columns (2) and (3). In Column (4), we
select on states reporting in all years (i.e., the “balanced sample”) and estimate a similar effect.
The consistency of the estimate between Columns (3) and (4) should reduce concerns that our
estimates are driven by changes in the states reporting information to TEDS over time. As we
expected, elderly share is not correlated with changes in reporting behavior.
In Column (5), we further adjust the sample and exclude admissions which report either
“Medicare” as the primary expected payment source or state that person is “Retired/Disabled.”

18

These selection criteria appropriately exclude the SSDI population.13 The estimate is relatively
unaffected and actually increases in proportional terms since eliminating the SSDI population
reduces the mean of the outcome variable. In this more narrowly defined population we see that
a one percentage point increase in the elderly population (65+) is significantly associated with
13.42 additional substance abuse treatments per 100,000 people in the 12-54 age group.14
In Table VI, we examine this relationship across different age groups and sex, using the
available age groupings in the TEDS. We rely on the balanced sample and exclude the SSDI
population. We observe statistically significant effects throughout the age distribution, except
for the 55+ age group. As with the mortality effects, the estimates are consistently larger for
men. For both men and women, the estimates are largest for the 21-29 age group, where the
effects are three times the size of the estimated aggregate effect for ages 12-54 (Column 5 in
Table V). The point estimates steadily decrease at older ages. We find significant amounts of
heterogeneity across age groups. This heterogeneity is consistent with the age trajectory
estimated for mortality.
As shown previously in Figure III, we find little evidence of differential pre-existing
trends between below median and above median elderly share states in terms of opioid-related
mortality and substance abuse treatment admissions. We can further study whether there are preexisting trends correlated with our continuous measure of 2003 elderly share by conducting an
event study analysis for all the years of available data (1992-2012) in the TEDS. We present the
results of such an analysis in Figure V using the balanced sample and excluding the SSDI
population (results are similar using the full sample; see Appendix Figure A.3 for the equivalent
event study). We find no evidence of pre-existing trends as the estimated effect is insignificant
throughout the entire pre-period and the estimated effect actually declines between 2002 and
2004. The magnitude increases in 2006 and is statistically significant from zero in four out of
the seven years after the enactment of Part D. Although noisier than the year-by-year estimates
for opioid access presented in Figure II, the effects on substance abuse closely track the
corresponding findings for distribution. Overall, these results provide strong evidence that

13
In fact, there is some concern that we are excluding more people than we should since some of these people may
not be on SSDI. This may add noise to our estimates but should not bias the results. The consistency of the
estimates across all analysis samples suggests that our sample criteria are not problematic.
14
It is also possible in the TEDS to identify individuals referred by the criminal justice system. Our results are
similar in proportional terms if we exclude this population.

19

opioid access through insurance benefits is associated with spillover effects resulting in more
substance abuse treatment admissions among populations that do not directly benefit from the
insurance expansion.
Given our concern that reporting issues may obfuscate the useful information in the
analyses using the TEDS, we briefly summarize why we believe that the estimates in this section
reflect true changes in substance abuse. First, there is little reason to believe that elderly share
predicts changes in reporting behavior starting precisely in 2006 when we begin to observe
evidence of effects. Second, our results are consistent when we select the sample on states that
we are confident are supplying a less noisy measure of substance abuse treatments. Finally, we
have replicated Table V using per capita heroin treatments and per capita treatments (across all
substances) as the dependent variables. 15 For these outcomes, the estimates are never
statistically significant and are close to zero. If reporting issues were the driving mechanism,
then we would expect to observe effects on all types of treatments, not just opioid-related
treatments.
4.4 Parameterizing the Relationship between Opioid Supply and Abuse
In this section, we parameterize the relationship between opioid access and spillovers to
the under-65 population and the full population using 2SLS. In the first column of Table VII, we
estimate the relationship between state morphine equivalent doses (MED) per capita and the state
opioid mortality rate using OLS for ages 0-64. We find that each additional morphine equivalent
dose increases the number of deaths by 0.308 per 100,000 people ages 0-64. When we
instrument with our interaction term (%𝐸𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦𝑠,2003 × 1(𝑡 ≥ 2006)), this estimate increases
slightly to 0.333. In Column (3), we present the 2SLS estimate for the full population (including
the elderly) and estimate a coefficient of 0.271. This estimate is smaller than the Column (2)
estimate given the low abuse response of the 65+ population to additional opioid access (as
shown in Table IV), but the effect is similar in proportional terms.
In the last three columns of Table VII, we present the same specifications for substance
abuse treatment admissions as we did for opioid mortality. With OLS, we estimate that each
morphine equivalent dose is associated with 6.9 additional treatment admissions per 100,000

15

Results are available from the authors upon request.

20

people. When we estimate using 2SLS, the effect again gets larger, this time doubling in
magnitude. In the final column, when we estimate the relationship for the population ages 12+,
we find that each additional per capita morphine equivalent dose increases the substance abuse
treatments by 8.5 treatments per 100,000 people. This effect is larger in proportional terms than
the estimated effect for the 12-54 population.
In proportional terms, the estimates imply that a 10% increase in opioid supply increases
opioid-related mortality rates (for ages 0-64) by 7.4% and substance abuse treatment admission
rates (for ages 12-54) by 14.1%.16
4.5 Robustness Tests
We test the sensitivity of our results to several factors, particularly those factors that
could provide alternative explanations for these results. We consider other possible
mechanisms, such as a concurrent shock in the supply or demand for opioids, other insurance
expansions that are also occurring during this time period, and confounding trends in potentially
problematic states. We provide additional sensitivities analyses examining the robustness of our
findings to alternative methodological assumptions in Appendix Section B. Appendix Table A.4
provides Poisson estimates to test for whether estimating proportional effects (instead of level
effects) provides meaningfully different results. The estimates imply similar effects. In
Appendix Figure A.4, we vary the base year used to calculate our initial elderly share measure
and graph the estimated mortality effects for each base year. The estimates are similar regardless
of which baseline we use.
4.5.1 Concurrent Supply-Side and Demand-Side Shocks
Although heroin is a type of opioid, it is supplied in illegal markets by drug cartels, not
pharmaceutical companies. Hence, the supply of heroin should not be impacted by the
implementation of Part D. However, if our opioid mortality and treatment results are being
driven by some other concurrent confounding supply or demand shock, then it is possible that
such a shock would impact not just opioids but also the heroin market. For example, if high
elderly share states were disproportionately affected by the Great Recession and economic
downturns are associated with increases in drug abuse, then we should also observe relative rises
16

To calculate these estimates, we use the mean value in 2006-2011 for each outcome as the baseline. The mean for
per capita morphine equivalent doses during this time period is 13.0.

21

in heroin and opioid abuse. The opioid-related mortality results in Figure IV suggest that the
timing of any concurrent shock must coincide with the implementation of Part D, ruling out
confounding factors that would imply gradual increases in opioid abuse rates. To assess the
possibility that our results are being driven by some other unobserved confounder affecting
substance abuse more broadly beginning in 2006, we conduct an additional event study analysis
focusing on heroin mortality per capita. The results, presented in Figure VI, show there is little
relationship between elderly share and heroin-related mortality growth. This reduces concerns of
more abrupt (illegal) supply-side or demand-side opioid-related shocks. We also find little
evidence of any relationship with heroin-related substance abuse treatment admissions in the
TEDS.
4.5.2 Eliminating 2006
Medicare Part D was implemented at the start of 2006, but individuals were not penalized
for delaying enrollment until May 15 and we expect that there was only a partial effect in the
first year. Our event study analyses confirm this hypothesis and this partial effect should bias the
estimates toward zero. In Table VIII, Panel A, we replicate our main estimates in each data set
while excluding 2006. As expected, the magnitudes increase for all outcomes.
4.5.3 Other Insurance Expansions
We study a large prescription drug expansion and its differential effects at the state-level.
During our time period, there were also large state-level health insurance expansions. In 2006,
Massachusetts enacted a health care reform law which expanded health insurance to nearly the
entire population. In 2008, Oregon expanded its Medicaid program. These expansions are not
problematic to our empirical strategy if they are not systematically related to elderly share. We
test the sensitivity of our results to this assumption by replicating our analysis excluding
Massachusetts and Oregon (see the second panel of Table VIII). The results remain consistent
with our previous main analyses for all of the outcomes.
4.5.4 Excluding Florida
Florida had a unique rise in opioid abuse during this time period due to the prevalence of
pill mills in the state before the 2011 crackdown. Since Florida is also a high elderly share state,
it is important to test whether Florida is solely driving the results, which we do in Panel C of
Table VIII. When we exclude Florida from the analyses, our estimates are still large and
statistically significant and, overall, our conclusions would be unaffected by the exclusion of
22

Florida from the analysis. While the estimates for legal distribution and substance abuse
treatments decrease, the mortality estimate actually increases (relative to Table III, Column 3),
which would imply even larger 2SLS estimates. We cannot statistically reject the equality of any
of the estimates excluding Florida with the corresponding estimates including Florida.
4.6 Discussion
Studying drug abuse is always difficult given the necessary reliance on noisy measures and
extreme events such as deaths. While these problems raise concerns in the analysis of this paper
as well, our approach circumvents them in a few ways. First, we study a large shock to
prescription drug access which has the power to identify effects, even when studying rare events.
Second, our shock is likely orthogonal to concerns about changes in reporting of events (instead
of actual changes in abuse).
As noted previously, the TEDS data from which we estimate impacts of Medicare Part D
expansion on treatment admissions are not collected in the same systematic fashion in each state.
States differ in the types of facilities that are included in their reporting for a variety of reasons,
including differences in agencies responsible for licensing, certification and disbursement of
public funds that may or may not be included in reporting requirements (SAMHSA, 2013).
While we see little reason to believe that 2003 elderly share predicts systematic changes in
reporting behavior, we also test this assumption by selecting on states with more consistent
reporting patterns and find similar effects. The parallels with the estimated mortality effects (in
both the overall effects and the age-specific patterns) also support the view that reporting
behavior is not biasing our estimates.
We also find little evidence that our findings of spillover effects are driven by SSDI
recipients, who are also eligible for coverage through Part D. First, the SSDI population is
relatively small and typically had access to (more) generous prescription drug coverage before
2006. Second, the largest effects are actually observed at relatively young ages while the under65 SSDI population is typically older. Third, we are able to explicitly exclude the SSDI
population in the TEDS analysis and estimate similar effects.

23

Our results are also robust to functional form assumptions,17 inclusion or exclusion of states
with their own health insurance expansions, using different baseline years to construct the fixed
elderly share measure, and several other assumptions made in the primary models. Event study
analysis suggests that the effects began in 2006 and grew as Part D enrollment increased. These
effects are not mimicked by other non-opioid measures of drug abuse. The robustness of our
findings to these and several other sensitivity checks provide greater confidence that our results
reflect true behavioral changes in abuse.
Finally, we interpret our effects as evidence of economically-meaningful levels of diversion
when a state’s opioid supply increases. We estimate effects on a population not directly
impacted by the implementation of Part D using variation unrelated to personal changes in
prescription drug coverage. An alternative mechanism would be that Part D led to differential
changes in physician prescribing patterns resulting in spillovers to the under-65 population. We
find little support for this interpretation given that opioids were already heavily-prescribed before
Part D. In 2005, an average of 9.4 morphine equivalent doses were distributed per person in the
United States. Furthermore, we observe the largest effects for younger age groups, not age
groups close to 65, ruling out the possibility that physicians were more likely to mistakenly
believe that their patients were covered by Part D in high elderly share states after 2006.
Similarly, we would likely expect most physician prescribing spillovers to occur to older age
groups, but the evidence suggests that the opposite is true.
Moreover, in the MEPS (used in Appendix Section A), while we observe an increase in the
number of opioid prescriptions for the 66-71 population, we actually observe a decrease in
opioid utilization for the 59-64 age group in 2006. This decrease is inconsistent with changes in
physician prescribing behavior and suggests that the additional abuse operated through
nonmedical acquisition of the drugs.
In Appendix Section C, we also include a more explicit test of this hypothesis. If
prescribing patterns changed, then we would expect to observe that high elderly share would
have larger effects in states with higher private insurance rates (among the 0-64 population). We

17

Though not shown, we have also estimated other models in addition to those presented in Appendix Section B
which test for the importance of functional form assumptions. We have also estimated models which use the log of
2003 elderly share, logged outcome variables, etc. The results are consistent across all models.

24

do not observe this relationship, suggesting that the rise in abuse operates through nonmedical
acquisition.
Finally, it is also unlikely that our effects could be explained by differential geographic
changes in price. If Part D increased demand for opioids, this may have driven prices up.
However, our time fixed effects capture national price level changes. If opioid prices increased
more in high elderly share states because of the increased demand, this rise would actually imply
that our estimates are biased away from zero since the higher prices would deter acquisition.
Consequently, we interpret our estimates as the relationship between increased supply and the
consequences of opioid diversion.

5. Conclusion
According to the CDC, 78 people die each day from an opioid overdose in the United States
and at least half of those involve a prescription opioid (CDC, 2016). More than 1.4 million
emergency department visits occur each year (SAMHSA, 2013), and the most recent household
estimates suggest that 1.9 million individuals meet the criteria for abuse or dependence on pain
medication (SAMHSA, 2015). In response, the Obama Administration has proposed $1.1 billion
in new funding to help those with opioid abuse disorders obtain treatment and, in March 2016, it
proposed additional funding to support several new avenues for expanding access to treatment
(White House, 2016).
While many federal, state and community strategies have been offered to try to counteract
the tide, explanations and empirical evidence for what caused the rise of the opioid epidemic in
the first place have been rare. This paper is the first to evaluate the extent to which expansions in
medical access, specifically insurance that reduced the cost of prescription drugs to patients, may
have contributed to the opioid epidemic. By exploiting geographic variation in the location of
the elderly, who were the primary beneficiaries of Medicare Part D implementation, we are able
to evaluate how expansion of prescription drug benefits (independent of expansions in access to
medical care) might have influenced the opioid epidemic. Using our estimates in Table II, the
differential growth in opioid supply caused by Part D between the highest and lowest elderly
share states is equivalent to the overall national growth in opioid distribution between 2004 and
2008. Part D provides a rare opportunity to mimic the dramatic national trends in medical opioid
supply and observe the spillover effects, while conditioning on time fixed effects.
25

It is difficult to conceive of alternative mechanisms for these spillover results than those
already explored here. Evidence from SAMHSA (2015) indicates that friends and relatives are
the primary source of prescription opioid medication, and elderly with multiple concurrent
prescriptions are an easy target for some individuals interested in diverting opioids into the black
market. Our results are consistent with these stylized facts and provide evidence about its causal
relationship with opioid-related overdoses.
We interpret our results as clear evidence of diversion from the medical market to the illegal
nonmedical use market. Opioid distribution in the United States increased between 2000 and
2011 by 376% while opioid-related overdose mortality rates increased by 346% over the same
time period. Our Table VII (Column 3) estimates imply that the increased access to opioids
explains 73% of this rise (i.e., the estimates predict a 252% causal mortality increase).
Attributing this magnitude to unintentional spillovers does not rule out the importance of more
direct effects. Opioid prescribing behavior may lead to high addiction rates which are then
exacerbated by nonmedical opioid access through diversion. Our results imply that the diversion
component is a critical driver of the opioid epidemic.
The implications of these findings is that, unless supply side mechanisms become much more
effective at reducing the opportunities for diversion of these prescription opioids from patients
(by reducing over prescribing, enforcing PDMPs, educating physicians on inappropriate
prescribing, and managing utilization), the opioid epidemic may not be over. There are a number
of provisions of the Affordable Care Act that expand insurance to the previously uninsured
(dependent care coverage, Medicaid expansion, and insurance exchanges), and it is possible that
as we continue to expand insurance coverage we also further exacerbate growing trends in opioid
mortality and morbidity. Optimal policy must account for the externalities of improving medical
care access to drugs that are easy to abuse and divert.

26

References
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber, "Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program," American Economic Review, 101 (2011),
1180-1210.
Alpert, Abby, "The Anticipatory Effects of Medicare Part D on Drug Utilization," Journal of
Health Economics, 49 (2016), 28-45.
Alpert, Abby, Darius Lakdawalla, and Neeraj Sood, "Prescription Drug Advertising and Drug
Utilization: The Role of Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper 21714," (Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015).
Bao, Yuhua, Yijun Pan, Aryn Taylor, Sharmini Radakrishnan, Feijun Luo, Harold A. Pincus, and
Bruce R. Schackman, "Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs Are Associated With Sustained
Reductions In Opioid Prescribing By Physicians," Health Affairs, 35 (2016), 1045-1051.
Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin M. Murphy, "Rational Addiction and the Effect
of Price on Consumption," The American Economic Review, 81 (1991), 237-241.
Bohnert, Amy S., Marcia Valenstein, Matthew J. Bair, Dara Ganoczy, John F. McCarthy, Mark
A. Ilgen, and Frederic C. Blow, "Association Between Opioid Prescribing Patterns and Opioid
Overdose-Related Deaths," Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), 305 (2011),
1315-1321.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, "Robust Inference With Multiway
Clustering," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29 (2011), 238-249.
Carpenter, Christopher, and Carlos Dobkin, "The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on Mortality:
Regression Discontinuity Evidence from The Minimum Drinking Age," American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (2009), 164-182.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton, "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White NonHispanic Americans in the 21st Century," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 112 (2015), 15078-15083.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "CDC Grand Rounds: Prescription Drug Overdoses
– a U.S. Epidemic. MMWR 61(01): 10-13," (Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2012).
---, CDC's Top Ten: 5 Health Achievements in 2013 and 5 Health Threats in 2014
(http://blogs.cdc.gov/cdcworksforyou24-7/2013/12/cdc%E2%80%99s-top-ten-5-healthachievements-in-2013-and-5-health-threats-in-2014/, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2013).
---, "Increases in Drug and Opioid Overdose Deaths – United States, 2000-2014. MMWR 64: 15," (Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015).

27

---, "CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain — United States, 2016.
Recommendations and Reports / 65(1);1–49," (Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2016).
Chaparro, Luis Enrique, Andrea D. Furlan, Amol Deshpande, Angela Mailis-Gagnon, Steven
Atlas, and Dennis C. Turk. "Opioids compared with placebo or other treatments for chronic low
back pain: an update of the Cochrane Review." Spine 39.7 (2014): 556-563.
Chaloupka, Frank J., "Rational Addictive Behaviour and Cigarette Smoking," Journal of
Political Economy, 99 (1991), 722-742.
Chriqui, James F., Rosalie L. Pacula, Duane C. McBride, Deborah A. Reichmann, Curtis J.
VanderWaal, and Yvonne Terry-McElrath, "Illicit Drug Policies: Selected Laws from the 50
States and the District of Columbia," (Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews University, 2002).
Dart, Richard C., Hilary L. Surratt, Theodore J. Cicero, Mark W. Parrino, S. Geoff Severtson,
Becki Bucher-Bartelson, and Jody L. Green, "Trends in Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality
in the United States," N Engl J Med, 372 (2015), 241-248.
Dobkin, Carlos, and Nancy Nicosia, "The War on Drugs: Methamphetamine, Public Health, and
Crime," American Economic Review, 99 (2009), 324-349.
Dowell, Deborah, Tamara M. Haegerich, and Roger Chou, "CDC Guideline for Prescribing
Opioids for Chronic Pain--United States, 2016," JAMA, 315 (2016), 1624-1645.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona S. Morton, "The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Prices
and Utilization," American Economic Review, 100 (2010), 590-607.
Duggan, Marl G., and Fiona S. Morton, "The Medium-Term Impact of Medicare Part D on
Pharmaceutical Prices," American Economic Review, 101 (2011), 387-392.
Galenianos, Manolis, Rosalie L. Pacula, and Nicola Persico, "A Search-Theoretic Model of the
Retail Market for Illicit Drugs," Review of Economic Studies, 79 (2012), 1239-1269.
Greco, Maria Teresa, Anne Roberto, Oscar Corli, Silvia Deandrea, Elena Bandieri, Silvio
Cavuto, and Giovanni Apolone. "Quality of cancer pain management: an update of a systematic
review of undertreatment of patients with cancer." Journal of Clinical Oncology 32.36 (2014):
4149-4154.
Grossman, Michael, and Frank J. Chaloupka, "The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A
Rational Addiction Approach," Journal of Health Economics, 17 (1998), 427-474.
Jacobson, Mireille, "Baby Booms and Drug Busts: Trends in Youth Drug Use in the United
States, 1975-2000," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 1481-1512.
Jena, Anupam B., Dana Goldman, Lesley Weaver, and Pinar Karaca-Mandic, "Opioid
Prescribing by Multiple Providers in Medicare: Retrospective Observational Study of Insurance
Claims," BMJ, 348 (2014), g1393.
28

Ketcham, Jonathan D., Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J. Miravete, and M. Christopher Roebuck,
"Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D," American Economic Review,
102 (2012), 2639-2673.
Ketcham, Jonathan D., and Kosali I. Simon, "Medicare Part D's Effects on Elderly Patients' Drug
Costs and Utilization," The American Journal of Managed Care, 14 (2008), SP14-22.
Kolodny, Andrew, David T. Courtwright, Catherine S. Hwang, Peter Kreiner, John L. Eadie,
Thomas W. Clark, and G. Caleb Alexander, "The Prescription Opioid and Heroin Crisis: A
Public Health Approach to an Epidemic of Addiction," Annual Review of Public Health, 36
(2015), 559-574.
Kuo, Yong-Fang, Mukaila A. Raji, Nai-Wei Chen, Hunaid Hasan, and James S. Goodwin.
"Trends in opioid prescriptions among Part D Medicare recipients from 2007 to 2012." The
American Journal of Medicine 129.2 (2016): 221.e21-221.e30.
Manning, W. G., E. B. Keeler, J. P. Newhouse, E. M. Sloss, and J. Wasserman, "The taxes of
sin. Do smokers and drinkers pay their way?," JAMA, 261 (1989), 1604-1609.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett Keeler, Bernadette Benjamin,
Arleen Leibowitz, M. Susan Marquis, and Jack Zwanziger, "Health Insurance and the Demand
for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. RAND Report R-3476-HHS,"
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1988).
Maughan, Brandon C., Marcus A. Bachhuber, Nandita Mitra, and Joanna L. Starrels.
"Prescription monitoring programs and emergency department visits involving opioids, 2004–
2011." Drug and Alcohol Dependence 156 (2015): 282-288.
McWilliams, J. Michael, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Haiden A. Huskamp, "Implementation of
Medicare Part D and Nondrug Medical Spending for Elderly Adults with Limited Prior Drug
Coverage," JAMA, 306 (2011), 402-409.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. Overdose Death Rates (https://www.drugabuse.gov/relatedtopics/trends-statistics/overdose-death-rates, National Institutes of Health, 2015).
Patrick, Stephen W., Carrie E. Fry, Timothy F. Jones, and Melinda B. Buntin, "Implementation
Of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs Associated With Reductions In Opioid-Related
Death Rates," Health Affairs, 35 (2016), 1324-1332.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., "The epidemiology of drug overdoses in the United States." Presented at
Responses to the Epidemic of Prescription Drug Overdoses in the U.S., Maimonides Medical
Center; Grand Rounds, Brooklyn, December 2, 2010.

Paulozzi, Leonard J., Christopher M. Jones, Karin A. Mack, and Rose A. Rudd, "Vital Signs:
Overdoses of Prescription Opioid Pain Relievers – United States, 1999-2008," Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 60 (2011), 1487-1492.
29

Paulozzi, Leonard J., Edwin M. Kilbourne, and Hema A. Desai, "Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs and Death Rates from Drug Overdose," Pain Medicine, 12 (2011), 747-754.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., and George W. Ryan, "Opioid Analgesics and Rates of Fatal Drug
Poisoning in the United States," American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 31 (2006), 506-511.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., and Daniel D. Stier, "Prescription Drug Laws, Drug Overdoses, and Drug
Sales in New York and Pennsylvania," Journal of Public Health Policy, 31 (2010), 422-432.
Safran, Dana G., Patricia Neuman, Cathy Schoen, Michelle S. Kitchman, Ira B. Wilson, Barbara
Cooper, Angela Li, Hong Chang, and William H. Rogers, "Prescription Drug Coverage and
Seniors: Findings from a 2003 National Survey," Health Affairs, Suppl Web Exclusives (2005),
W5-152-W155-166.
Santos Silva, João M. C., and Silvana Tenreyro, "The Log of Gravity," The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88 (2006), 641-658.
Stagnitti, Marie N., "Trends in Prescribed Outpatient Opioid Use and Expenses in the U.S.
Civilian Noninstitutionalized Population, 2002–2012. Statistical Brief #478." (Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2015).
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Center for Behavioral
Health Statistics and Quality, "Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS): 2001-2011. State
Admissions to Substance Abuse Treatment Services," (Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, 2013).
---, "2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables," (Rockville, MD:
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2015).
Volkow, Nora D., Thomas A. McLellan, Jessica H. Cotto, Meena Karithanom, and Susan R. B.
Weiss, "Characteristics of Opioid Prescriptions in 2009," JAMA, 305 (2011), 1299-1301.
White House, Office of the Press Secretary, "Fact Sheet: President Obama Proposes $1.1 billion
in New Funding to Address the Prescription Opioid Abuse and Heroin Use Epidemic." February
2, 2016.
Zhang, Yuling, Julie M. Donohue, Judith R. Lave, Gerald O'Donnell, and Joseph P. Newhouse,
"The Effect of Medicare Part D on Drug and Medical Spending," N Engl J Med, 361 (2009), 5261.
Zhou, Chao, Curtis S. Florence, and Deborah Dowell. "Payments For Opioids Shifted
Substantially To Public And Private Insurers While Consumer Spending Declined, 1999–
2012." Health Affairs 35.5 (2016): 824-831.

30

Figures

9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
1
20 0
1
20 1
1
20 2
13

19

19

92

0

Per Capita Outcomes
Normalized to 100 in 2003
50 100 150 200 250

300

Figure I: Opioid Use and Abuse

Year
Opioid−Related Treatment Admissions
Opioid−Related Mortality
Opioid Distribution
Notes: We use ARCOS data to generate per capita opioid distribution, NVSS to create
per capita opioid-related mortality, and TEDS to calculate per capita substance abuse
treatments for opiates. We normalize each time series to 100 in 2003. The ARCOS time
series spans 2000-2011; NVSS 1999-2013; TEDS 1992-2012.

31

11
20

10
20

09
20

08
20

07
20

06
20

05
20

04
20

03
20

02
20

01
20

20

00

Estimated Effect of % Elderly in 2003
−.03
0
.03
.06

Figure II: Opioid Distribution: Event Study

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We estimate equation (1) but allow the eﬀect of Elderly Share in 2003 to vary by
year, normalizing the coeﬃcient for 2003 to zero. The outcome is the log of morphine
equivalent doses per capita.

32

Figure III: Per Capita Opioid-Related Mortality and Substance Abuse Treatments

Per Capita Treatments
Normalized to 100 in 2003
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
9
19 2
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
1
20 0
1
20 1
12

0
19

13

12

20

11

20

10

20

09

20

08

20

07

20

06

20

05

20

04

20

03

20

02

20

01

20

00

20

20

19

99

0

Per Capita Opioid−Related Deaths
Normalized to 100 in 2003
50
100
150
200
250

States with High Elderly Shares Versus States with Low Elderly Shares

Year

Year

Below Median
Above Median

Below Median
Above Median

Mortality, Ages 0-64

Substance Abuse Treatments, Ages 12-54

Sources: National Vital Statistics System and Treatment Episode Data Set
Notes: “Above Median” and “Below Median” refer to the elderly share of the population in 2003.

33

12

13
20

20

10

09

08

07

11
20

20

20

20

20

05

04

03

06
20

20

20

20

01

00

02
20

20

20

19

99

Estimated Effect of % Elderly in 2003
−.75 −.5 −.25
0
.25
.5
.75

Figure IV: Opioid Abuse: Mortality per 100,000 (Ages 0-64)

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We estimate equation (1) but allow the eﬀect of Elderly Share in 2003 to vary by
year, normalizing the coeﬃcient for 2003 to zero.

34

19

9
19 2
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
1
20 0
1
20 1
12

Estimated Effect of % Elderly in 2003
−10
0
10
20
30
40

Figure V: Opioid Abuse: Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions (Ages 12-54)

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We estimate equation (1) but allow the eﬀect of Elderly Share in 2003 to vary by
year, normalizing the coeﬃcient for 2003 to zero. We use a balanced sample of states
and exclude the SSDI population. Estimates using the full samples are included in the
Appendix. See Appendix Figure A.3.

20
13

20
12

20
11

20
10

20
09

20
08

20
07

20
06

20
05

20
04

20
03

20
02

20
01

20
00

Estimated Effect of % Elderly in 2003
−.4
−.2
0
.2
.4
.6
19
99

Figure VI: Heroin Mortality per 100,000 (Ages 0-64)

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We estimate equation (1) but allow the eﬀect of Elderly Share in 2003 to vary by
year, normalizing the coeﬃcient for 2003 to zero.

35

Tables
Table I: Summary Statistics
Mean Standard Deviation

Variable
Substance Abuse Treatment per 100,000
Deaths per 100,000
Morphine Equivalent Doses per capita
Unemployment Rate
% Private Insurance
% 65+
% Part D (2006-2011)
PDMP Law
PDMP Mandatory
PDMP Real Time
PDMP 4+ Schedules

54.23
4.08
9.95
6.22
69.75
12.62
7.55
0.52
0.29
0.17
0.22

Notes: All statistics for years 2000-2011 unless otherwise noted.

36

50.93
2.69
4.93
2.23
6.62
1.86
1.36
0.50
0.45
0.38
0.41

Table II: Legal Distribution of Opioids
Outcome:
% Elderly2003 × Post

log(Morphine Equivalent Doses Per Capita)
(1)
0.029**
(0.012)

(2)
0.032***
(0.008)
0.011
(0.008)
0.003
(0.004)
0.675**
(0.312)

612

612

% Unemployed
% Private Insurance
ln(Population)
PDMP Law
PDMP Mandatory
PDMP Real Time
PDMP 4+ Schedules
N

(3)
0.034***
(0.007)
0.007
(0.008)
0.001
(0.003)
0.758**
(0.301)
-0.008
(0.047)
0.086*
(0.046)
-0.053
(0.035)
-0.012
(0.032)
612

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls included in all models but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and
Percentage 65+.

37

Table III: Opioid-Related Mortality, Ages 0-64
Outcome:
% Elderly2003 × Post

Opioid-Related Mortality per 100,000
(1)
0.372***
(0.106)

(2)
0.404***
(0.111)
0.040
(0.115)
0.010
(0.040)
5.166
(3.843)

612

612

% Unemployed
% Private Insurance
ln(Population)
PDMP Law
PDMP Mandatory
PDMP Real Time
PDMP 4+ Schedules
N

(3)
0.360***
(0.099)
0.061
(0.108)
0.017
(0.036)
4.201
(3.795)
0.314
(0.484)
-0.682*
(0.348)
0.284
(0.505)
-0.411
(0.417)
612

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and Percentage
65+. Population refers to size of 0-64 population.

38

Table IV: Opioid-Related Mortality by Age Group
Outcome:

Opioid-Related Mortality per 100,000

Age Group
% Elderly in 2003

10-19
0.008
(0.038)

20-29
0.440**
(0.212)

Age Group
% Elderly in 2003

10-19
0.004
(0.014)
612

20-29
0.352***
(0.118)
612

N

Men
40-49
0.559***
(0.207)
Women
30-39
40-49
0.460*** 0.458**
(0.168)
(0.182)
612
612
30-39
1.062***
(0.253)

50-59
60-64
0.456*** 0.170*
(0.163) (0.094)
50-59
0.211
(0.134)
612

60-64
0.064
(0.083)
612

65+
-0.009
(0.032)
65+
0.021
(0.076)
612

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, Percentage
65+, unemployment rate, private insurance rate, log of population size, and four PDMP
indicators.

39

Table V: Opioid-Related Substance Abuse Treatments, Ages 12-54
Outcome:
% Elderly in 2003

Opioid-Related Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions Per 100,000
(1)
16.988***
(3.283)

% Unemployed
% Private Insurance
ln(Population)
PDMP Law
PDMP Mandatory
PDMP Real Time
PDMP 4+ Schedules
Sample
Population
N

Full
All
587

(2)
(3)
15.178***
14.749***
(3.335)
(3.249)
-5.476
-5.367
(4.492)
(4.467)
-43.436
-73.937
(118.359)
(98.529)
-401.450*** -430.465***
(130.294)
(134.163)
-15.75
(15.066)
-11.701
(12.914)
30.054*
(15.796)
-9.345
(8.949)
Full
Full
All
All
587
587

(4)
14.662***
(3.391)
-5.274
(4.754)
-54.561
(106.871)
-438.899***
(138.109)
-9.785
(15.093)
-13.562
(13.194)
25.301
(15.909)
-7.953
(9.261)
Balanced
All
516

(5)
13.423***
(3.116)
-4.486
(4.459)
-60.026
(99.677)
-393.900***
(130.292)
-8.502
(14.284)
-10.741
(12.367)
22.592
(14.975)
-7.192
(8.708)
Balanced
Exclude SSDI
516

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls included in all models but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and
Percentage 65+. Population refers to size of 12-54 population. “Balanced” uses the sample
of states reporting to TEDS in all years 2000-2011. The “Exclude SSDI” population excludes
individuals reporting labor force participation of “Retired/Disabled” or with Medicare as
the expected payment source.

40

Table VI: Opioid-Related Substance Abuse Treatments by Age Group
Outcome:

Opioid-Related Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions 100,000

Men
Age Group
12-20
21-29
30-39
40-49
% Elderly in 2003 9.322*** 45.240*** 16.092*** 4.501***
(3.079)
(10.685)
(4.707)
(1.451)
Women
Age Group
12-20
21-29
30-39
40-49
% Elderly in 2003 8.062*** 42.864*** 13.551*** 3.416***
(1.494)
(6.994)
(3.346)
(1.108)
N
516
516
516
516

50-54
2.616***
(0.941)

55+
0.130
(0.218)

50-54
1.141*
(0.602)
516

55+
-0.102
(0.129)
516

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, Percentage 65+,
unemployment rate, private insurance rate, log of population size, and four PDMP indicators. Sample limited to states reporting to TEDS in all years 2000-2011. SSDI population
excluded.

Table VII: Relationship Between Opioid Distribution and Harms
Outcomes:
MED Per Capita
Ages
Estimator
Mean Dep. Var. (2006-2011)
N

Deaths Per 100,000
(1)
0.308***
(0.056)
0-64
OLS
5.87
612

(2)
0.333***
(0.095)
0-64
IV
5.87
612

(3)
0.271***
(0.084)
All
IV
5.26
612

Admissions Per 100,000
(4)
6.859***
(1.825)
12-54
OLS
122.68
587

(5)
13.311***
(2.612)
12-54
IV
122.68
587

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, Percentage
65+, unemployment rate, private insurance rate, log of population size, and four PDMP
indicators. Population refers to size of population for the relevant age group. The excluded
instrument is % Elderly2003 × Post. MED = morphine equivalent doses. The mean MED
per capita in 2006-2011 was 13.0.

41

(6)
8.541***
(1.717)
12+
IV
75.11
587

Table VIII: Robustness Tests
Excluding 2006
(1)
log(MED Per Capita)
% Elderly2003 × Post
0.037***
(0.008)
N
561

(2)
(3)
Deaths per 100,000 Admissions per 100,000
0.406***
16.931***
(0.105)
(3.538)
561
473
Excluding MA and OR
(4)
(5)
(6)
log(MED Per Capita) Deaths per 100,000 Admissions per 100,000
% Elderly2003 × Post
0.034***
0.366***
15.180***
(0.007)
(0.101)
(3.425)
N
588
588
492
Excluding FL
(7)
(8)
(9)
log(MED Per Capita) Deaths per 100,000 Admissions per 100,000
% Elderly2003 × Post
0.020**
0.406**
11.975**
(0.008)
(0.162)
(4.996)
N
600
600
504
Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, Percentage
65+, unemployment rate, private insurance rate, log of population size, and four PDMP
indicators. Columns 1-3 exclude 2006. Columns 4-6 exclude Massachusetts and Oregon.
Columns 7-9 exclude Florida. MED = morphine equivalent doses. TEDS estimates use
balanced sample and exclude SSDI population.

42

Appendix
Figures
Figure A.1: Elderly Share in 2003

>14%
12−14%
10−12%
<10%

Relationship Between 2003 Elderly %
and % Part D Enrollment
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7

Figure A.2: Relationship between % Elderly in 2003 and % Enrolled in Part D

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We regress the percentage of the population enrolled in Part D on the percentage
of the 2003 population ages 65+. We perform this cross-sectional regression by year.

43

19

9
19 2
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
1
20 0
1
20 1
12

Estimated Effect of % Elderly in 2003
−10
0
10
20
30
40

Figure A.3: Opioid Abuse: Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions (Ages 12-54)

Year
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
Notes: We estimate equation (1) but allow the eﬀect of Elderly Share in 2003 to vary by
year, normalizing the coeﬃcient for 2003 to 0. We use the full sample – all states and
including the SSDI population.

20
05

20
04

20
03

20
02

20
01

20
00

19
99

19
98

19
97

19
96

19
95

19
94

19
93

19
92

.1

Estimated Effect of % Elderly
.2
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure A.4: Mortality Eﬀects: Varying Year to Calculate Initial
% Elderly

Year of Instrument
Coefficient Estimate
95% Confidence Interval
We replicate the model presented in Column (3) of Table III but vary the year used to
construct initial elderly share. The x-axis marks the year used to construct this measure.
The y-axis denotes the coeﬃcient estimate when that year is used.

44

Tables
Table A.1: MEPS Analysis
Panel A: Opioid Prescriptions
(Age ≥ 65) x (Year ≥ 2006)
Age Fixed Eﬀects
Year Fixed Eﬀects
Years (2002-2009)
Ages (59-71)
N

(Age ≥ 65) x (Year ≥ 2006)
NDC x Year Fixed Eﬀects
NDC x Age Fixed Eﬀects
Years (2002-2009)
Ages (59-71)
N

(1)
(2)
(3)
0.174**
0.191**
0.181*
(0.089)
(0.096)
(0.094)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All
All
No 2004-2005
All
No 63-64
All
23,190
19,205
17,754
Panel B: ln(Price)

(4)
0.177*
(0.099)
Yes
Yes
No 2004-2005
No 63-64
14,694

(1)
-0.476***
(0.121)
Yes
Yes
All
All
11,995

(4)
-0.488***
(0.142)
Yes
Yes
No 2004-2005
No 63-64
7,697

(2)
(3)
-0.459***
-0.491***
(0.114)
(0.142)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All
No 2004-2005
No 63-64
All
9,978
9,230

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. In Panel A, each observation is an individual-year and standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering
at individual level. In Panel B, each observation is a prescription and standard errors
are adjusted for two-way clustering at individual- and NDC-level. Age 65 excluded in all
regressions.

45

Table A.2: Poisson Estimates
Outcome:

MED

Deaths (0-64)

Admissions (12-54)

0.630*
(0.326)
612

1.070***
(0.318)
587

ln % Elderly2003 × Post 0.475***
(0.164)
N
612

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and Percentage
65+. MED = morphine equivalent doses. The log of population is also included and the
coeﬃcient estimate is constrained to equal 1.

Table A.3: Interactions with Insurance Rate
Outcome:

log(MED Per Capita)

Deaths per 100,000

Admissions per 100,000

% Elderly2003 × Post

0.022***
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.005***
(0.001)
612

0.270*
(0.140)
-0.019
(0.034)
-0.042**
(0.017)
612

13.000***
(4.579)
-0.944
(1.271)
-0.358
(0.747)
516

% Insured2003 × Post
% Elderly2003 × % Insured2003 × Post
N

Notes: ***Significance 1%, ** Significance 5%, * Significance 10%. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at state level. All regressions weighted by population.
Controls also included but not shown: state fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, Percentage
65+, unemployment rate, private insurance rate, log of population size, and four PDMP
indicators. % Elderly2003 and % Insured2003 are de-meaned. MED = morphine equivalent
doses.

46

Appendix A: Did Part D increase opioid prescriptions among the 65+ population?
Several papers compare changes in prescription drug utilization for the 65+ population
around the implementation of Medicare Part D to utilization changes for other age groups. This
approach isolates the effect of Part D from other secular trends in drug utilization. The literature
consistently finds that Part D increased overall prescription drug utilization, but there is no
research focusing specifically on opioid prescriptions. A necessary condition for our empirical
strategy is that Medicare Part D increased opioid prescriptions for the 65+ population.
We use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to study changes in the number of
opioid prescription for ages 66-71 relative to ages 59-64.1 The MEPS is a nationallyrepresentative longitudinal data set which surveys households about demographics, income,
health insurance, and medical claims. The Prescribed Medicines Data Files include prescription
drug claims data for each person in the data. These files were linked to the Multum Lexicon
database to obtain therapeutic class variables starting in 2002. We follow Stagnatti (2015) by
defining opioid prescriptions as those with therapeutic subclasses “narcotic analgesics” and
“narcotic analgesic combinations.” We use the 2002-2009 data files and consider each claim as
a prescription, which is standard in this literature (see Alpert, 2016). The MEPS surveys
households for two consecutive years so we account for the panel structure by adjusting standard
errors for clustering. We estimate the following specification:
𝑦𝑖𝑎𝑡 = 𝜃𝑎 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜌[1(𝑎 ≥ 65) × 1(𝑡 ≥ 2006)]+𝜀𝑠𝑡 ,

(2)

where 𝑦𝑖𝑎𝑡 represents the number of opioid prescriptions filled by individual i at age a in year t.
The specification includes age and year fixed effects. The parameter of interest is coefficient on
the interaction of the implementation of Part D and an indicator for ages 65+.
We present the main estimates in Column 1 of Table A.1. The estimate implies that
individuals ages 65+ increased the number of annual prescriptions by 0.174 more prescriptions
than individuals ages 59-64. While the literature often relies on large pharmacy claims data, this
estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level despite the relatively small sample.
We replicate this analysis in Column 2 but exclude ages 63 and 64. Alpert (2016)
provides evidence of important anticipation effects with respect to Medicare Part D. Excluding
1

We exclude age 65 individuals since they would only have a partial year with Part D eligibility.

47

these ages should reduce concerns that the control group is also “treated” by Part D. We find
similar estimates when we exclude 63-64 year olds. Alpert (2016) shows that the anticipation
effects occurred in 2004-2005 since Part D was announced at the end of 2003, providing
individuals the opportunity to alter prescription drug utilization given the intertemporal price
changes. In Column 3, we exclude 2004 and 2005 from the analysis and estimate a similar
effect. In Column 4, we exclude 2004-2004 and ages 63-64. Again, we observe similar effects.
We have also estimated the above models using Poisson regression to estimate
proportional effects. The evidence (not shown) is consistent with the estimates presented in
Table A.1, which is not surprising given that the pre-Part D utilization rates between these two
groups are relatively similar.
In Panel B of Table A.1, we present corresponding estimates of the effect of Part D on
the price of opioids. Part D decreased out-of-pocket prices for the 65+ population, driving the
increased utilization. We estimate
ln(𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝜃𝑑𝑎 + 𝛾𝑑𝑡 + 𝜑[1(𝑎 ≥ 65) × 1(𝑡 ≥ 2006)]+𝜐𝑠𝑡 ,

(3)

where 𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡 is the out-of-pocket price of National Drug Code (NDC) d purchased by individual i
of age a in year t. We control for interactions based on NDC-age and NDC-year. Each
observation is an opioid prescription purchased in the sample for ages 59-71 (excluding 65). We
adjust our standard errors using two-way clustering (Cameron et al., 2012) by individual and by
NDC.
The estimates are consistent whether we account for anticipation effects. Our main
estimate (Column 1 in Panel B) implies that individuals ages 65+ experienced a 48% reduction
in out-of-pocket payments relative to the 59-64 population after the implementation of Part D.
Thus, we find evidence that Part D decreased the price of opioids for the Medicareeligible population and that this price decrease led to an increase in the number of prescriptions.
In Section 4.2, we study whether this individual-level increase in opioid access can be observed
at a more aggregate level by studying whether elderly share predicts increases in state opioid
supply. We find that higher elderly share states experienced relative increases in opioid supply
after Part D implementation.
48

Appendix B: Additional Robustness Tests
In this section, we test for the importance of functional form assumptions by replicating
our main results using Poisson regression. The dependent variable is the level of the outcome of
interest and we control for the log of population with the effect of this variable constrained to
equal 1. We use the log of 2003 elderly share interacted with a post dummy as our interaction
term. Poisson regression has several advantages over log-linear specifications (see Santos Silva
and Tenreyro (2006) for details). Related specifications produce similar conclusions.
The estimates are presented in Table A.2. We estimate significant effects for our
outcomes and the magnitudes imply similar effects as the linear estimates presented in the main
text. Functional form assumptions do not appear to be driving our results which is consistent
with the small pre-Part D differences in the outcomes based on elderly share.
Figure A.4 replicates Column (3) of Table III. However, we vary which year is used to
construct the “pre-Part D elderly share” measure. We find consistent estimates regardless of
which year is used, implying that there is nothing special about 2003 elderly share which is
driving our conclusions.
Appendix C: Physician Prescribing Behavior
In the main text, we consider several reasons why it is unlikely that our results can be
explained by changes in physician prescribing patterns. We provide a more explicit test here.
Physician prescribing spillovers would imply that elderly share should predict even larger
increases in states with high health insurance rates for the under-65 population. Individuals with
health insurance are more likely to seek care from a physician so the spillovers resulting from
high elderly share would primarily affect high-insurance states. We fix the private health
insurance rate in 2003 (using data from the Current Population Survey) and interact this variable
with 2003 elderly share variable, examining whether there were differential effects starting in
2006. We control separately for the post-Part D effects of the 2003 private insurance rate. The
estimates are presented in Table A.3 for our three outcomes. For distribution and deaths, we
actually observe negative and statistically significant effects of our triple-difference term. This
negative relationship is evidence that nonmedical opioid acquisition (and use) and medical
acquisition are potentially substitutes. For example, people with chronic pain but without health
insurance may obtain diverted opioids without instructions on use (or may acquire more
49

dangerous and addictive opioids), leading to greater harms than if they had been prescribed the
opioids legally. We do not observe any evidence of positive relationship between elderly share
and private insurance rates. The estimates in Table A.3 are consistent with diversion and
inconsistent with medical-based spillovers.

50

