NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOW-INCOME HOUSING POLICY
Robert Collinson
Ingrid Gould Ellen
Jens Ludwig
Working Paper 21071
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21071

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

This chapter was prepared for the 2014 NBER conference on means-tested transfer programs organized
by Robert Moffitt. We thank the Kreisman Initiative on Housing Law and Policy at the University
of Chicago Law School for financial support and Benjamin Keys, Robert Moffitt, Edgar Olsen, Barbara
Sard, Alex Schwartz, our discussant Lawrence Katz and other conference participants for helpful comments.
Rob Collinson remained an unpaid employee of the U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development
(HUD) during the writing of this chapter. Any errors and all opinions are ours alone and do not represent
those of HUD or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robert Collinson, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Low-Income Housing Policy
Robert Collinson, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 21071
April 2015
JEL No. H53,I3,I38,R28
ABSTRACT
The United States government devotes about $40 billion each year to means-tested housing programs,
plus another $6 billion or so in tax expenditures on the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC).
What exactly do we spend this money on, why, and what does it accomplish? We focus on these questions.
We begin by reviewing the history of low-income housing programs in the U.S., and then summarize
the characteristics of participants in means-tested housing programs and how programs have changed
over time. We consider important conceptual issues surrounding the design of and rationale for means-tested
housing programs in the U.S. and review existing empirical evidence, which is limited in important
ways. Finally, we conclude with thoughts about the most pressing questions that might be addressed
in future research in this area.

Robert Collinson
New York University
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School
of Public Service
295 Lafayette Street
New York, NY 10012
rcollinson@nyu.edu
Ingrid Gould Ellen
New York University
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School
of Public Service
295 Lafayette Street
New York, NY 10012
ingrid.ellen@nyu.edu

Jens Ludwig
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jludwig@uchicago.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION

The United States federal government devotes around $40 billion each year to meanstested housing programs, plus another $6 billion or so each year in tax expenditures on
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). This is well over twice the level of federal
spending on either cash welfare or the Title I compensatory program in education, four
times what is spent on the children’s health insurance fund (Falk 2012), and five times
what is spent on Head Start.1 What exactly do we spend this money on, why, and what
does it accomplish? Those are the over-arching questions at the heart of our chapter.
We should note these programs are just a modest share of the total subsidies government
provides to subsidize housing for American households. Most of the government’s
spending on housing, or roughly $195 billion of an estimated $270 billion,(OMB,
Analytical Perspectives, FY2014) goes towards subsidizing homeowners through the tax
code (for example the Mortgage Interest Deduction). Sinai and Gyourko (2004) argue
that even more economically meaningful may be the non-taxation of imputed rent, which
they estimate led to total subsidies for homeownership on the order of $600 billion.2 We
do not consider these subsidies in this chapter not because they are economically
unimportant, but rather because the focus of this volume is means-tested transfer
programs and most of these tax subsidies are not means-tested -- and indeed the vast
majority of these subsidy dollars go to non-poor households.3
Public concern about housing conditions among the poor dates back at least to the
“muckraking” of Jacob Riis and the publication in 1890 of his book, How the Other Half
Lives, which described living conditions in the Lower East Side tenements of New York
City. However as we note in Section II of our chapter, the federal government did not get
involved with low-income housing in earnest until the passage of the Housing Act of
1937. Economic stimulus played a large role in motivating the government’s initial move
into housing. This rationale does not come up much in current housing policy discussions
but is perhaps not surprising when one considers what the economic conditions were at
the time the Housing Act was passed. Another important motivation was the concern of
advocates about the substandard quality and inadequate supply of low-income housing
(see for example Hunt, 2009, p. 9), and by the desire to promote “slum clearance.” Given
these rationales, for the first several decades, the government was mostly involved in
directly supplying housing in the form of federal subsidies to local public housing
authorities (PHAs) for the construction of public housing developments.
Over time the number of separate means-tested housing programs in the U.S. has
proliferated, due more to political forces than any coherent overall plan or policy
motivation. Perhaps the most striking change has been the decline in the share of total
1 https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/standards/pdf/PDF_PIs/PI2013/ACF-PI-HS-13-03.pdf
2 Their estimate was for the year 2000 and reported in 1999 dollars, as $420 billion.
3 Our chapter also focuses on the largest means-tested housing programs, which tend to be those run by the
US Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Low Income Housing Tax Credit. As noted
below, the US Department of Agriculture also runs some low-income housing programs but these are fairly
small relative to the others.
1

low-income housing assistance provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) that is delivered in the form of government built-and-operated
housing. Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, HUD shifted to rely more on subsidies both
to private developers to build and operate housing developments for low-income families
and to low-income households to rent in the private market (housing choice vouchers).
The growth in the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program has reinforced this
change within HUD’s program portfolio. The long-term effect of this shift is that the
government now plays more of a role in just subsidizing housing for low-income families
rather than also directly supplying it.
Section III summarizes what is currently known about the number of people participating
in different means-tested housing programs in the U.S., their characteristics, and how
these figures have changed over time. Compared to most of the other means-tested
programs run by the U.S. government that are considered in this volume, means-tested
housing programs are quite generous on a per-participant basis. Indeed average benefit
levels per participant are high enough that even with $40 billion in annual spending, only
around 23 percent of low-income renters receive assistance from any of these programs
(Fischer and Sard 2013).
While all of these programs focus on serving low-income people, the rules governing
tenant selection have cycled back and forth over time, sometimes favoring the poorest of
the poor and other times prioritizing instead working poor households or those believed
to be temporarily poor. This “policy cycling” reflects a key tension in the design of lowincome housing programs. On the one hand, the usual assumption of declining marginal
utility of consumption motivates the desire to prioritize helping the most disadvantaged
families. On the other hand, because housing programs – at least supply-side programs –
essentially condition program participation on living in a certain geographic location,
many policymakers wish to avoid creating housing developments with high
concentrations of very poor households. Changes over time in housing policies and/or
program rules reflect changes in the emphasis that policymakers place on the different
aspects of this tradeoff.
Section IV discusses the different conceptual issues related to means-tested housing
programs in the US. One set of issues has to do with the changing rationales for these
programs over time. During the 1930s when the Housing Act was passed the desire to use
means-tested housing programs as a tool for macro-economic policy (stimulus) was much
stronger than it is today. The belief that government-supported housing programs are
needed to address supply-side problems and stimulate housing production has also waned
over time, though there is some debate about this point in high-cost, growing cities. To
the extent that economists today worry about the supply of private housing in the U.S.,
they more often focus on the role that local land use and building restrictions play in
restricting supply (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2002, Quigley and Raphael, 2004, 2005).
Perhaps the most important motivation for means-tested government housing programs
today in the U.S. is concern about housing affordability. The quality of America’s
housing stock increased dramatically over the 20th century, but at the same time it also
2

became more expensive both in real terms and relative to the earnings of low-income
households. As a result the focus of much current housing-policy discussion is the desire
to subsidize poor households to help them meet their housing needs.
This motivation raises standard questions about the tradeoff between transferring
resources to the poor versus reducing work effort, which we consider in Section IV. The
challenge in balancing this tradeoff can be seen in some of the different design choices
that have been made with different means-tested housing programs. For example the
rules of HUD programs like public housing or housing vouchers require participants to
contribute 30 percent of income to rent, while the program rules for the LIHTC charges a
flat rent to residents. The flat rent model has the disadvantage of making LIHTC units
unaffordable to a large share of the low-income households targeted by HUD programs.
On the other hand flat rents have the advantage of avoiding the large increase in effective
marginal tax rates on earnings that faces participants in HUD programs, which all else
equal will reduce labor supply through standard substitution effects. The 30 percent
effective marginal tax on earnings in HUD programs is actually moderate compared to
the UK Housing Benefit program, which has a taper rate of more than 60 percent (Brewer
et al., 2011). Of course, these work dis-incentives are most relevant for non-elderly, nondisabled adults, who at present comprise only about one-third of all participants in
HUD’s means-tested housing programs.
The goal of addressing problems of housing affordability also raises the question of why
government should help poor families meet their housing needs by providing in-kind
housing assistance rather than simply cash transfers. One obvious answer is donor
preferences – that is, taxpayers prefer to support low-income housing rather than simple
cash transfers. Another candidate answer is the belief that housing consumption has
either “internalities” that program participants may not fully understand, such as
beneficial effects on the ability of people to get and keep a job, or externalities, for
example in the form of improved health or schooling. Implicit here is the idea that in-kind
housing programs generate higher levels of housing consumption than would similarly
costly cash transfers, although this need not be true as a conceptual matter given the
complicated budget constraints created by these programs.
A different type of motivation for having in-kind housing programs instead of cash
transfers is to help reduce the disparities in neighborhood conditions experienced by
households of different races and incomes. Specifically, government-supported housing
developments could in principle bring poor families to less disadvantaged neighborhoods,
or actually directly improve the economic or social conditions of distressed
neighborhoods. Low-income households that are given cash instead could potentially be
hindered in their efforts to move to better neighborhoods by information failures and
discrimination by landlords. Local politics could also adversely affect the ability of either
government programs or cash transfers to help poor families move into less distressed
neighborhoods, by either constraining the selection of sites for government-provided
housing, or by making it more difficult for private-sector developers to build low-cost
housing in higher income areas and so effectively limiting private development to poor
and minority areas.
3

Another key implication of the current subsidy structure is that because families are able
to receive housing subsidies for as long as they continue to meet income and other
program eligibility criteria, most means-tested housing programs are implicitly
addressing the problem of low permanent income rather than income variability or
helping cushion families against negative income “shocks.” In principle, U.S. housing
policy could shift towards a system of providing either more modest subsidies or timelimited subsidies to a larger share of eligible people.
The empirical evidence reviewed in Section V of our chapter (which is limited in
important ways, as we discuss in detail below) suggests that while housing programs do
indeed increase housing consumption and quality for poor families and improve
affordability relative to not receiving a subsidy, surprisingly little is currently known
about the effects on these outcomes of housing programs relative to cash transfers.
There is also not overwhelming evidence to date to support the idea of large externalities
from housing consumption to the poor. For example, the means-tested housing programs
that HUD operates seem to on net reduce labor supply and earnings for program
participants. This suggests that whatever beneficial effects extra housing consumption
might have on work may be outweighed by the standard income and substitution effects
induced by these programs.
Another sort of externality argument that has often been made is the possibility that
inadequate housing or neighborhood conditions adversely affect productivity, health,
well-being, and behavioral outcomes, or what Rosen (1985) refers to as the “social cost
of slums.”4 While there is little evidence that housing conditions within the range that we
currently see in the U.S. generate major externalities, there is some indication that
investments in government housing programs can improve the condition and desirability
of surrounding neighborhoods under some circumstances. Further, there is some
evidence that families and children enjoy better health and overall well-being when living
in more advantaged neighborhoods, although housing subsidies do not necessarily move
families to better neighborhoods. The public housing program appears, if anything, to
lead families to live in more economically and racially isolated neighborhoods than they
would otherwise, and families receiving tenant-based subsidies like housing vouchers do
not typically use them to move to neighborhoods that are substantially different from the
ones they were living in previously without a subsidy. It is possible that modifications to
the design of the housing voucher program could induce or assist families in moving to
more advantaged areas; HUD is currently experimenting with such modifications, as we
discuss below.5
4 For example one of the initial motivations for housing programs in the 1930s was the potential effect of
slum conditions on delinquency by children (Hunt, 2009). And in announcing the War on Poverty in 1964,
President Lyndon B. Johnson argued: “Very often a lack of jobs and money is not the cause of poverty, but
the symptom. The cause may lie deeper in our failure to give fellow citizens a fair chance to develop their
own capacities, in a lack of education and training, in a lack of medical care and housing…”
5 As we discuss below, the current housing voucher program sets the fair market rent (FMR) – which
speaking loosely could be thought of as something like a rent “cap” for voucher-holders – at the 40th
percentile of the metropolitan statistical area. Using smaller geographic areas to define the FMR essentially
reduces the amount of housing unit quality poor families with vouchers need to give up for an improvement
in neighborhood amenities.
4

While most of the research has focused on how individual housing programs affect
participants, the question of how changing the mix of subsidies would affect families is
also relevant for policy. Most of the research in this area has been focused on comparing
HUD project-based versus tenant-based programs. Because the rent rules are mostly the
same for HUD’s public housing program and its voucher program, shifting from one
program to another within HUD’s budget does not deliver the same direct financial
benefits to households as does giving a subsidy to a previously unsubsidized household.
However by breaking the link between a government subsidy and a specific unit located
in a given place, vouchers at least have the potential to enable families to live in less
distressed neighborhoods. While moving to lower poverty neighborhoods does not seem
to have the sweeping effects on people’s behavior and life chances as much of the nonexperimental literature on “neighborhood effects” would have predicted, it does change
several important outcomes, particularly health, and improve overall well-being.
The final section concludes with some thoughts about the most pressing questions that
might be addressed in future research in this area.
I.

HISTORY OF THE PROGRAMS AND CURRENT RULES

Federal low-income housing programs can be broadly divided into three categories of
programs: (1) public housing; (2) privately-owned, subsidized housing; and (3) tenantbased vouchers.6 In this section we begin with a history of means-tested housing
programs in the U.S., which started with public housing. Over the years, the government
rhetoric surrounding housing has shifted away from publicly-owned housing towards
privately-owned housing, and more recently from place-based subsidies towards tenantbased support. In practice the flow of dollars has changed less than the rhetoric, largely
due to the growth in the LIHTC program, but there is no question that the private housing
market has come to play a much more central role in federal housing assistance. After
describing the history of these programs we then turn to a discussion of their key features
and rules.
A. Program History
1. Public Housing
Public housing, the federal government’s first major low-income housing program, was
established by the Housing Act of 1937. Although largely funded by the federal
government, public housing developments are owned and operated by housing authorities
established by local governments, which have control over siting, design and tenant
selection. The original model was that the federal government would pay for construction
6 The federal government also provides block grants to states and localities to use for a wide range of
housing-related activities. The HOME program awards funds annually to jurisdictions to support
rehabilitation programs for homeowners, programs to create and rehabilitate affordable rental housing or
the tenant-based rental assistance. The Community Development Block Grant program provides block
grants to support community development goals, including housing rehabilitation.
5

costs (through covering debt service on bonds issued to finance development costs), but
that local housing authorities would cover the operating costs through rental revenues.
Over time, buildings aged, utility costs rose, and rental revenues fell fall short of what
was needed to cover the costs of operations and maintenance. In response, the federal
government started to provide substantial subsidies for operations and improvements in
the early 1970s (HUD 1974).
The enactment of the public housing program was highly contested, as the private real
estate industry feared competition, and conservatives resisted public ownership as well as
long-term subsidies (Mitchell 1985). In fact, the program may have never emerged if not
for the crisis in the national economy. In the middle of the 1930s, the country was still
reeling from the Great Depression, with a national unemployment rate of 25 percent.
Public housing was sold partly as a way to increase construction employment and
stimulate the economy. As Senator Robert Wagner, the co-sponsor of the bill, poetically
put it, “The whole country awaits the time when the sound of the rivet and the saw are
joined more loudly in the chorus of economic recovery” (Mitchell 1985, p. 245).
Wagner’s testimony reveals a second motivation for public housing as well: slum
clearance. Wagner and many housing reformers were convinced that poor quality housing
generated social and economic externalities. As Wagner declared: “It is not necessary to
prove here that millions of people in America live in homes that are injurious to their
health and not conducive to their safety… Nor do I need to elaborate on the fact that bad
housing leaves its permanent scars upon the minds and bodies of the young, and thus is
transmitted as a social liability from generation to generation” (Mitchell 1985, p. 245).
Neighborhood externalities were raised as a concern as well. The U.S. Conference of
Mayors, key supporters of the bill, passed a resolution at their 1935 annual meeting
stating that “the disgraceful conditions in the city slums … have a directly detrimental
effect on the social well-being of these areas and the surrounding communities” (Mitchell
1985, p. 248).
Notably, there is less in the official congressional debate suggesting a motivation to
simply help the poor. While members of Congress did make the case that the program
would increase the supply of low-rent housing for low-income households, the targeting
of the program to low income households seems to have been justified more as a way to
restrict government investment to a segment of the market that private developers would
not serve in order to protect private owners from competition (Meehan 1979; Schill
1993). Further, the program was set up in a way that had housing authorities screen
tenants carefully, favoring those viewed to be temporarily poor (Friedman 1968; Vale,
2000).
After its contested enactment, the public housing program never grew to become fully
popular. At a national level, it has always faced loud opposition from the real estate
industry and market advocates who have questioned the efficiency of public ownership.
On a local level, residents have often fiercely opposed the construction of developments
within their communities, charging that they would undermine the architectural character
of their community, increase crime, and reduce property values.
6

Of course many liberal housing advocates originally supported the program, and tenants,
at least initially, were quite happy with their homes and communities. Most residents
found their housing units to be far superior to their previous homes (Wright 1981). Even
the notorious Pruitt-Igoe and Robert Taylor Homes developments were initially popular
among residents (Vale 2013).
But by the late 1950s, even those sympathetic to the need for direct housing subsidies
were starting to question the success of the public housing model. One issue was design.
Housing officials tended to build large developments that were architecturally distinct
from the surrounding neighborhoods. They felt such developments would help not only
to reduce costs but also to create order and “discourage regression” to the slums that they
had replaced (Wright 1981, p. 235). Liberal critics soon charged that this design approach
had been a mistake, and that the large, standardized buildings that made up public
housing developments, together with their placement on “super blocks” set apart from the
regular street grid, both stigmatized tenants and isolated them from their neighbors
(Bauer 1957).
A second concern with the public housing program as it was implemented concerned
siting. While there are many good arguments for local control, it allowed local
jurisdictions, especially those located in the suburbs, to opt out of participating in the
program, ensuring the concentration of public housing in central cities. Further, it
permitted city governments to build developments in areas already occupied by poor, and
typically minority, residents, further concentrating poverty and deepening racial
segregation (Schill and Wachter 1995). The extreme case, perhaps, was Chicago, where
of the 33 projects constructed in the 1950s and early 1960s, all but one was built in a
neighborhood that was at least 85 percent black (Hirsch, 1983).
In part due to the lack of popularity of public housing, the pace of construction never
matched the goals set out in the various housing acts. At its peak in the early 1990s, the
program reached 1.4 million units. Today, the number of public housing units has fallen
to 1.1 million as new public housing developments are no longer being created and many
have been demolished.
Most of the demolitions have occurred through the HOPE VI program, which aimed to
replace distressed public housing developments with lower-density, mixed-income
developments (Schwartz 2014). Between 1993 and 2007, HOPE VI supported the
demolition of more than 150,000 units of public housing, equal to 11% of the nation’s
total public housing stock at its high point. These demolished units have been fairly
geographically concentrated; 60% of them are located in just 33 cities. To the chagrin of
housing advocates, the program did not include a one-for-one replacement rule (that is, a
guarantee that each public housing unit that was demolished would be replaced), and only
about 55 percent of the demolished units will be replaced with public housing. The other
side of this argument is that many of the original units were vacant and uninhabitable at
the time of demolition (Schwartz 2014).

7

2. Privately-Owned Subsidized Housing
While there is just one public housing program, the federal government has created
numerous programs to subsidize the creation of privately-owned, low-income housing.
The programs emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, as criticism of the public housing
program and optimism about the potential of public-private partnerships to solve social
problems grew. Policy makers were also motivated by a desire to create a program that
would serve households with incomes too high to qualify for public housing but too low
to find stable, sound housing through the private market (Hays 1995). In the typical
model, the private organization would agree to provide housing with reduced rents for a
specified number of years in return for a below market interest rate loan. Initially only
nonprofits were allowed to participate, but soon for-profits were invited as well.
The initial programs did not provide rent subsidies; instead they attempted to insure that
low- and moderate-income households could occupy the developments by limiting
construction costs. But the newly constructed developments were expensive, and the
initial subsidies were not sufficient to write down the rents to a level affordable to lowincome households. Thus, occupants tended to have moderate incomes. The rent
supplement program was later developed to write down rents of low-income tenants who
lived in these developments to 25 percent of adjusted income (Olsen 2003). Annual
commitments grew considerably, and research showed that much of the subsidy was
going to cover administrative expenses as well as tax benefits to investors (Frieden 1980).
In 1974, the federal government introduced a new, and more generous, approach to
subsidizing low-income housing in the private market. In addition to providing subsidies
for construction or rehabilitation, the Section 8 New Construction and Substantial
Rehabilitation programs provided a direct rental subsidy to tenants. Developers were also
able to take advantage of accelerated depreciation allowances (allowing owners to claim
deductions that are larger than actual economic depreciation, and thereby pay lower
taxes, in early years of ownership). As a result of these generous subsidies, the program
was expensive. Indeed, these programs turned out to be so expensive that Congress
essentially terminated all of HUD’s construction programs in 1983.7
But just a few years after it ended HUD’s production programs, Congress created the
Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which
has now become the largest subsidy for the production of rental housing in the United
States.8 Unlike many other tax credits, low-income housing tax credits are limited in
supply and allocated annually to states based on their population. Initially, each state was
given a per capita allocation of $1.25.9 This amount increased to $1.75 in 2002 and has
been adjusted for inflation since, reaching $2.25 in 2013. (The justification for these per
7 Notably, Congress did not end the Section 515 program for rural housing, which was administered by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, and provides developers with long-term, low-interest loans and rent
subsidies to ensure that low-income tenants pay no more than 30 percent of their adjusted income on rent
(Schwartz 2014). The structure of the program was similar to HUD subsidy programs.
8 The program replaced other tax incentives for rental housing that were not means-tested.
9 While 9 percent credits are capped, 4% tax credits are not capped and are available for any low-income
housing development financed with tax-exempt bonds.
8

capita allocation formulas from the perspective of economic theory is not clear.) Each
annual allocation authorizes a ten-year stream of tax credits, which is estimated to reach
nearly $7 billion in 2014.10 By the end of 2012, the program had supported the creation of
nearly 2.5 million housing units, surpassing both the public housing program and other
HUD-supported, subsidized housing.11
The LIHTC program is administered by state allocating agencies, which determine the
priorities for the LIHTC program, and award credits to developers to support the
construction and rehabilitation of low-income, rental housing. Projects are eligible for tax
credits if at least 20 percent of their tenants have incomes below 50 percent of the area
median income (AMI) or at least 40 percent have incomes below 60 percent of AMI.
(Since many readers may find the poverty rate a more intuitive benchmark than AMI, it
may be helpful to note that in 2014 for a family of four, the annual poverty level is 39%
of the average area median income).12
In practice, the vast majority of LIHTC projects contain only low-income units, or units
affordable to households earning under 60 percent of area median income or lower, with
95 percent of units in tax credit projects qualified as low-income units. (While the credit
sets a minimum share of units within developments that are deemed affordable, the
amount of tax credits available for a project increases with the share of units that is
affordable.) Projects must meet these requirements for a minimum of 30 years to qualify
for the ten-year stream of tax credits.13
Each state agency is required to issue a qualified allocation plan (QAP) that outlines the
selection criteria it will use when awarding tax credits. Some criteria are required by the
federal government, such as setting aside at least ten percent of credits for nonprofit
developers and using the minimum amount of tax credit financing feasible. But states are
also allowed to adopt additional priorities, such as providing set asides for developments
in rural areas, or awarding bonus points for locating developments in geographic areas
within the state with greatest need (based on low vacancy rates, and/or high rents). As the
competition for credits has increased, these criteria may play a greater role in the final
distribution of tax credit projects.14
Many LIHTC developments also receive other sources of funding to cover construction
costs, such as low-interest loans from state and local governments and rental assistance
payments for very low-income tenants. A recent analysis of ten states found that half of
10 According to the Joint Committee on Taxation, the LIHTC will cost $6.7 billion in foregone revenue in
2014. http://crfb.org/blogs/tax-break-down-low-income-housing-tax-credit
11 http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/lihtc.html
12 http://www.ocpp.org/poverty/2014-median-income/
13 The original requirement was 15 years.
14 LIHTC projects that are financed through tax-exempt bonds can automatically qualify for LIHTC
credits of 4%. While these credits must meet all LIHTC restrictions, they are not allocated through a
competitive process and do not count towards the state yearly per capita cap.

9

LIHTC tenants were also receiving some form of government rental assistance as well,
either project- or tenant-based (O’Regan and Horn, 2013).
3. Housing Vouchers
Partly motivated by the high costs of construction programs, Congress created the
Section 8 Existing Housing Program in 1974 (now the Housing Choice Voucher
program), which awarded vouchers to low-income households to rent apartments on the
private market. While slightly different variants of the program have evolved over the
years, the basic structure has remained the same. Tenants generally pay 30 percent of
their income towards rent, while the federal government covers the difference between
this payment and the rent, up to a specified maximum payment standard (see below). To
qualify for the voucher program, housing units must meet certain quality and size
standards, and participation by landlords is voluntary, though 13 states and several
localities have now passed source of income discrimination laws that prohibit landlords
from discriminating against voucher holders.15 (Owners of LIHTC housing are also
prohibited from discriminating against voucher holders.) The voucher program is now
HUD’s largest housing subsidy program for low-income households.
B. Program Rules
In this section we discuss the rules for the most important housing programs described
above. Rather than discuss the rules program-by-program, we contrast how the different
program rules operate with respect to income eligibility and rent requirements.
1. Income eligibility
While all of these programs were designed to provide rental housing for low-income
households, income eligibility rules vary across programs and have varied over time
within programs. These fluctuations reflect changing attitudes over time about how to
balance the desire to serve the most disadvantaged families with other program objectives
such as generating sufficient rental income to support operating and maintenance costs,
trying to avoid dis-incentivizing work, and avoiding creating large concentrations of very
low-income families.
From the start, the public housing program was designed to target low-income families,
but the expectation that rents would largely cover operating costs gave local housing
authorities an incentive not to target the very lowest income households. The Housing
Act of 1937 simply stated that public housing tenants could earn no more than five times
the rent they paid for their homes. Many public housing authorities appear to have used
the leeway they had to screen tenants to choose working poor families (Schwartz 2014;
Vale 2000).

15 For a list of these states and localities and a description of the laws, see Poverty and Race Research
Action Council, 2005, updated 2014.
10

Over time, perhaps due in part to the aging of the stock or the availability of subsidized
homeownership, the median income of public housing tenants fell from 57 percent of the
national median in 1950 to just 29 percent in 1970 (Schwartz 2014). (Since most readers
of this volume will probably find the poverty rate to be a more intuitive metric than share
of area median income we note that 29 percent of the national median in 1970 amounted
to just $2,460, or about 80 percent of the poverty threshold for a family of three).
In 1974, due to concern about the concentration of poverty in public housing
developments, Congress required PHAs to establish tenant selection criteria that would
allow for “families with a broad range of incomes” and “avoid concentrations of lowincome and deprived families with serious social problems” (HCD Act 1974). Seven
years later, Congress completely changed course and adopted stringent targeting
requirements, mandating that 90 percent of occupants in existing public housing
buildings and 95 percent in newly constructed buildings have incomes below 50 percent
of the area’s median (Schill 1993). Further, Congress introduced requirements that
housing authorities give preferences to households that were involuntary displaced, living
in substandard housing or shelters, or paying more than 50 percent of their income on
rent. The combination of these rules meant that virtually all households entering public
housing now had incomes at the very low end of the local distribution. By 1990, the
median income of public housing residents fell to less than 20 percent of the national
median (Schwartz, 2014), and the proportion of public housing tenants with incomes
below 10 percent of the area median had risen to 20 percent (Spence 1993).
In 1998, the pendulum swung back again, at least partly, and Congress sought to limit
concentrations of poor households living in public housing. The Quality Housing and
Work Responsibility Act of 1998 mandated that 40 percent of households admitted into
public housing have incomes below 30 percent of the area median and let the threshold
fall to 30 percent in some developments in high-poverty areas.
Table 1 below shows that public housing tenants can technically earn up to 80 percent of
the area median income. But in practice due to preferences and also demand, most tenants
fall far below this limit. In 2013, 76 percent of public housing tenants earned incomes
below 30 percent of their local area median income (HUD, 2013). Similarly, tenants in
Section 8 New Construction and Substantial Rehabilitation developments can also
technically earn up to 80 percent of the area median income (AMI), again few do so in
practice, as shown in Section III.
The official income limits for the LIHTC program are lower than those for public
housing and project-based Section 8; LIHTC tenants can technically earn only 60 percent
of the area median income upon initially occupancy. In practice, however, LIHTC
tenants turn out to have higher average incomes because the program does not provide
rental assistance to tenants, and projects are typically underwritten to rents affordable to
households earning 60 percent of AMI. So unless tenants have other rent subsidies, like
housing vouchers, they typically earn incomes at about this level.
Although vouchers were initially aimed at households earning up to 80 percent of AMI,
over time the program has been targeted to lower income households. Today, other than
11

in a few special cases, tenants can earn no more than 50 percent of AMI, and the 1998
Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act mandated that 75% of new voucher
households must earn less than 30 percent of AMI. Despite this deeper targeting, Section
III shows that incomes of voucher holders appear to be about the same as those of tenants
in public housing and project-based Section 8 housing.
2. Rent requirements
As for rules about rents, rents in the public housing program were not initially tied to
tenant income – they were flat rents set at levels that would enable local authorities to
cover their operating costs. But costs grew faster than tenant incomes, and Congress
responded by passing a series of amendments (the Brooke amendments) between 1969
and 1971 that set rents at 25 percent of a tenant’s income to protect tenants (HUD 1974).
This percentage was raised to 30 percent in the early 1980s (Olsen 2004). Housing
authorities typically recertify tenants’ incomes every year.
The 1998 Housing Act required that housing authorities give families the option of
paying a flat rent based on local market rents, though relatively few accept the offer. As
for 2005, an estimated 10 percent of public housing tenants were paying a flat rent or a
ceiling rent (a capped rent amount on the income-based rent) (Finkel and Lam, 2008).16
Tenants generally also pay 30 percent of their income both in the voucher program and
the Section 8 New Construction/Substantial Rehabilitation program, just as in the public
housing program. In the voucher program, the federal government covers the difference
between the tenant payment and the rent, up to a specified maximum payment standard.17
In the first year of the program, tenants must pay no more than 40 percent of their income
towards rent; after initial lease-up families can pay more than 40 percent for units with
rents above the payment standard. Housing authorities recertify the income of voucher
holders every year, though housing agencies participating in the Moving to Work (MTW)
demonstration program, which exempts them from many of HUD’s standard rules, are
permitted to recertify less frequently.
Housing authorities can set payment standards between 90 and 110 percent of the fair
market rent (FMR) in the metropolitan area (or non-metro county), which is defined as
either the 40th or 50th percentile of rents, depending on the cost of housing18. HUD uses
metropolitan areas to define the local market, as they are believed to capture the full set
of housing options available to a household in that area. The drawback of using such
large areas to define FMRs is that units that rent below the 40th percentile within a
metropolitan area tend to be concentrated in the lowest income neighborhoods within that
area. HUD is currently experimenting with letting a few housing authorities set fair

16 The New York City Housing Authority accounted for about one third of all flat-rents units nationwide in
2005 (Finkel and Lam, 2008).
17 HUD has rent reasonableness rules that prohibit PHAs from paying the FMR in neighborhoods where
the market rents are less than the FMR. But it is unclear how well these rules are enforced.
18 PHAs can apply to HUD for “exception payment standards” above or below this range.
12

market rents at the zip code level, with the aim of providing voucher holders with access
to a broader range of neighborhoods.19
In contrast to the HUD programs, tax credit rents are flat and not tied to a tenant’s
income. The flat rents can be no higher than the rent that would be affordable to a
household earning the maximum income allowed for the low-income units in a tax credit
development (typically 60 percent of the area median income).20 Developers may charge
lower than the maximum allowable rents, but rents charged for the unit are the same
regardless of the income of the household who actually lives there. As a result, tenants in
tax credit developments can pay considerably more than 30 percent of their income
towards rent. Technically, there is no cap on rent burdens, though many owners impose
minimum income requirements on applicants to ensure reasonable burdens. Further,
LIHTC households are allowed to stay in developments even if their incomes rise,
suggesting burdens may be lower than 30 percent for some households. In a study of
LIHTC developments in 18 states, O’Regan and Horn (2013) find that a majority of
tenants were rent-burdened according to standard definitions: 41 percent of LIHTC
tenants paid between 30 and 50 percent of their incomes for rent and 16 percent paid over
half of their incomes for rent.
The fact that the average incomes of LIHTC residents are higher than those for
participants in HUD-sponsored programs highlights a tension in the design of meanstested housing programs: Setting tenant rent contributions to equal 30 percent of income
has the downside of greatly increasing the effective marginal tax rates on earnings facing
households. On the other hand setting flat rents combined with the need for projects to
reach revenue targets to be economically viable means that the flat rent in practice can
wind up pricing out many low-income households.
II.

PROGRAM STATISTICS

This section considers data on low-income housing assistance over time and the
characteristics of families receiving federal low-income housing subsidies. We then
review statistics on aggregate housing assistance receipt relative to eligibility, and then
describe trends in federal spending on low-income housing subsidies.
A. Trends in Low-Income Housing Assistance
The largest federal low-income housing assistance programs serve approximately six
million households today. Figure 1 displays the number of units or households by
program over time. For over 30 years government-managed public housing was the only
major form of federal low-income housing assistance. The mid-1970s gave rise to
19 At this time, six housing authorities are operating “Small Area Fair Market Rents.” The Housing
Authority of Cook County (IL), Chattanooga Housing Authority (TN), the City of Long Beach Housing
Authority (CA), Laredo Housing Authority (TX), and the Town of Mamaroneck Housing Authority (NY)
have voluntarily joined the demonstration. Dallas Housing Authority (TX) continues to operate with zip
code FMRs resulting from a lawsuit.
20 Rents are considered affordable to a household if they amount to no more than 30 percent of a
household’s pre-tax income.
13

privately-owned and managed properties as an important source of federal low-income
housing assistance with the development of the Section-8 tenant-based and newconstruction programs. By the early 1990s, the public housing, tenant-based and projectbased Section-8 programs were roughly equal in size, with each serving about 1.4 million
households. The LIHTC program was introduced as part of the tax reform act of 1986
and has grown rapidly since.
During the past 20 years, the public housing stock has shrunk by about 300,000 units,
with about 150,000 of the most distressed public housing units demolished through the
HOPE VI program. While the project-based section 8 and public housing stock have
declined by nearly 600,000 units in the last twenty years, this has been more than offset
by an additional 2.2 million households served through the Housing Choice Voucher
program and the LIHTC (Table 2).21 Today, privately-owned and operated properties
house nearly three-quarters of assisted households.
B. Characteristics of Households Served
Table 3 provides a picture of households assisted by HUD rental assistance programs.
The roughly 4.5 million households served through the public housing, housing choice
vouchers, project-based section-8 and smaller programs account for roughly 10 million
persons. In this section we focus on HUD-assisted households. One challenge describing
federally assisted renters is the absence of data on households served by the LIHTC.
Until very recently, no federal agencies were responsible for collecting this data. HUD is
now beginning to collect this information, but clean nationally representative data is not
yet available.
HUD assisted households are on average quite disadvantaged with incomes of $12,000$14,000 across HUD’s major programs. Three quarters of households earn less than 30
percent of their Area Median Income (AMI). Although there is no national database of
LIHTC tenants, a recent analysis shows that LIHTC tenants have considerably higher
incomes than households participating in HUD programs. Analyzing tenant income data
for 18 states, O’Regan and Horn (2013) report that 45 percent of LIHTC tenants earned
less than 30 percent of the area median income in 2009, and about a fifth earned over 50
percent of the local AMI. (Indeed a significant minority of LIHTC tenants earn above 60
percent of AMI because there is no requirement for households whose income grows
above that income limit to move from LIHTC housing.)
Roughly 40 percent of all HUD-assisted households have children. A large share of
HUD-assisted households are headed by an elderly member (33%) or a disabled head or
spouse (33%). Across HUD programs, about 24 percent of HUD assisted households
have earned income; this number is slightly higher for public housing and vouchers
where there are more working-age adults. The majority of HUD-assisted residents are
racial or ethnic minorities. Slightly over one-third of households are non-Hispanic White.

21 Of course the number of households in the U.S. has grown by some 24 million over the last twenty years
14

There are some important differences across programs. Residents of Project-based
section-8 tend to be whiter and older relative to participants in other HUD programs, in
part because of the inclusion of rental assistance delivered to Section 202 developments,
which house the low-income, elderly. Housing voucher households are on average
younger, more likely to include children and larger than households served by public
housing or project-based section-8. Single female-headed households with children make
up about 40% of voucher households and roughly one-third of public housing
households. When utilities are included, voucher households pay more on average for
their housing than either public housing or project-based section 8 residents (not
adjusting for quality).
Given that some justification for housing assistance is based on the presence of
neighborhood externalities, the average neighborhood characteristics across programs is a
relevant statistic. On average, public housing households reside in census tracts where 32
percent of residents are poor. This is considerably higher than the neighborhoods
occupied by the average voucher tenant (22 percent poor) or residents of project-based
section 8 (23 percent). Of course because the program populations are slightly different,
these differences in neighborhood environments could partly reflect differences in the
constraints or preferences of the participants in the different programs. Below we review
the evidence that is available on the effects on neighborhood environments of changing
the type of subsidy that a given family receives.
C. Overlap with Other Subsidy programs
How do housing subsidies overlap with other transfer programs? The interaction of other
federal and local subsidy programs is in general an under-studied issue and one that is
relevant to, among other things, understanding whether participating in multiple
programs reduces the benefit amounts families receive from each individual program.
The HUD rent calculations exclude certain benefits, but include others in the
determination of income and thus rents. Benefits that count towards income and rent
calculations include: UI, SSDI, SSI, and TANF. HUD excludes most benefits tied to
medical expenses from the calculation of adjusted income used to set rents. Importantly,
HUD excludes SNAP benefits, LIHEAP, earnings from or payments from participation in
WIA programs, and EITC refunds in the income calculation (HUD Occupancy
Handbook, Chapter 5).
As noted earlier, HUD rent calculations implicitly tax earnings at marginal rate of 30
percent. This tax rate interacts in economically meaningful ways with other subsidy
program rules. Figure 2 plots the distribution of wage-earning single-earner households
(with one-child) against the EITC schedule in 2014. Roughly 94 percent of voucher
households in this group of wage-earning households and about 89 percent of public
housing fall within the EITC-range. Approximately 30 percent these wage-earners are in
the “phase-in” region, another 30 percent are in the flat portion of the EITC schedule, and
about a third are in the “phase-out” region. In 2014, the credit rate for the phase-in region
was 34 percent in the phase-in region for single-filers with one child (Tax Policy Center,
Briefing Book 2014). This means that for earnings gains for households with incomes in
15

the phase-in region, the EITC more than offsets the increase in rents brought about by the
HUD rules. More attention should be given to examining how federal subsidy programs
overlap and connect.
D. Eligible Households and Housing Affordability
The number of households served by federal rental assistance has increased over time, in
absolute terms, and households receiving federal assistance are quite disadvantage by
standard measures. Two important lingering questions are: how has the need for lowincome housing assistance evolved over time? And what proportion of eligible
households receive federal rental assistance?
The concept of “need” for housing assistance depends on the precise justification. As we
will discuss in Section VI, the motivation for present day housing programs tends to
focus on the issue of affordability- expressed as the share of income spent on rent. Of
course, affordability measured in this way can decrease in response to falling income
even as housing costs remain constant. By most measures, housing costs have increased
in real terms in the post-war era. The relevant question is whether rental prices have
outpaced income growth. Figure 2 plots changes in real rental prices against changes in
25th percentile household incomes since 1980 (base year, 1983). Over this period, rents
largely tracked income until the Great Recession. Since 2007, incomes have plummeted
while rents have rebounded after a brief dip. Table 4 also suggests that low-income
households spend more today on rent than they did 50 years ago. The median renter
household in 1960 spent about 18 percent of their income on rent; today they spend 29
percent. Renters who were in the bottom fifth of the income distribution devoted about 47
percent of their income to rent in 1960, compared to 63 percent today. This trend is at
least in part due to stagnant real incomes for renters over this period, but there housing
expenses seem to have risen in real (inflation-adjusted) terms as well. Given the large
improvements in housing conditions over this time, it remains somewhat unclear how
much increases in real rents are due to improvements in housing quality.
As noted above, one very striking feature of federal low-income housing assistance is the
small share of eligible households that actually receive a subsidy. As discussed in Section
II, most federal low-income housing programs allow households to remain eligible up to
80 percent of Area Median Income, but target households with lower incomes. The 2011
AHS shows nearly 19 Million renters with incomes below 50 percent of Area Median
Income, with 4.6 Million of them reporting receiving some kind of rental assistance.
These figures suggest that slightly fewer than one in four eligible households currently
receive a housing subsidy. To be fair, these numbers may not count many low-income
households in tax credit developments who do not also receive a rent subsidy, but these
households receive a much smaller effective subsidy.
In just about all parts of the country housing assistance is oversubscribed, and local
housing authorities have developed a number of different systems to prioritize
households on the program waitlists. According to a 2012 survey of about 80 percent of
housing authorities, covering about 85 percent of assisted housing, there are more than
16

4.9 million households on wait-lists for housing vouchers and 1.6 million households on
public housing wait-lists. These numbers may slightly overstate the number of unique
households on a waitlists, because households could conceivably be on multiple waitlists.
Low-income housing assistance is the only major federal welfare program rationed in this
way, a point to which we return below.
E. Budget
Table 5 shows direct federal spending on housing programs since 1980 in nominal and
real (2013) dollars. Expenditures on housing assistance to low-income families rose
substantially in real terms through the late 1980s and early 1990, were stable through
much of the 2000s, spiked in 2010 and 2011 partly due to investments from the federal
stimulus package (ARRA), and then declined recently as a result of cuts triggered by
budget sequestration. These outlay figures do not capture the opportunity costs of using
land for low-income housing, or any spillover costs (positive or negative) of the
programs.
Most federal subsidies for low-income housing can be found in HUD’s budget, though
the USDA operates a few smaller rural housing programs, including project-based rental
assistance to 270,000 households through the Section 521 program at a cost of roughly $1
billion annually.22 Importantly, Table 5 excludes tax expenditures, including subsidies
that come through the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. Table 6 provides estimates of
the subsidies for LIHTC for the past ten years. The LIHTC cost over 6 billion in 2013.
III.

REVIEW OF ISSUES SURROUNDING THE PROGRAMS

In this section we discuss several different conceptual issues that are raised in the design
and operation of means-tested housing programs. First, we discuss the justification for
these programs. The growing emphasis on affordability as a motivation for the existence
of such programs raises the obvious question for economists about why government
relies on in-kind housing programs instead of just providing cash transfers. Many of the
rationales for in-kind housing programs rest on the assumption that such programs will
lead to greater consumption of housing than would a cash transfer of equal cost to the
government, but as we note below this need not be the case. We also discuss the potential
“internalities” as well as externalities associated with housing consumption, which are
frequently cited as key justifications for housing programs. We pay particular attention to
potential effects on labor supply, and how housing programs balance the general tension
that arise with all poverty programs between supporting poor households and not trying
to discourage work. The third issue we discuss is how different housing programs affect
the neighborhoods that participants live in as well as how they shape neighborhood
environments for others. The final issue addressed here is the logic of the current
system’s approach of providing very generous subsidies to just a small sub-set of incomeeligible households.
A. Justifications for Low-Income Housing Subsidies
22 USDA also operates a mortgage subsidy program, Section 515 (<$1B/year)
17

The justifications for government involvement in housing markets have shifted over the
years, and they varied even at their beginning. The development of the nation’s public
housing program was motivated in part to stimulate the economy after the Depression,
but also partly to address perceived failures on the supply side of the private housing
market. Early housing reformers maintained that private enterprise only constructed
adequate quality homes for households near the top of the income distribution, and that
government involvement was critical to rescue low-income households from dangerous
slums, which they believed bred social ills (Von Hoffman 1996). This view seems to
ignore the important role of “filtering” in supplying housing to low-income households,
where a given housing unit becomes less expensive over time as its condition declines.
Whatever the initial arguments were in the 1930s around supply problems in the private
housing market, the supply of quality housing has clearly changed dramatically since
then. Census measures of substandard housing, such as units lacking complete plumbing
facilities, have declined dramatically from a little less than half of all housing units (45.3
percent) in 1940 to a tiny share of all housing (2 percent) in 2012. Over-crowding has
shown similarly large decreases since 1940 from nearly one-in-five households with
more than 1-person per room to one-in-twenty households today. The share of units
without a septic or sewer connection has similarly declined. The incidence of housing
problems has fallen substantially in nearly every measurable way. Mirroring these
declines in problems has been an improvement in the availability of housing amenities.
Less than half of all housing units in 1973 had some form of air conditioning (central air
or room-units). In 2011, more than 85 percent of housing had either central air or a roomunit air conditioning.23
As housing conditions have improved, affordability has worsened. The median renter
household in 1960 was paying approximately 18 percent of his/her total family income in
rent; the equivalent figure today is 29 percent. As with health care, in the area of housing
American households are now paying more but getting more as well.
Today’s motivation for low-income housing subsidies is much more about affordability
and less about quality, though current housing programs still impose some quality
restrictions.24 Implicit in the argument that households are paying too much for housing is
that they lack income to cover consumption of other goods. But if the aim of housing
subsidies is to reduce under-consumption of non-housing goods, why provide in-kind
housing subsidies rather than cash transfers?
There are a few arguments to justify such in-kind support, many of them generic to the
whole issue of in-kind programs rather than specific to housing per se. The first potential
justification is donor preferences. In-kind transfers typically are only preferred on
23 A different type of argument noted by Aaron (1972, p. 18) is the possibility that the private supply of
housing responds to changes in housing demand with a lag that policymakers view as “too long.”
24 The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development bi-annually tracks a measure called “worstcase housing needs” which are unsubsidized low-income households24 paying more than 50 percent of
their income towards rent or occupying “severely inadequate” housing as measured by the American
Housing Survey. In 2011, there were 8.45 Million of these households of which just 3 percent resided in
substandard housing (HUD 2013).
18

paternalistic grounds. Currie (2008) provides a thorough review of the theory justifying
in-kind transfers (see also Aaron, 1972). Probably the most realistic model of this
paternalism for low-income housing policy is to allow for an interdependence of
preferences among donors (taxpayers) and recipients whereby donors derive some utility
from seeing recipients consume a particular good, in this case housing. Another related
possibility is that donors have preferences to restrict the consumption choice set of lowincome households to rule out consumption of particular goods such alcohol, cigarettes or
luxury goods. Whether it is a preference for consumption of housing or against other
goods, in-kind housing transfers do indeed seem to have more political support than cash
transfers. For example a 2003 survey found that just 39 percent of Americans support
cash payments to the poor when there is no barrier to employment, while 89 percent of
Americans support low-income housing assistance (Lennen et al 2003).
On the other hand 90 percent of Americans do not necessarily support the specific lowincome housing programs administered by the federal government. This may or may not
be related to the federal government’s decision to continue to administer a bewildering
variety of housing programs, even though most of them are no longer producing new
units. Forty years ago the authors of Housing in the Seventies, the 1974 HUD report
summarizing the findings of the National Housing Policy Review, identified 20 different
subsidized housing programs and called the nation’s housing laws “a hodge podge of
accumulated authorizations” which “contain internal inconsistencies, numerous
duplications, cross-purposes, and overlaps as well as outright conflicts and gimmickry”
(HUD 1974, p. 22). The authors of the report attribute the proliferation to the multiplicity
of goals that housing programs are designed to achieve, ranging from stimulating the
economy to removing slums, assisting the poor, and furthering economic and racial
integration. It may also be that the fragility of the political support for low-income
housing contributes to the proliferation too. It is far from certain that voters would
support a simple, broad-based housing entitlement program. It is perhaps no coincidence
that the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program is a tax expenditure program that does
not require annual appropriations.
A second argument for having means-tested housing programs is that providing in-kind
subsidies rather than cash payments reduces the risk of fraud as households will be less
motivated to try to secure housing rather than cash (Nichols and Zeckhauser 1981). This
argument is also generic to the whole issue of in-kind subsidies, not housing specific.
A third argument is that housing is a “merit good” – that Americans believe that all
residents of the United States, as stated in the Housing Act of 1949, deserve a “decent
home and suitable living environment.” However if housing is a normal good, providing
low-income households with more cash would increase their housing consumption. This
raises a critical question for low-income housing programs: do housing subsidies increase
housing consumption more than an equivalently sized cash transfer?
The federal low-income housing programs produce complicated budget sets for
participating households, with varying rules determining income deductions and
exemptions. We limit our focus here to general cases corresponding to the larger unit19

based assistance programs: public housing and the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC), and tenant-based rental assistance (Housing Vouchers). For a more detailed
theoretical analysis of federal low-income housing programs, see Olsen (2003, 2008).
First we consider the simple unit-based assistance case. For the public housing program,
a participating household is simply offered a fixed quality of housing QPH at a rent equal
to 30 percent of their income (Y) after adjustments. Ignoring the distortions of the
transfer on labor supply, the static budget set is represented in Figure 4. The vertical axis
is the quantity of all other goods consumed (Qx), and the horizontal axis is a scalar index
of housing quality consumed (QH).
As noted by Olsen (2003), economic theory does not yield an unambiguous prediction as
to whether a household offered public housing will increase its housing consumption.
Public housing admission produces a take-it or leave-it offer of a fixed quality of
housing. In practice public housing probably offers a better housing alternative for
families applying for assistance – however it may be that some households would
consume better housing in the absence of a subsidy, and so enrollment in public housing
would lead them mainly to increase consumption of other (non-housing) goods.
Like public housing, the LIHTC program provides a take-it or leave-it offer of a fixed
quality of housing. Unlike public housing, which lets program participants increase
consumption of other goods by fixing the tenant’s rent contribution at 30 percent of
income (less than what most unsubsidized households pay towards rent), the LIHTC
program may have less of an impact on the consumption of other goods (absent
additional subsidies) because rents are not tied to a given tenant’s income. Instead, rents
are set to 30 percent of 60 percent of the Area Median Income (roughly twice the poverty
line in most parts of the country). Thus, it is possible that the LIHTC program doesn’t
offer substantially lower rents in many markets than low-income households would pay
in absence of the program, but does deliver higher quality for a given rent level than most
housing alternatives for low-income households. In high-cost markets, households in
LIHTC units are likely spending less on rent than their unsubsidized counterparts and
getting higher-quality units.
Housing vouchers are more flexible than project-based subsidies. Recipients get a capped
rent subsidy to lease any decent unit on the private market – conditional on the owner
accepting the voucher. Recipients pay 30 percent of their income, and the voucher pays
the difference in rent, up to a locally-defined rent ceiling. The structure of the voucher
subsidy produces a complex budget set for voucher households (illustrated in figure 5).
The rules of the voucher program are such that it doesn’t guarantee increased housing
consumption. Families receiving a voucher can occupy the same unit as they resided in
prior to voucher receipt, so long as that unit meets the voucher program’s quality
standards. While “leasing in place” essentially leaves money on the table for the many
poor households living in units with monthly rents below (perhaps far below) what is
effectively the voucher’s maximum allowable rent (the FMR), around 20 percent of
newly issued voucher holders use the voucher to lease their previous unit (Finkel and
Buron, 2001). One reason households do this is because they have a limited amount of
time to find housing (typically around 90 days) when first issued a voucher, after which
the voucher offer is rescinded by the local housing authority so that some other household
20

can use it. Presumably some of these families who lease in place will “re-optimize” with
future moves. If housing is a normal-good, as we would expect for most households, the
design of the program should eventually increase housing consumption.
It remains unclear whether the current system of housing subsidies increases housing
consumption more than equivalently-sized cash transfers. Unfortunately, to our
knowledge, no experiment has been run to answer this particular question. Hanushek
(1986) reviews results on housing expenditures from the Negative Income Tax
Experiment and the Housing Allowance Demand Experiment and concludes that they are
quite similar. If simple cash transfers produce similar impacts on housing consumption, it
is difficult to argue that in-kind housing subsidies are efficient. This is an important
unresolved question that should be a priority for future research.
A final justification for in-kind housing programs is if housing consumption generates
externalities. We turn to this issue next.
B. Externalities from housing consumption
The Progressive era reformers argued that slums caused disease and social pathologies,
and that these maladies could spread to the larger population (Von Hoffman 2012). This
early motivation, which focused on externalities resulting from poor-quality housing and
neighborhood conditions, identified poor housing as a cause rather than a simple
consequence of poverty and social problems. If poor housing conditions imposed some
external costs to society, then efficiency gains could be realized by increasing housing
consumption to the socially optimal level.
While little rigorous research has explored how inadequate housing might generate
negative externalities in practice, there are some obvious candidate channels such as
physical housing quality, over-crowding, and residential mobility (Leventhal and
Newman 2010). Housing quality could influence outcomes – particularly health - through
the presence of toxins or hazards such as lead paint or asbestos. If information about the
presence of these hazards is asymmetric or imperfect, then landlords may not know about
or choose to report the presence of potential toxins, and households won’t fully
internalize the cost of locating in housing units that contain these hazardous materials.
As for crowding, the limited personal space in crowded apartments could facilitate the
transmission of disease (Goux and Maurin, 2008), create stress and induce physiological
distress (Evans, 2003). Over-crowding could in principle also hinder children’s academic
performance or other schooling outcomes by restricting opportunities for concentrated
study (Goux and Maurin, 2008).
Housing subsidies could potentially also help to increase residential stability. Involuntary
moves theoretically could have damaging collateral effects on individuals. These moves
could induce acute stress on parents from events such as eviction, which could in turn
affect parenting and children’s outcomes (Desmond 2012). Residential moves might also
force children to change schools, which could potentially lower achievement for moving
21

students as well as students at receiving schools (Hanushek et al 2004). Involuntary
moves could disrupt social networks, which could be important to adult labor market
attachment. If housing instability carries large social costs and results principally from an
inability to meet rental payments, then housing subsidies could be efficient if they reduce
these external costs substantially. Whether these externalities exist and are economically
meaningful is an empirical matter, which we discuss in Section V.
Of particular interest to economists has been the question of whether and how housing
consumption and means-tested housing programs affect productivity and labor supply.
Simple static models suggest housing assistance should reduce labor supply through
income and substitution effects. The majority of current federal housing subsidies require
that 30 percent of recipient income is devoted to rent (the LIHTC being one notable
exception in charging a flat rent instead). This means that the size of the subsidy declines
linearly with income, or that income is effectively “taxed” at a rate of 30 percent.
In a simple static labor supply model, the impact of housing assistance can be understood
as a basic income and substitution effect, which is illustrated in Figure 6. In the absence
of a subsidy, the household faces budget constraint AZ, and optimizes at U, where the
wage rate equals the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure. The
housing subsidy modifies the budget constraint to ABC. Due to the program rules, the
subsidy lowers the relative price of leisure and induces a substitution effects equal to SE
in figure 6. The additional income from the subsidy has an income effect denoted IE as
the household shifts to U’. In this simple model, the housing subsidy reduces labor supply
and the effective value of the subsidy shrinks from G to S.
This static model is useful, but in reality labor supply decisions play out over multiple
periods and households wait months or years to receive a subsidy, which complicates the
picture considerably. For example a family that is on the wait-list for a program may
realize that their effective marginal tax rate may be much higher in the future and so
decide to shift work effort towards current periods when effective rates are lower. Some
suggestive evidence that at least some people do indeed respond this way is presented in
Jacob and Ludwig (2012).
Other complications to the standard static model raise the possibility that housing
programs could actually increase labor supply in a more persistent way. For example
housing subsidies could increase labor supply if they cause households to increase
housing consumption and additional work is needed to maintain a given level of nonhousing consumption. The residential stability created by housing assistance could also
increase labor supply in the long-run by stabilizing families’ housing circumstances and
allowing them to invest more time and attention to job search and training. What the
available data tell us about the net effect of housing programs on labor supply is
discussed in detail below.
C. Neighborhood Access and Neighborhood Externalities

22

One possible contributor to the proliferation of low-income housing programs is the close
connection between these programs and the policy goals of reducing racial/ethnic
segregation, and more generally of promoting access to “better neighborhoods.” The link
between housing and neighborhood conditions was referenced in the landmark Housing
Act of 1949, which established as a national goal a decent home and “a suitable living
environment for every American.”
Economists have long understood that the rent of price of a housing unit is directly linked
to the neighborhood conditions around it; that is, surrounding neighborhood conditions
are an amenity that is capitalized into the price of an apartment or house. If
neighborhoods affect life chances, and housing subsidies change the neighborhood
conditions of the poor, then housing subsidies could be justified on the grounds that they
improve outcomes for low-income families through their effect on neighborhood. Of
course policymakers may care about the level of racial or income segregation of
American neighborhoods for its own sake, even if neighborhood conditions do not
change people’s behavior or long-term outcomes.
The design of low-income housing programs may have a large bearing on the degree to
which they deliver “better neighborhoods.” One critical distinction is between placebased subsidies, like public housing and the LIHTC program, versus tenant-based
subsidies like housing vouchers.
If place-based subsidies such as public housing change where subsidized households
would otherwise live in the absence of a subsidy, then such programs affect the
neighborhoods conditions experienced by subsidized families by changing both the site
they live in themselves and the composition of the other tenants around them. For public
housing, the immediate tenants in the same building or development are likely to be very
disadvantaged – and may be more disadvantaged compared to who their neighbors would
have been had they not been admitted to public housing. This problem was compounded
historically by the political decisions made by local housing authorities to locate public
housing developments in some of the most racially and economically isolated areas of
their cities, as noted in section II above.
Housing programs could also change the neighborhood environments that low-income
families experience by directly changing the neighborhoods, as opposed to changing what
neighborhoods poor families live in. The effect of place-based subsidies on the conditions
of surrounding neighborhoods is more theoretically ambiguous. If high-income
households view subsidized housing as a disamenity, then they may choose to avoid
living near to them, which could result in lower-quality public services. Low-income
housing programs could also reduce property values if subsidized housing is perceived as
introducing crime or disorder to a neighborhood.
On the other hand housing programs could improve neighborhood conditions and
property values if they help remove disamenities such as blighted structures and vacant
lots. A second mechanism through which such programs could change property values is
by increasing the total population living in an area, which can support more commercial
23

activity and potentially promote safety (Ellen et al 2001). A large literature has
investigated empirically the relationship between investments in subsidized housing and
neighboring property values, which we consider in the next section.
Concern about the possible effects of project-based subsidies in geographically
concentrating poor families has led to growing policy interest in either public housing or
LIHTC developments that are designed as “mixed-income” developments (Joseph, 2013).
These are projects in which local authorities include “market-rate” units in redeveloped
or new public or LIHTC housing. Casual empiricism about where people choose to live
in the U.S. context seems to suggest that most non-poor households all else equal would
prefer to live among other non-poor households. If this is indeed true, that would mean
that mixed-income developments might need to offer non-poor households some sort of
subsidy to choose units in these developments instead of somewhere else. So “market
rate” may be something of a misnomer. A different potential consequence associated with
mixed-income buildings is that overall construction costs for low-income units may be
higher in a building that is mixed-income (because of higher land costs and amenities
needed to attract market-rate tenants) than it would be for a building that would house
entirely low-income households.
Tenant-based subsidies such as housing vouchers have long been thought to be a better
policy mechanism to improve the neighborhood quality of poor households, since
individual voucher-holders can choose where to live rather than face a take-it-or-leave-it
offer of a public housing unit in a development that houses larger numbers of other poor
families (Olsen 2008). However landlord discrimination against voucher holders – while
outlawed in some states – is routinely found in audit studies (Lawyers Committee for
Better Housing, 2002). Further, finding rental units in better neighborhoods may entail
substantial search costs for tenants who are issued a voucher, who may have limited
transportation, child-care or information to access less disadvantaged neighborhood
(Rosen 2014). And as noted above what is essentially the housing voucher maximum rent
(the FMR) is set at the metropolitan-area level; given that rental units in better
neighborhoods tend to be more expensive (holding all else equal), vouchers will either
require families to accept some reduction in unit quality in exchange for living in an more
affluent neighborhoods or in some cases may even be priced out of more affluent
neighborhoods altogether.
Household preferences could also attenuate the degree to which housing voucher receipt
translates into changes in neighborhood conditions. For example social ties also likely
play a role in potentially limiting the neighborhoods considered by voucher recipients
(Desmond 2012). If people choose to locate near family and friends, and disadvantaged
individuals tend to have disadvantaged social networks located in higher poverty
neighborhoods, then this may restrict where voucher families look for housing. Section V
reviews the empirical evidence on this question.
This discussion highlights two open empirical questions that are critical for low-income
housing policy. The first is whether compared to in-kind housing programs, providing
low-income families with cash transfers would lead to larger or smaller changes in the
24

housing and neighborhood environments in which they live. The second has to do with
the ongoing debate in the housing policy community about project-based vs. tenant-based
subsidies in terms of the relative risks of “government failure” versus “market failure.” In
practice these relative risks may vary according to local conditions, such as the tightness
of the local housing market, and could also vary according to what type of place-based
program is being considered as an alternative to tenant-based programs.25 Understanding
more about the relative performance of project-based vs. tenant-based programs under
different situations (and for different types of program participants) would be very useful
in informing future policy debates.
C. Concentrating vs. Dispersing Subsidy Resources
As noted above, the current system of means-tested housing programs is unusual among
current U.S. social programs in its narrow distribution of resources: fewer than onequarter of income-eligible households receive benefits from HUD programs, but those
who do can receive subsidies worth roughly $8,000 per year (HUD, Congressional
Justification FY2015),26 and which in more expensive cities can be worth $12,000 per
year or even more (see for example Jacob and Ludwig, 2012). In principle one could
imagine making our housing programs more like our other social programs, and
increasing the share of income-eligible people who benefit by reducing the perparticipant subsidy value. Here we consider the conceptual tradeoffs that would be
associated with such a change in policy.
For starters it is worth considering the degree to which path dependence in housing
policies has contributed to the current distribution of resources. As noted in Section II,
when housing programs began in earnest in the 1930s, these subsidies were delivered by
just one program – public housing. In many ways the government essentially backed into
large per-participant subsidies by building developments that were of higher quality than
most of the slum buildings from which families were originally drawn (which set the cost
per housing unit), then setting subsidy amounts with an eye towards keeping units
affordable to low-income households. The only way to reduce the subsidy amount would
have been to either reduce the quality of the housing themselves, which would be
problematic, or increase the rent contributions required by residents, which would
undermine the goal of helping the poorest families afford better units.
Over time the shift towards other subsidy programs has in principle created more options
for how the $40 billion per year in housing programs are allocated across households. In
particular, the housing voucher program rules could be set in any number of ways that
would reduce the subsidy amount per household. One reason this has not happened is the
opposition of housing advocates, who seek to grow the budgets of housing programs over
time to a level where all income-eligible households can receive the large subsidy
amounts that current housing-program participants receive. Since fewer than one-quarter
25 For example in the LIHTC program, developers rather than government officials propose the location of
projects, so the risk of government failure in the location of those developments might be lower than with
traditional public housing.
26 The average monthly HUD subsidy was $647 in 2013 (HUD Congressional Justification FY 2015).
25

of eligible households currently participate in such programs, this would require
something like a quadrupling of the annual budget outlays for such programs.
In the meantime, what are the tradeoffs of the current approach versus spreading
available resources out across more households? Some advocates argue that any level of
housing subsidy below some threshold is insufficient to help poor families. One version
of this argument is that in many housing markets, landlords would resist renting to poor
households with only shallow subsidies, viewing them as too risky. A different version of
the argument is that high housing costs combined with local housing codes and HUD
quality standards sharply limit the pool of decent, lower rent units. As a result, shallower
subsidies would still leave poor families paying unsustainable shares of their rents or
living in poor housing and so would not improve their well-being. It is worth noting that
this assumption stands in contrast to the usual assumption within economics of
diminishing marginal utility of consumption. It also stands in contrast to findings
elsewhere in the social policy literature that there are diminishing marginal benefits from
additional household resources on other outcomes that policy cares about, such as
children’s life outcomes (Loken, Mogstad and Wiswall, 2012).
In principle a different way that the government could distribute subsidies more widely
would be to provide time-limited subsidies, which could potentially allow a large share of
all low-income families receive subsidies at some point in their lifetimes. At present
families can keep their subsidies indefinitely so long as their incomes remain low enough
and they do not violate any of the program’s behavioral rules (such as prohibition on drug
offenses). This stands in contrast to the original conception of the public housing
program, which was intended to serve households who were temporarily suffering as a
result of the Depression (Vale 2013). The idea was not to provide long-term, permanent
subsidies to the poor. But as public housing and vouchers have shifted to serve the very
poorest households, many tenants have stayed for longer tenures than the original framers
of the programs envisioned.
The change over time towards conceptualizing public housing as providing longer-term
subsidies should in retrospect not be surprising. The original design of the program failed
to take into account how difficult it is to take assistance away from households who are
receiving it. In the political arena, the plight of subsidized tenants who have lost their
assistance is far more salient and visible than the plight of low-income households who
have never received assistance at all.
Moving to more time-limited subsidies might make the program less effective from the
perspective of addressing problems related to low levels of permanent income (for one
thing, landlords might be far less willing to accept poor tenants with a time-limited
subsidy), but it would make the program more effective in helping address the problem of
income volatility (see for example O’Flaherty, 2011). Part of the problem is that when
families experience negative income shocks, they can reduce their spending on expenses
like food, clothing or transportation, but housing is an expensive durable good that is not
easily divisible and so spending on housing may be hard to adjust. Most renters sign
annual lease agreements, which stipulate monthly payments of a fixed amount. Failure to
26

meet agreed upon rental payments may lead to eviction, which in turn can lead to a spell
of homelessness that in turn carries significant social cost (Desmond 2012). The only way
to substantially reduce spending on housing is to move.
The current structure of housing assistance programs makes them ill-suited to address the
problem of income volatility.27 Vouchers are not well designed to mitigate
contemporaneous risk of homelessness because they are such a scarce subsidy - rationed
to a small number of households from waitlists numbering in the tens of thousands in
many large cities. Reliable estimates of average waitlist times are difficult to find, but it
is not uncommon for housing voucher waitlists to exceed two years. Anecdotal evidence
also points to similarly lengthy admission waitlists for public housing and other projectbased programs such as the LIHTC. This means that households experiencing sudden
income loss rarely receive timely federal housing assistance that might prevent eviction.
One way that liquidity-constrained households might try to adjust housing expenses in
response to sudden loss of income is to sublet a portion of their housing – that is, to rent
out a room. But for households that are already over-crowded this might be a difficult
proposition. And the circumstances of sudden poverty might itself tax poor families of
the bandwidth required to find sublets (Mani et al., 2013). Moreover well-intended rules
for federal assistance programs that restrict adjustments to household composition may
make it more difficult for some low-income households to weather economic shocks by
subletting or having other relatives or significant others co-habit. Ellen and O’Flaherty
(2007) examine the programmatic rules and regulations that govern a variety of transfer
programs serving low-income household (SNAP, SSI, and cash welfare) and find that
many of these programs are structured with strong disincentives for multiple adult
households. They also note that subsidized housing is among the most restrictive
programs by establishing minimum unit sizes for occupancy (as measured by persons per
room). This means that many low-income households are unable to optimize household
size the way that more affluent households often do in response to changing economic
conditions – as evidenced by the large number of college graduates returning to live with
their parents during the recent recession (Painter and Lee 2013).
D. Targeting of Housing Assistance
In 2012, housing authorities nationwide reported more than 6.5 million households on
their waitlists for housing voucher or public housing.28 In light of this enormous demand
for housing assistance, an important question is whether these scarce subsidies are
targeted to the households most in need?

27 Some localities creatively use different federal funding sources to provide short-term rental assistance to
help families stay in their homes. New York City’s Human Resource Administration operates a “One-Shot”
emergency assistance program – funded with TANF and local dollars - that is available for individuals or
families who are facing eviction, escaping domestic violence, facing utility disconnection and other
extreme circumstances.
28 This number may include some duplicate households if households are on multiple housing authorities’
waitlists (HUD, 2012)
27

Systematic evidence on local targeting policies is limited, but a 2012 HUD survey of
housing authorities offers some insights. Housing authorities typically organize their
waiting lists for housing assistance in one of three ways (or combination of them): 1)
first-come first-served; 2) random lottery; or 3) local subgroup preferences (such as
recently homeless, domestic abuse victims, working families, high-rent burden or overcrowding). Approximately 62 percent of PHAs covering roughly 77 percent of all
housing vouchers nationwide use some type of preference for their housing voucher
waitlist, sometimes in addition to a first-come, first-served rule. The numbers are similar
for public housing admissions preferences. About 62 percent of PHAs with public
housing use some admission preference and these PHAs account for about 81 percent of
public housing units. The most commonly reported preferences are given to homeless
families and individuals, households involuntary displaced (from natural disaster or
government activity), victims or domestic violence, residents of the local jurisdiction,
applicants living in substandard housing, households who are rent burdened, and
veterans. Unfortunately, this survey did not gather data on how many households come in
under each of these categories.29
Among the different approaches for organizing and managing a wait list, first-come firstserved might be the most problematic in terms of targeting the neediest households. It
seems possible that familiarity with waiting list opening periods and ability to arrive at
housing authority offices on a timely basis would wind up being negatively correlated
with underlying need among income-eligible families. Lottery-based systems have the
advantage of being fair the way most people would probably define it (horizontally
equitable), but achieve no gains in targeting beyond the initial eligibility criteria.
Preferences appear the most appealing of the three methods at targeting to needy
households, if households cannot easily manipulate their status for to the stated
preferences.
The more general question of how to target scarce low-income housing assistance is an
important one that has received little rigorous attention. One possible framework is to ask
for which populations might the possible cost-benefit of housing assistance be most
favorable. For example, if housing assistance is most beneficial to the homeless or young
children in disadvantaged neighborhoods, perhaps housing programs should more
explicitly target these groups. An obvious challenge to establishing these types of strong
preferences is that it can create perverse incentives for households to change their status
in order to receive housing assistance.
Another dimension of targeting is how low income housing programs respond to changes
in underlying needs. Historically, the number of housing units constructed or households
served in HUD’s three major rental assistance programs has not been closely connected
to underlying macroeconomic conditions. The need for housing assistance can change as
a result of tightening housing market conditions or falling incomes. These two forces tend
to pull in opposite directions, but not always. The Great Recession led to sustained falling
29 We know relatively little about the waiting list practices for LIHTC developments. In some cases private
developers or property managers may apply their own wait list practices, but they may also coordinate with
their relevant city agencies to organize their waitlist.
28

incomes, but rents rose quickly after an initial downward drop. The size of HUD’s
programs is a primarily a function of budgetary decisions rather than any direct link to
outside economic conditions. PHAs administering the voucher program generally have a
budgetary cap meaning that if falling tenant incomes are not sufficiently offset by falling
rents, then they have to issue fewer vouchers. As for LIHTC, the credit itself is relatively
fixed, but it behaves pro-cyclically as the strength of investor interest in the credit has
tended to match general economic forecasts.
For those households already receiving assistance, the federal low-income housing
program rules are well designed in times of economic downturn. Falling tenant incomes
mean that tenants are required to pay less in rent, thus providing some buffer of support
to negative economic shocks. For voucher holders, the size of the voucher depends on the
FMR, which is tied to local rent data from the census, which tends to have some lag, but
in theory captures some of the effects of increases in rents (or decreases).
IV.

REVIEW OF RESULTS OF RESEARCH ON PROGRAMS

In this section we review the available empirical research about the different meanstested housing programs described above. The available empirical research is limited,
particularly high-quality empirical evidence that is capable of isolating causal
relationships between housing programs and different outcomes of policy interest. For
some programs there is essentially no available evidence whatsoever.
In what follows we focus on the highest-quality evidence and in any case try to be clear
about the strength of the empirical evidence we do have on these questions. We consider
what is known about the effects of means-tested housing programs on housing quality,
affordability, access to different neighborhoods, residential mobility, and what one might
call “indirect” outcomes of housing programs related to labor supply, health, children’s
outcomes, and overall well-being. Within each outcome domain we consider what is
known about the effects of different programs relative to not participating in any program
at all. We also where available discuss research about the relative effectiveness of
different programs compared to one another, and in particular given the trend over time
from project-based to tenant-based subsidies. Since there is so little research right now on
the LIHTC, we focus on studies of the relative effects of public housing vs. vouchers.
A. Effects of housing programs on housing consumption (quality and quantity)
Means-tested housing programs for many people probably conjure up high-rise public
housing projects of the sort that were built during the 1950s and 1960s, which have
become synonymous with terrible living conditions and high rates of crime and racial
segregation: Pruitt-Igoe in St. Louis, Jordan Downs in the Watts neighborhood of Los
Angeles, Magnolia Projects in New Orleans, and of course the Robert Taylor Homes and
Cabrini-Green in Chicago. But the focus on the very difficult living conditions in these
projects overlooks the fact that most public housing projects are not so distressed, and the
worst of them have been torn down in recent years through HUDs’ HOPE VI program.

29

Perhaps even more importantly, it is easy to forget exactly how bad the slum conditions
were that for many families were the alternative to living in public housing, particularly
as the developments were initially built. For example in 1940, fully 45% of all housing
units in the U.S. lacked complete plumbing facilities (defined as having a flush toilet,
sink, and hot water).30 This figure is under 1% today, even for housing units rented by
households in the bottom quintile of the income distribution (Quigley and Raphael,
2004). Crowding and many other measures of housing quality have also improved.
Most of the available research suggests that public housing improved the housing
conditions of low-income residents. The challenge for empirical work on this question is
carrying out an appropriately apples-to-apples comparison of housing conditions, since
the type of family that winds up participating in the public housing program may be
systematically different from other low-income families in a variety of ways – including
along dimensions that are difficult to adequately measure in social science datasets.
A number of studies using data from the 1960s and 1970s show that relative to
unsubsidized households, people living in public housing increased their housing
consumption by about 20 to 80 percent (Olsen, 2003, Table 6.8). For example the most
recent of these is by Olsen and Barton (1983), who use Census Bureau survey data of the
housing market in New York City in the 1960s to estimate what are essentially hedonic
regressions that try to price public housing units. They estimate that families in public
housing consume 10-70 percent more housing, with a dollar value equal to 20-25 percent
of the average income for these families. Their study suggests that it cost the New York
City Housing Authority $1.14 to produce each extra $1 in housing consumption for
families. Whether other types of means-tested housing subsidies could provide such
services more efficiently is a topic to which we will return at the end of this sub-section.
One of the best studies comparing the housing conditions of families in and outside of
public housing is by Currie and Yelowitz (2000), whose research design takes advantage
of the fact that the number of bedrooms to which a family would be entitled within a
housing project depends on the gender mix of children in the family. Specifically,
children of the same gender have to share a bedroom but those of opposite genders do
not, so that a family with one adult and two children will be eligible for a three bedroom
apartment if the household has a boy and a girl but just a two bedroom if the children are
of the same sex. Using child gender composition as an instrument for the likelihood of
being in public housing (families eligible for larger apartments are 24 percent more likely
to live in housing projects), they find participation in public housing reduces the
likelihood a family is over-crowded by 16 percentage points. This finding holds for both
blacks and whites.31

30 https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/historic/plumbing.html
31 The sample mean for the Census over-crowding measure they use in their paper is about 1 percent for
whites and 10 percent for blacks (Currie and Yelowitz, 2000, Table 6), but these sample means are not
quite the right benchmark for judging the size of the public housing effects, since the relevant mean would
be the one for the set of families who would have been in public housing had the gender mix of children in
the home been different (or in the language of Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996, the “compliers”).
30

The same general finding seems to hold for the housing voucher program as well. What is
very clear is that the market rents of the housing units in which people reside is
dramatically higher for people with vouchers compared to similar people without them.
For example Jacob and Ludwig’s (2012) study of housing vouchers in Chicago is able to
compare similar types of families who do and do not receive vouchers because the city
randomly assigned applicants to the voucher program wait-list. That lottery study shows
that vouchers enable recipients to live in units with rents that are about 50% higher than
the rents for the units in which they would be otherwise live (this change in unit rent is
equal to 25-30% of average income for these households). If the housing market is
working at all well this should be expected to translate into improved unit quality,
although some observers have noted that landlords are aware of the rent limits in the
voucher program and may artificially raise the rent of a unit to meet the tenant’s new
ability to pay (Mallach 2007; Collinson and Ganong 2013).
Some evidence that vouchers also improve direct measures of housing conditions, not
just a total measure of housing consumption like rent, comes from the randomized
welfare-to-work voucher study by Mills et al. (2006) that finds voucher receipt increases
housing unit quality and size.32 This same study also shows that vouchers increase by
over 20 percentage points the rate at which recipients and their children live on their own
rather than with other relatives, which may reduce crowding and enable people to get
away from difficult or even abusive relationships. Many voucher recipients report in
qualitative interviews that they value this new independence for its own sake as well.
If both public housing and housing vouchers improve housing conditions for poor
families, a natural follow-up question for public policy is which program is more
effective in achieving this goal. Some of the best available evidence on this question
comes from HUD’s Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment. Between 1994 and 1998
MTO enrolled 4600 low-income families with children living in very distressed public
housing projects in five US cities (Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles and New
York City). It is important to keep in mind that families in the MTO study were coming
from some of the most distressed public housing projects in the country, such as the
Robert Taylor Homes on the south side of Chicago.
Families were randomly assigned to one of three groups – a low poverty voucher (LPV)
group, which received extra mobility counseling assistance and a housing voucher that
could only be redeemed in a census tract with a 1990 poverty rate below 10%; a
traditional voucher (TRV) group that received a standard housing voucher (which was at
the time the Section 8 program); and a control group that did not receive any extra help

32 For example, the share of families in the control group that live in crowded housing conditions (more
than one person per bedroom) at the time of their follow-up survey is about 39 percent, while the effect of
voucher use (the treatment on the treated effect) is minus 22 percentage points (p<.05); see Table 5.3 of
Mills et al. 2006, p. 139. Similarly, the share of control group families reporting two or more housing
problems is 13.5 percent, and the TOT is again about one-half that (minus 7 percentage points), although is
not quite significant.
31

moving out of public housing. For present purposes what is most relevant is the contrast
between the TRV and control groups in MTO.33
Data from the MTO 5-year (“interim”) follow-up showed that relative to the control
group, moving with a housing voucher increased the share of respondents rating their
housing unit as good or excellent by 7 percentage points (the treatment on the treated or
“TOT” effect), compared to a control mean of 52 percent (Orr et al., 2003, Exhibit 3.5, p.
66). By the time of the long-term follow-up, which measured outcomes 10-15 years after
random assignment, the control mean had risen to 57 percent although the TOT effect on
this measure had declined to 5 percentage points and was no longer statistically
significant (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011, Exhibit 2.5, p. 56). At the time of the long-term
follow up, however, MTO did reduce the rate of self-reported specific housing problems
related to things like vermin (TOT effect of minus 14 percentage points, compared to a
control mean of 52 percent, p<.05), heating or plumbing (TOT of minus 8 percentage
points, control mean 37 percent, p<.10), and peeling paint or plaster (TOT of minus 19
percentage points, control mean of 47 percent, p<.05).
The question of how project-based vs. tenant-based subsidies change housing quality is
closely related to, but slightly different, from the question of which program costs less to
deliver a given level of housing quality, because the former question ignores the
possibility that the programs differ in their costs per participant. The answer to the
question of which program is more cost-effective is not obvious as a conceptual matter.
As noted above, many housing advocates are concerned that landlords over-charge
voucher holders in the private market, capitalizing partly on the fact that some landlords
reportedly refuse to take housing vouchers. There has also been long-standing concern
about the possibility that many families are in disequilibrium in the housing market
because of the large transaction costs associated with changing housing units (see for
example Rosen, 1985). On the other hand, the fact that federal subsidies to local PHAs
and private builders artificially distort the relative price of initial construction and
operating costs suggests the possibility of inefficiency in that program. And the fact that
unit rents in public housing are far below market levels will mean there may be excess
demand for such units even if they are not well maintained.
While theory is ambiguous, the empirical research is fairly consistent in suggesting that
tenant-based programs are able to deliver a given level of housing-unit quality at lower
cost compared to project-based programs, or at least compared to HUD-sponsored
project-based programs such as public housing. Deriving reliable empirical evidence on
this question is not entirely straightforward because it requires, among other things, some
attempt to estimate the market rent of project-based housing units.34 Nor is it entirely
33 Put differently, the LPV treatment in MTO adds the constraint to the normal voucher program that
families could only redeem the vouchers initially in low-poverty census tracts, and so the findings for the
LPV vs. control contrast (recall all MTO families were living in public housing at baseline) are not directly
relevant for the larger question of the relative effects of public housing versus the regular voucher program
without the additional mobility constraints or supports. For this reason we also do not emphasize in the test
discussion of the Gautreaux mobility program in Chicago; see Rubinowitz and Rosenbaum (2000).
34 Most analyses ignore other potential spillover effects, like on the surrounding communities. For an
excellent discussion of these issues see Olsen (2009).
32

straightforward to even estimate program costs, which are particularly challenging to
calculate in the context of housing projects that receive subsidies from multiple sources
(free land, or favorable tax treatment or loan terms) and have large fixed costs.
With these caveats in mind perhaps the best evidence on this question comes from the
Pittsburgh and Phoenix sites of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program (EHAP),
which was a large demonstration project carried out in the 1970s. Mayo et al. (1980)
estimate that the ratio of total costs to market rent equaled from 1.8 to 2.2 for public
housing, from 1.5 to 2.0 for Section 236 (the new construction and rehabilitation program
in effect at the time), and from 1.09 to 1.15 for EHAP housing allowances (like housing
vouchers). Put differently, the tenant-based subsidy appears to be far more cost-effective
in producing housing units of a given quality. Similarly Wallace et al. (1981) estimate
that the Section 8 new construction program cost 44-78% more than the Section 8 tenantbased subsidy (see also Shroder and Reiger, 2000, GAO 2001, 2002). It is worth noting
that this study only focused on two metropolitan areas and is now more than 40 years old.
So it is reasonable to ask whether the same cost differences would hold in different
market conditions.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that it has become the largest federal place-based housing
program, there is no research of which we are aware that examines the effects of the
LIHTC on the housing conditions of low-income families.
There is unfortunately also very little evidence on the question of whether in-kind
housing programs increase consumption more than cash transfers. As noted above, this
question is relevant for judging the efficiency of using in-kind housing programs to
address problems of housing affordability rather than other types of transfers. The one
finding we know of is Hanushek’s (1986) examination of changes in housing
consumption in both the Negative Income Tax experiment (a cash transfer) versus the
Experimental Housing Allowance Program. While he concluded the change in housing
consumption was similar, this is too important an issue on which to rely on just a single
data point.
B. Effects on housing affordability
Housing assistance could advance well-being through reducing the share of family
income used to pay for housing, and freeing up additional resources for other critical
needs, such as high-quality day care, healthy food, and preventative health care.
Both public housing and housing vouchers also appear to greatly increase housing
affordability, defined as the share of family income devoted towards housing.
Unfortunately the excellent paper by Currie and Yelowitz (2000) on public housing relies
on Census data on rental payments that respondents seem to interpret as the rental value
of their unit rather than what they actually pay out of pocket, and so that study with its
strong research design is not able to address the effects of public housing on affordability.
But other studies like Olsen and Burton’s (1983) using New York City data finds that
public housing enables families to enjoy higher levels of non-housing consumption by
14-18% compared to observably similar families outside of public housing, because the
33

rent contribution for those living in public housing is equal to 30% of adjusted income
and that is much less than the share of total income that unsubsidized families on average
pay. This gain in non-housing consumption from Olsen and Burton (1983) expressed as a
share of total income (or put differently, the reduction in the share of income families
have to pay as rent) is equal to about 12 percent.35
The available evidence about how the voucher program affects affordability is stronger,
as we now have several randomized lottery studies on the question. In the voucher study
in Chicago carried out by Jacob and Ludwig (2012), the average family at baseline
(without a subsidy) was paying about 58% of their reported income towards rent.
Voucher receipt enables families to reduce their out-of-pocket spending on rent to about
27% of reported income.36 Similarly in the HUD Welfare to Work (WtW) experiment the
average control group family is spending about $529 on rent per month (including
utilities), equal to roughly one-quarter of reported monthly income.37 Welfare receipt
reduces out-of-pocket spending on rent by $211 per month, or about 40% (Mills et al.,
2006, Exhibit 5.3, p. 139).
While the public housing and voucher programs have similar rules about required rent
contributions from participants, the two programs do have some differences that could
affect housing affordability for households. For example, utilities are handled differently
in the two programs, with many public housing projects just including utilities in rent
rather than billing families separately. In the 5 year MTO follow-up, while overall
housing costs were not different across randomized groups, families that received regular
housing vouchers were 12 percentage points more likely than controls to report having
problems paying their utilities (control mean 27%, p<.05) (Orr et al., 2003, Exhibit 3.3, p.
61). A similar pattern was found in the 10-15 year MTO follow-up, with families who
used a traditional housing voucher being 8 percentage points more likely than controls
(24%) to have received a shut-off notice of some utility due to non-payment the past 12
months (p<.05) (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011, Exhibit 2.4, p. 55).
Relatively little is currently known about the effects of the LIHTC on housing
affordability. The LIHTC rent limits mean that the program tends to reach low-income
households, but not the very poorest households (Desai et al., 2009). There is research
documenting the number of units produced under the program (see for example
Cummings and DiPasquale, 1999, Desai, Dharmapala and Singhal, 2009), and research
35 Olsen and Burton (1983), Table 5 show that in 1968 families had average incomes of about $5,000
absent the housing program, and were able to increase consumption of non-housing goods by about $600.
36 It is possible that some, or perhaps even many, families have unreported income – see for example Edin
and Lein (1997). Because the same income denominator is used to calculate the share of spending on
housing for families both with and without vouchers, this means the Jacob and Ludwig study should still be
getting the sign of the effect of vouchers on housing affordability correct. But because the denominator will
be too small under both the voucher and no-voucher conditions, the “levels” (share of income spent on
housing) will be too low in both cases and the percentage point change in share of income spent on housing
will be too large.
37 Exhibit 4.16 of Mills et al. (2006) reports monthly TANF cash benefits during the first period after
random assignment of $1,325 for the control group, while Exhibit 4.10 reports quarterly earnings of
$1,863, or about $621 per month.
34

showing that the LIHTC increases the total number of rental units in an area (BaumSnow and Marion, 2009).38 All else equal we would expect an outward shift in rental
housing in these areas to reduce rents but the magnitude of this effect is, as far as we are
aware, not currently known. O’Regan and Horn (2013) report that tenants in LIHTC
housing who earn less than 30 percent of the area median income face lower rent burdens
than unassisted renters, but far higher burdens than households with similar incomes who
are participating in HUD programs.
C. Effects of housing programs on residential mobility
Conceptually the effects of means-tested housing programs on residential mobility are
ambiguous, at least in the short run. Programs could reduce residential instability by
cushioning subsidized families against having to move as a result of income shocks. On
the other hand to get a public housing subsidy families need to move into public housing,
and because most housing voucher applicants are living in housing units with rents far
below the FMR (see for example Jacob and Ludwig, 2012), families offered vouchers
will also have a strong incentive to use the voucher to move into a new unit. Low-income
renters in the US are also a fairly mobile population in general; it could be that subsidy
receipt simply changes the timing of when families would have made a move that would
have happened anyway.
Unfortunately there is no experimental evidence that we know of about the effects of
public housing on residential mobility.39 However, the evidence we have suggests that
public housing tenants tend to remain in their units for longer than other renters. Lubell,
Shroder and Stefan (2003) find that the average public housing resident stays in their unit
for 8.5 years and the median stays for 4.9 years. As a comparison, the median renter in
the United States had lived in their home for 2.2 years in 1998 (Hansen 1998).40 Of
course at least part of this difference in average rates of residential stability between
public housing residents and unsubsidized households could be due to differences in the
types of families who are in public housing.
Experimental evidence from the voucher program is mixed. The welfare-to-work voucher
experiment by Mills et al. (2006), found that the average control group family in their
study moved roughly twice over the 5 year follow-up period; voucher receipt reduced the
38 Baum-Snow and Marion (2009) find more crowd-out of new LIHTC units (that is, LIHTC units

displace some private-market housing that would have been built anyway) in gentrifying areas.Malpezzi
and Vandell (2002) do not find a detectable effect of the LIHTC on the supply of rental housing but their
research design is not nearly as convincing as that of Baum-Snow and Marion (2009).
39 The data used by Currie and Yelowitz (2000) does not allow them to apply their natural-experiment
(IV) research design to measures of residential mobility. However they do present some OLS results that
show that residence in public housing is correlated with a higher rate of changing schools by children in
public housing families relative to their non-public-housing counterparts. (We recognize that changing
schools mixes together the effects of residential moves with other reasons why children might change
schools over time). In any case Currie and Yelowitz argue that OLS results are likely to be biased in the
direction of overstating any negative effects of public housing, so as the authors note, it is not clear what to
make of that correlation.
40 Note that these tenure patterns are fairly consistent over time. Mateyka and Marlay report a median stay
of 2.2 years for U.S. renters in 2008.
35

total number of moves by about 0.9 (the TOT effect). About 53% of the control group
had moved out of their baseline census tract in the Mills et al. study; voucher receipt
increased that by 11 percentage points. In contrast, the Chicago voucher study by Jacob
and Ludwig (2012) finds the average number of moves over the follow-up period was
about 2.7 for the control group; the effect of moving with a voucher (TOT) was to
increase the number of moves by just 0.12.
What about the relative effects on residential mobility from participation in the public
housing program vs. housing voucher program? The 10-15 year MTO follow-up found
that the average control group family moved 2.2 times over the follow-up period; families
that used a housing voucher to move out of public housing wound up moving an extra 1
time over the study period (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011, Exhibit 2.2, p. 53). Relative to the
MTO control group, voucher recipients also experienced an increased likelihood of ever
having been “doubled up,” equal to 7 percentage points versus a control mean of 19%.
D. Effects of housing programs on access to different neighborhoods
Historically America’s public housing program reinforced residential segregation by race
and income, in part through reserving some housing developments for blacks and some
for whites. Data from the 1960s showed that 72 percent of public housing projects at the
time were inhabited by people of a single race (Bonastia 2006, 74). Part of the issue also
stemmed from the role that local politicians played in deciding where housing
developments would be built.41 Opposition to new public housing was weakest in those
communities where initial housing conditions were most distressed, and so projects were
disproportionately likely to be built in predominantly low-income and minority
neighborhoods (see for example Hunt, 2009).
Additional evidence comes from the EHAP Housing Assistance Demand Experiment in
the 1970s (Mayo et al. 1980A, Chapter 5). For example, families moving into public
housing in the Pittsburgh EHAP site moved from neighborhoods with poverty rates of
37% to neighborhoods with poverty rates of 50%. Black participants in the public
housing program experienced changes in tract share minority from 52% to 69%. Newman
and Schnare (1997 Table 3) show that in the mid-1990s public housing units were much
more concentrated in extreme-poverty areas than were the units occupied by other lowincome people (defined in their study as other welfare recipients). Fully 36% of public
housing tenants lived in census tracts with poverty rates over 40%, versus just 12% of
other low-income households. In addition 38% of public housing residents were in census
tracts with minority shares over 80%, compared to 18% percent of other low-income
households. More recent evidence suggests that households in place-based, assisted
housing live in neighborhoods with low-performing public elementary schools (Horn,
Ellen, and Schwartz, 2013).

41 Hunt (2009, Chapter 4) provides an excellent account for the city of Chicago. More generally, in order
for a public housing project to be built in a political jurisdiction, it must establish a public housing authority
(PHA). Many jurisdictions chose not to create one. Furthermore, because the PHA had to obtain the local
government’s cooperation, the local government had veto power over the location of the projects.
36

The expected effects of tenant-based subsidies on the neighborhood characteristics of
residents are not clear as a conceptual matter. To the extent that neighborhood
disadvantage is a “dis-amenity” that is capitalized into housing prices, subsidies that
enable families to rent more expensive units should expand their choice set to include
more units in more advantaged neighborhoods. On the other hand racial discrimination
may constrain the choices that families have about where they can use their housing
voucher, and some families may choose to stay in poor, racially isolated areas even after
receiving a generous tenant-based subsidy because of proximity to family, friends, jobs,
religious organizations and so on.
Data from the 1970s EHAP programs showed that housing allowances similar to the
current housing voucher program, as well as the Section 236 rental housing program and
the Section 23 leased housing program had very small effects on the neighborhood
conditions experienced by families. Similar findings come from more recent randomizedlottery studies of the current-day housing voucher program. For example Jacob and
Ludwig (2012) find that the average unsubsidized family who applied for a housing
voucher in the late 1990s in Chicago was living in a tract with a poverty rate of 26%;
those families randomly assigned good positions on the voucher program wait list who
moved with a voucher were in tracts with poverty rates that were just 1 percentage point
lower (the “control mean” for share black was 78%, with a TOT effect also of about 1
ppt.) Similarly, the control group in the Mills et al. (2006) study of HUD’s welfare to
work voucher experiment were in tracts with an average poverty rate of 27%; the TOT
effect was 2 percentage points (Exhibit 3.6).42 As for the quality of local schools, in a reanalysis of data from HUD’s welfare to work study, Ellen, Horn, and Schwartz (2014)
find that the families randomly assigned vouchers reached neighborhoods with schools
that had the same proficiency rates as the schools near to control group families.
The strongest available evidence suggests the voucher program, as it is widely
implemented, does not seem to have large effects on the average neighborhood
conditions of recipients. However, the design of the voucher appears to influence tenant
neighborhood choices. MTO illustrates how restricting vouchers to leases in low-poverty
census tracts for a year, coupled with some counseling assistance, affects tenant location
decisions. Unsurprisingly households that received the restricted low-poverty voucher
initially moved to neighborhoods with much lower poverty than households with a
conventional, unconstrained voucher. This difference persists through the 10-15 year
follow-up, though it shrinks considerably. This low-poverty restriction also had the
effect of substantially reducing voucher take-up rates. Shroder (2001) finds that while
counseling intensity was positively related to lease-up rates, the geographic restriction
still lowered lease-up rates among the experimental group by 14 percentage points.
A less prescriptive approach to stimulating moves to better neighborhoods, underway as
part of HUD demonstration known as “Small Area Fair Market Rents,” entails increasing
the maximum voucher subsidy in high-rent neighborhoods and lowering the maximum
42 Carlson, Haveman, Kaplan and Wolfe (2012) use a propensity-score matching design and find that
housing voucher recipients are not living in significantly different neighborhoods from non-recipients in the
short term; the effect is only about one-half a percentage point in tract poverty 4 years post-receipt.
37

subsidy in low-rent neighborhoods. Collinson and Ganong (2014) evaluate this policy
change from a single metro-wide maximum subsidy to ZIP-code voucher subsidy ceilings
in the Dallas metro area. They find that relative voucher holders in neighboring FortWorth, Dallas movers are in neighborhoods about 0.23 SD higher on a composite
measure of quality three years after the policy change with little net costs to the
government.
To what degree does the shift from project-based to tenant-based subsidies increase
access to more advantaged neighborhoods? The MTO experiment found that relative to
control group families that did not receive help moving out of public housing, those who
used a regular Section 8 housing voucher experienced declines in neighborhood poverty
but more modest declines in percentage minority. Moving out of public housing with a
regular Section 8 voucher reduced average census tract poverty rates one year after the
voucher offer by about 45 percent (about 22 percentage points compared to the average
for the MTO control group of 50 percent), and reduced the average tract poverty rate
families experienced over a 10-15 year period by about 25 percent (11 percentage points
compared to a control mean of 40 percent). The effect on average tract minority share
was much smaller – treatment households ended up in neighborhoods with a percentage
non-white that was about 3 percentage points lower than the 88 percent non-white
neighborhoods where the MTO control families resided.
As for the LIHTC program, it includes a rule under which developments receive more tax
credits if they are located in census tracts in which at least half of households are LIHTCeligible, which incentivizes developers to build housing in such areas (Baum-Snow and
Marion, 2009). But states adopt other siting priorities as well. Non-experimental
evidence shows that LIHTC tenants on average live in neighborhoods that have nearly
identical poverty rates, slightly higher minority concentrations, and higher average crime
rates as those lived in by poor households as a whole (Lens et al 2011). But we do not
know what the neighborhood conditions would have otherwise been for the type of
families served by the program.
E. Indirect effects of housing programs (labor supply, health, child outcomes)
As noted above, one of the rationales for providing assistance to low-income families in
the form of in-kind housing benefits instead of cash is the possibility that housing
consumption has positive externalities on labor supply. (That said, it bears repeating that
about two thirds of HUD subsidy recipients are either elderly or disabled.) While one of
the major reviews of the empirical literature written a dozen years ago argued that
“housing assistance is not persuasively associated with any effect on employment”
(Shroder, 2002, p. 381, 410), a growing body of evidence since that time provides a
stronger basis for concluding there is some decline in work effort at least as a result of
HUD programs. Perhaps the best available empirical evidence on the effects of public
housing on labor supply is the study by Susin (2005), who uses data from the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to compare public housing residents with
unsubsidized SIPP respondents who are matched on observable characteristics. While
this research design may be susceptible to bias from omitted variables, the estimates
38

suggest public housing reduces earnings of adult participants by 19% (see also Olsen et
al., 2005).
There is stronger evidence for the effects on work effort from the voucher program. The
study of the HUD welfare-to-work voucher experiment by Mills et al. (2006) found
sizable reductions in quarterly employment rates (3 or 4 percentage points, or 6-8% of the
control mean of 53 percent) but these were only statistically significant during the first
year following random assignment. The Mills et al. study also found persistent increases
in TANF receipt rate, equal to 4 percentage points during the first year (about 7 percent
of the control mean of 56%) and equal to about 7 percentage points three years out
(nearly 20% of the control mean). Jacob and Ludwig’s (2012) study of housing vouchers
in Chicago found that voucher receipt reduces quarterly employment rates by 4
percentage points (6 percent of the control mean), quarterly earnings by $330 (10 percent
decline), and increased TANF receipt by 2 percentage points (15 percent). All of these
effects appear to persist through 8 years after random assignment (so more persistent than
in Mills et al.), although updated data for this sample suggest the effects eventually do
fade out after 14 years (Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig, 2014).
Concerns over public housing and the voucher program reducing work effort has
prompted some experimentation around policies aimed at encouraging economic selfsufficiency and removing work disincentives. One notable example is the Jobs-Plus
demonstration. Jobs-Plus randomized a bundle of varied employment services (which
could include vocational training, educational programs, childcare or transportation
assistance) along with modified rent policies designed to reduce earnings disincentives to
public housing developments across several cities. Residents at treatment developments
experienced a 14-20 percent increase in earnings relative to their control peers four- and
five- years later with no detectable fade-out (Bloom, Ricco, and Verma 2005). The design
of the study was such that it wasn’t possible to directly test which element of the
intervention was most effective. A research demonstration is currently underway to test
whether reducing work disincentives in the current rent calculation through reforming
rent rules could attenuate the negative labor supply effects of public housing assistance.
Little is currently known about the effects of the LIHTC on labor supply. Unlike HUD
programs like public housing or housing vouchers, the LIHTC uses a system of flat rents
that should not generate a substitution effect on labor supply. However to the degree to
which the LIHTC subsidizes low-income households we would expect there to still be an
income effect that depresses work effort, potentially countervailed to some unknown
degree by whatever the effects are of improved and more stable housing conditions on
labor market success.
Advocates also sometimes point to positive effects of housing on children’s outcomes as
another type of externality and justification for in-kind housing programs. However, there
is not very strong evidence in the literature for important externalities along these lines.
For the public housing program, the best available evidence comes from the study by
Currie and Yelowitz (2000), discussed above. Their study has a strong research design
39

for overcoming the possibility of selection bias and comparing public housing families to
truly comparable non-participants. They find that public housing residence has no
detectable effects for whites on schooling outcomes (as measured by grade retention in
their Census data), but reduces grade retention by 19 percentage points for blacks. The
one important potential limitation with this finding is the reliance on grade retention as a
measure of schooling outcomes, since schools in relatively higher-poverty areas may (all
else equal) be less likely to hold children back.43
For the housing voucher program, Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig (2015) use administrative
data on a large sample of children in Chicago combined with a random lottery design and
find no statistically significant effects on various measures of children’s schooling
outcomes, criminal involvement (as measured by arrest records), or health (as measured
by Medicaid claims data). With statistically insignificant findings, a key issue always is
the precision of the estimates, since null findings can often come with 95% confidence
intervals that are so wide that they cannot rule out medium-size or even large effects. But
in the Chicago voucher lottery the estimates can rule out effects of voucher receipt on
children’s test scores that are any larger than about 0.06 to 0.09 standard deviations.
Another concern is that if children’s outcomes are the result of accumulated exposure to
developmentally productive environments, the effects of social programs may only reveal
themselves over long periods of time while most studies often follow families over only
short periods. Yet the Chicago voucher study follows families for 14 years and finds little
evidence that impacts grow over time. These findings are similar to those found by the
welfare-to-work experiment study by Mills et al. (2006), which relied on a smaller
sample and parent-reports of child outcomes.
While we have little evidence that children are affected when their families move into
public housing or receive a voucher, we do have evidence showing that children benefit
from moving into the voucher program from very distressed public housing projects in
high-poverty neighborhoods. In the interim (5-year) MTO follow-up, relative to the
control group (that did not receive help moving out of public housing) girls experienced
improvements in mental health (0.19 standard deviations), declines in risky behavior
(0.13 SD) and a decline of about 40% in lifetime arrest prevalence (Kling, Ludwig and
Katz, 2005, Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007; see also Orr et al., 2003). However voucher
receipt relative to distressed public housing may have if anything led to worse outcomes
for boys with respect to outcomes like risky behavior (by .21 SD). We see a similar
pattern although somewhat more muted in the long-term MTO follow-up that followed
families for 10-15 years after the time of random assignment with respect to risky or antisocial behaviors (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011), but sizable effects on mental health
43 For example Jacob and Lefgren (2009) find that in the Chicago Public School system in the early

1990s, retention rates for students in grades 3, 6 and 8 were on the order of 1 or 2 percent. In 1996-7 CPS
enacted a policy to end “social promotion” and tie promotion to performance on a standardized
achievement test. The performance standard was set to equal about the 15 th to 20th percentile of the national
achievement distribution, with about 30-40% of students failing to meet the standard after the policy and
about 10-20% each year retained in grade. A different observational study, Newman and Harkness (2002),
uses data from the 1997 National Survey of America’s Families to estimate that children who lived in
public housing for more years between 1968 and 1982 had somewhat higher employment rates and labor
earnings as young adults.
40

outcomes that – as at the 5 year follow-up – go in opposite directions for boys versus
girls (Kessler et al., 2014).44
Another version of the externality argument is that investments in subsidized housing
improve neighborhoods through removing blight, creating attractive new buildings, and
repopulating neighborhoods. There is some evidence that LIHTC developments increase
the value of surrounding properties, at least in low-income areas. For example, BaumSnow and Marion (2009) find that the construction of LIHTC units increase the median
value of nearby homes in low-income areas. Similarly, Schwartz et al (2006) examine the
property value impact of city-assisted subsidized housing investments on distressed
parcels in New York City, much of which used tax credits. Using geocoded government
administrative data to estimate a difference-in-difference specification, they find that the
value of properties surrounding the housing investment rose more after the completion of
a new unit than the value of comparable properties in the same neighborhood but further
away. The magnitudes of these effects are substantial, suggesting the city government
could recoup its subsidies through resulting increases in property tax revenues. Of course
these results come from one city and focus on subsidized housing investments that were
explicitly targeted to fix up the 100,000 blighted housing units and vacant lots that the
city had taken over for tax foreclosure during the 1970s.
Other recent studies have suggested that subsidized housing investments fail to deliver
any significant effect on neighboring properties (Briggs, Darden, and Aidala 1999), while
(2007) suggest that effects differ across programs. And of course place-based investments
are extremely expensive. Thus, the neighborhood externality argument should be made
cautiously, as it may apply only in limited circumstances, perhaps when investments are
made deliberately to target neighborhood blight in a city with an otherwise strong
economy.
V.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In this chapter we set out to answer the questions: How does the U.S. spend its meanstested housing assistance dollars? Why has it made those choices? And what does this
spending accomplish?
Unfortunately only the first of these questions lends itself to a good answer at this point.
Federal housing programs began in the 1930s with public housing, which over time has
been joined by a large number of other programs that subsidize privately-built and
operated housing developments as well as subsidies for tenants to live in private units of
their own choosing (housing vouchers).
The intellectual (as opposed to political) justification is for these programs continues to
be contested and somewhat unclear – as was also the case 40 years ago when Henry
44 Compared to the control group girls in families assigned to the traditional voucher group in MTO had
lower rates of major depression (6.5% vs. 10.9%) and conduct disorder (0.3% versus 2.9%), while for boys
there were higher rates of post-traumatic stress disorder from the traditional voucher treatment (4.9%
versus 1.9%).
41

Aaron wrote his excellent book Shelter and Subsidies (1972). Much of the support for
means-tested housing programs today seems to be motivated by concerns about housing
affordability for low-income households. The rationale for providing in-kind housing
support rather than cash transfers should hinge at least partly on the assumption that inkind programs will lead to more housing consumption than would cash transfers of equal
cost. Yet there is remarkably little evidence available to date on this first-order question.
A different justification for housing programs (which in principle could also apply to
cash transfers, since these would also stimulate housing consumption) is that housing
consumption generates externalities. But there is surprisingly little good evidence about
the effects of existing programs on the behavior and well-being of participating families.
We say “surprisingly” both because these programs consume significant amounts of
government resources each year (and so are important), and because the excess demand
for these program services (fewer than one out of four income-eligible families in the
U.S. participates in such a program) would seem to offer numerous opportunities to carry
out studies with truly comparable comparison groups.
The best available evidence suggests that increasing housing consumption without
improving neighborhood conditions may have little detectable impact on conventional
measures of human capital accumulation of children and may reduce labor supply of
working-age adults. But these questions are hardly settled; there is considerable room for
further evidence on the effects of housing subsidy receipt on families and children.
Indeed there is virtually no evidence about the effects of what is currently our largest
low-income housing subsidy program, the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program.
There is more robust evidence about the importance of neighborhoods, which suggests
that exposure to less-distressed neighborhood conditions can improve health outcomes,
and, as may be suggested by more recent research, among young children to boost their
long-term labor market success as adults.
Another surprise with existing research on means-tested housing programs is our limited
understanding of potential innovations to existing or new potential programs. This is
particularly surprising given the level of experimentation taking place at the local level
by public housing authorities. For example, more than 30 housing authorities have been
granted “Moving to Work” (MTW) status in the past decade, which has allowed them to
waive a number of HUD regulations to tackle goals of enhancing economic selfsufficiency and improving resident opportunity. The housing policy landscape would
seem to be rife with state and local variation in policy that is waiting to be studied.
Some of the most important questions, then, for future research in this area include:


What are the relative effects of in-kind housing programs versus equivalentlycostly cash transfer programs on housing consumption of poor households? Many
local housing agencies use lotteries to allocate slots in over-subscribed housing
programs, which can help identify the housing consumption effects of those
programs. Some work like that has been done to date but only in a few cities, such
as Chicago (Jacob and Ludwig, 2012); for external validity purposes there would
42

be value in having such estimates in more cities. Economists have developed a
large parallel literature in trying to understand various behavioral responses of
people to cash transfers, exploiting for instance variation over time in the value of
the federal Earned Income Tax Credit or variation in the generosity of statespecific EITC programs. That work could also be extended to consider impacts on
housing consumption as well.


What are the externalities associated with both housing and means-tested housing
programs? To date there is a small literature that uses housing-voucher lotteries
suggesting that providing subsidies to previously unsubsidized households has
fairly modest effects on non-housing outcomes (Mills et al, 2006, Jacob and
Ludwig, 2012, Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig, 2015). This research stands in
contrast to non-experimental studies that find that at least some features of
housing consumption are associated with important non-housing outcomes (see
for example Leventhal and Newman, 2010). Whether this discrepancy is due to
problems with internal validity in the non-experimental studies or with limited
external validity of the voucher lotteries remains unclear at present and would be
valuable to learn more about in future research.



Similarly, there is virtually no research on the impact of living in Low Income
Housing Tax Credit developments, despite the fact that the LIHTC program has
become the largest federal low-income housing production program.



Questions also remain about the the externalities associated with neighborhood
conditions like racial and economic composition or social conditions or cohesion
like “collective efficacy” (Sampson, Earls and Raudenbush, 2007), which housing
programs could in principle affect. Here again the experimental and nonexperimental literatures seem to somewhat conflict. For example evidence from
the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment suggest important changes in some
outcomes, such as physical and mental health, overall well being and (more
recently) long-term earnings for children exposed to disadvantaged
neighborhoods, but these impacts are less sweeping than what is generally
suggested by non-experimental studies. How do we reconcile these literatures?



What modifications to existing housing programs, if any, could make them more
successful in enabling poor families to access less disadvantaged neighborhoods?
For example with the current housing voucher program, a sizable share of
families offered vouchers are not able to use them to lease a new unit within the
program’s limited search window. And those who do lease up wind up living in
neighborhoods that are not so different from the ones they were living in prior to
receiving a subsidy. To the extent to which neighborhood conditions are
important for at least some aspects of well-being, how can we modify our existing
housing policy levers to do more to change the geographic concentration of
disadvantage in the US?

43



What are the advantages and disadvantages of relying on project-based versus
tenant-based programs under different types of housing market or economic
conditions? Studies like MTO tell us something about the effects of housing
vouchers versus public housing, which is valuable but surely cannot be the only
word on this subject given that it was carried out in just five cities with extremely
distressed public housing developments. In principle the relative advantages and
disadvantages of the two types of subsidy programs could vary according to the
tightness of the local housing market, a type of potential contingency that we
would need much more than five city data points to understand.



What are the advantages and disadvantages of relying on flat versus income-based
rents in housing programs? Flat rents of the sort used in the LIHTC program have
the advantage of minimizing work disincentive effects associated with the
income-tied rents used in most HUD programs, but have the downside of making
units more expensive to low-income households. Almost nothing is known on this
point right now, which is a question that could in principle be answered by
supporting and studying local housing authority experimentation with the
different types of rent approaches.



What are the benefits and costs of mixed income developments to low-income
households? One issue is better understanding the degree to which non-poor
households wind up being implicitly subsidized to live in mixed-income
developments, and what the other costs are of building mixed-income
developments rather than those that would exclusively serve low-income families.
A different but related question is how much more it costs to house poor
households in higher-valued neighborhoods. How to view these potential
tradeoffs depends partly on the size of the spillover benefits to poor families from
living near non-poor households, and how the social value of those spillovers
compares to the opportunity cost of directly subsidizing fewer poor households.
Little is currently known about the relative magnitudes of the different effects at
play here with this tradeoff.



What are the benefits and costs from a system that provides either smaller or more
time-limited subsidies to a larger share of income-eligible households than
currently receive housing help from the government? There is an implicit
disagreement right now between housing advocates who believe that the benefits
of housing subsidies are convex in the subsidy amount and researchers who study
other transfer programs who believe the benefits of subsidies in general are more
likely to be concave in the subsidy amount. Understanding more about this
question is critical for housing policy given that at present fewer than one in four
income eligible households receives rent support from federal means-tested
subsidy programs.

44

Finally, most of the research that has been carried out on low-income housing programs
to date has focused on effects on the program participants themselves. But programs that
seek to change the supply side of the private housing market or change how low-income
families are distributed across neighborhoods have the potential to have impacts on nonparticipants as well through channels other than just the tax burden associated with
financing the programs. For example, housing policies and programs may change the
distribution of rents or house prices in the private market overall, or change the nature of
“peer effects” that people experience within their neighborhoods or school settings.
Unfortunately remarkably little is currently known about what economists would call the
“general equilibrium” effects of most housing programs. While studying general
equilibrium effects is far more challenging than examining impacts on just the program
participants, it nonetheless should be a high priority for future research in this area.

45

REFERENCES
Aaron, Henry J. (1972) Shelter and Subsidies: Who Benefits from Federal Housing
Policies? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Bauer, Catherine. (1957). “The Dreary Deadlock of Public Housing.” Architectural
Forum 106(5): 138-142, 219-221.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Justin Marion (2009). “The Effects if Low Income Housing
Tax Credit Developments on Neighborhoods,” Journal of Public Economics, 93(5-6):
654-666.
Bipartisan Policy Center Housing Commission (2013). “Housing America’s Future:
New Directions for National Policy.” Washington, D.C. Downloaded from
http://bipartisanpolicy.org/sites/default/files/BPC_Housing Report_web_0.pdf.
Bonastia, Christopher. (2006). Knocking on the Door: The Federal Government’s
Attempt to Desegregate the Suburbs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brewer, Mike, James Brown, and Wenchao Jin. (2011). “Universal Credit: A
Preliminary Analysis.” Institute for Fiscal Studies Briefing Note 116. Economic and
Social Research Council
Briggs, Xavier de Souza, Joe T. Darden, and Angela Aidala (1999). “In the Wake of
Desegregation: Early Impacts of Scattered-Site Public Housing on Neighborhoods in
Yonkers, New York.” Journal of the American Planning Association 65, no. 1: 27-49.
Carlson, Deven, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan and Barbara Wolfe (2012). “Longterm effects of public low-income housing vouchers on neighborhood quality and
household composition.” University of Wisconsin, LaFollette School Working Paper
Number 2012-002.

46

Collinson, Robert A. and Ganong, Peter (2014). “The Incidence of Housing Voucher
Generosity.” Working Paper <http://ssrn.com/abstract=2255799>.
Cummings, Jean L. and Denise DiPasquale (1999). “The low-income housing tax credit:
An analysis of the first ten years,” Housing Policy Debate. 10(2): 251-307.
Currie, Janet M. (2006). The Invisible Safety Net: Protecting the Nation’s Poor Children
and Families. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Currie, Janet M., and Aaron Yelowitz (2000). “Are public housing projects good for
kids?” Journal of Public Economics, 75(1): 99-124.
Desai, Mihir A., Dhammika Dharmapala, and Monica Singhal (2010). “Tax Incentives
for Affordable Housing: The Low Income Housing Tax Credit.” In Tax Policy and the
Economy, Volume 24, Edited by Jeffrey R. Brown. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. pp. 181-205.
Desmond, Matthew (2012). “Eviction and the Reproduction of Urban Poverty,”
American Journal of Sociology 118: 88-133.
Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein (1997). Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive
Welfare and Low-Wage Work. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation Press.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould (2000). Sharing America’s Neighborhoods: The Prospects for
Stable Racial Integration. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Michael Schill, Amy E. Schwartz, and Ioan Voicu (2002).
“Revitalizing Inner-City Neighborhoods: New York City’s Ten Year Plan for
Housing,” Housing Policy Debate 13(3): 529-566.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Amy Ellen Schwartz, Ioan Voicu, and Michael Schill (2007).
“Does Federally-Subsidized Rental Housing Depress Property Values?” Journal of

47

Policy Analysis and Management, 26(2), 2007: 257-280.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Keren M. Horn, and Amy E. Schwartz (2014). “Why Don’t Housing
Choice Voucher Holders Live Near Better Schools?” Paper presented at 2014
APPAM Conference, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Falk, Gene (2012). "Low-Income Assistance Programs: Trends in Federal Spending." In
Congressional Research Service (CRS), House Ways and Means Committee, US
Congress.
http://greenbook.waysandmeans.house.gov/sites/greenbook.waysandmeans.house.gov/
files/2012/documents/RL41823_gb.pdf.
Feins, Judith D. and Rhiannon Patterson (2005). “Geographic mobility in the housing
choice voucher program: A study of families entering the program, 1995-2002.”
Cityscape. 8(2): 21-48.
Finkel, Meryl, and Larry Buron (2001). Study on Section 8 Voucher Success Rates:
Volume I: Quantitative Study of Success Rates in Metropolitan Areas. Cambridge,
MA: Abt Associates.
Finkel, Meryl and Ken Lam (2008). “Use of Flat Rents in the Public Housing Program,”
Cityscape, 10 (1): 91 – 116.
Fischer,Will, and Barbara Sard (2013). Chart Book: Federal Housing Spending is
Poorly Matched to Need. Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Downloaded from http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=4067 on June
24, 2014.
Fisk, William J., Quanhong Lei-Gomez, and Mark J. Mendell (2007). “Meta-analyses of
the associations of respiratory health effects with dampness and mold in homes,”

48

Indoor Air, 17(4): 284-96.
Freeman, Lance (2005).“Household composition and housing assistance: examining the
link.” Cityscape. 8(2): 49-68.
Frieden, Bernard (1980). “Housing Allowances: An Experiment that Worked.” The
Public Interest 59: 15-35.
Friedman, Lawrence. (1968). Government and Slum Housing: A Century of Frustration.
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyuorko (2002). “The impact of building restrictions on
housing affordability.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review.
June. Pp. 1-19.
Goux, Dominique and Eric Maurin (2005). “The effect of overcrowded housing on
children’s performance at school,” Journal of Public Economics, 89: 797-819.
Hansen, Kristen A. (1998). Seasonality of Moves and Duration of Residence. U.S.
Bureau of the Census: Current Population Reports.
Hanushek, Eric (1986). “Non-Labor-Supply Responses to the Income Maintenance
Experiments,” in Alicia Munnell, ed., Lessons from the Income Maintenance
Experiments. Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 106-121.
Hanushek, A. Eric, John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin (2004). “Disruption versus
Tiebout Improvement: The Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools,” Journal of
Public Economics, 88(9): 1722-1746.
Harkness, Joseph and Sandra Newman (2005). “Housing affordability and children’s
well-being: Evidence from the national survey of America’s families.” Housing Policy
Debate. (2005) 16(2): 223-55.

49

Hays, R. Allen (1995). The Federal Government and Urban Housing: Ideology and
Change in Public Policy (Second.). Albany, New York: State University of New York
Press.
Hirsch, R. Arnold (1998). Making the Second Ghetto. Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press.
Horn, M. Keren, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Amy Ellen Schwartz (2014). “Do Housing
Choice Voucher Holders Live Near Good Schools?” Journal of Housing Economics,
24: 109-121.
Housing Act of 1949, 42 U.S.C §§ 1441–1490 (1994).
Hunt, D. Bradford (2009). Blueprint for Disaster: The Unraveling of Chicago Public
Housing. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Jacob, Brian A. (2004). “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement:
Evidence from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review.
94(1): 233-58.
Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren (2009). “The effect of grade retention on high school
completion.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 1(3): 33-58.
Jacob, Brian A., and Jens Ludwig (2012). “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor
Supply: Evidence from a Voucher Lottery.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 272304.
Jacob, Brian A., Max Kapustin and Jens Ludwig (2014). “The impact of housing
assistance on child outcomes: Evidence from a randomized housing lottery.” Working
Paper, University of Michigan.
Janet Currie & Firouz Gahvari (2008). "Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets

50

the Data," Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association, 46(2):
333-383.
Joint Center for Housing Research (2014). State of the Nation’s Housing, 2014.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. Downloaded from
http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/jchs.harvard.edu/files/sonhr14-color-full.pdf on July
14, 2014.
Joseph, M. L. (2013). “Mixed-income symposium summary and response: Implications
for antipoverty policy,” Cityscape, 15 (2): 215-221.
Katrine V. Loken, Magne Mogstad and Matthew Wiswall, (2012). "What Linear
Estimators Miss: The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes," American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2), 1-35.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001). “Moving to
Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 607-54.
Kessler, Ronald C., Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Jeffrey R.
Kling, Nancy A. Sampson, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Jens Ludwig
(2014). “Associations of housing mobility interventions for children in high-poverty
neighborhoods with subsequent mental disorders during adolescence.” Journal of the
American Medical Association. 311(9): 937-47.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz (2007). “Experimental
Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz (2005). “Neighborhood Effects
on Crime for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing

51

Voucher Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 87-130.
Lawyers Committee for Better Housing (2002). “Locked Out: Barriers to Choice for
Housing Voucher Holders,” Chicago, IL: Lawyers Committee for Better Housing.
Downloaded from http://lcbh.org/reports/locked-out-barriers-choice-housing-voucherholders
Lee, Ok Kwan and Gary Painter (2013). “What happens to household formation in a
recession?” Journal of Urban Economics, 76(C): 93-109.
Lennen, Mary Clare, Lauren D. Applebaum, J. Lawrence Aber, and Katherine McCaskie
(2003). Public Attitudes Towards Low-Income Families and Children: Research
Report #1. Columbia University: National Center for Children in Poverty.
Lens, Michael C., Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Katherine O’Regan (2011). “Do Vouchers
Help Low-Income Households Live in Safer Neighborhoods? Evidence on the
Housing Choice Voucher Program.” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and
Research 13(3): 135-159.
Leventhal, Tama and Sandra Newman (2010). “Housing and Child Development,”
Children and Youth Services Review, 32(9): 1165-1174.
Løken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall (2012). “What linear
estimators miss: The effects of family income on child outcomes.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 1-35.
Lubell, M. Jeffrey, Mark Shroder, and Barry Steffen (2003). “Work Participation and
Length of Stay in HUD-Assisted Housing,” Cityscape, 6(2): 207 – 223.
Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa A. Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan,
Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Stacy Tessler Lindau, Robert C.

52

Whitaker, and Thomas W. McDade (2011). “Neighborhoods, obesity and diabetes: A
randomized social experiment.” New England Journal of Medicine, 365(16): 1509-19.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler,
Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu (2012). “Neighborhood effects on the longterm well-being of low-income adults.” Science, 337(6101): 1505-10.
Ludwig, Jens, and Deborah A. Phillips (2008). “Long-Term Effects of Head Start on
Low-Income Children.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1136(1): 25768.
Mallach, Alan (2007). “Landlords at the Margins: Exploring the Dynamics of the One to
Four Unit Rental Housing Industry.” Working paper, RR07-15. Joint Center for
Housing Studies, Harvard University.
Malpezzi, Stephen and Kerry Vandell (2002). “Does the Low-Income Housing Tax
Credit Increase the Supply of Housing?” Madison, WI: Center for Urban Land
Economics Research. 1-28.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao (2013). “Poverty
Impedes Cognitive Function.” Science, 341 (6149): 976-980.
Mateyka, Peter and Matthew Marlay (2010). “Residential Duration by Tenure, Race, and
Ethnicity.” Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the American Sociological
Association.
Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life
Chances. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mayo, Stephen K. (1981). “Theory and estimation in the economics of housing
demand.” Journal of Urban Economics, 10: 95-116.

53

Mayo, Stephen K., et al. (1980). “Housing Allowances and Other Rental Assistance
Programs—A Comparison Based on the Housing Allowance Demand Experiment, Part
2: Costs and Efficiency,” Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates Inc.
McClure, Kirk (2005). “Rent burden in the housing choice voucher program.” Cityscape,
8(2): 5-20.
Meehan, Eugene J. (1979). The Quality of Federal Policymaking: Programmed Failure
in Public Housing. St Louis, MO: University of Missouri Press.
Merrill, R. Sally and Catherine A. Joseph (1980). Housing Allowance Demand
Experiment: Housing Improvements and Upgrading in the Housing Allowance
Demand Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Mills, Gregory, Daniel Gubits, Larry Orr, David Long, Judie Feins, Bulbul Kaul,
Michelle Wood, Amy Jones & Associates, Cloudburst Consulting, and the QED group
(2006). The Effects of Housing Vouchers on Welfare Families. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research.
Mitchell, J. Paul (Ed.). (1985). Federal Housing Policy and Programs: Past and Present.
New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research.
Mitchell, J. Paul (Ed.). (1993). Federal Housing Policy and Programs: Past and Present.
New Jersey: Center for Urban Policy Research.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2010). Student Mobility: Exploring
the Impact of Frequent Moves on Achievement: Summary of a Workshop. A. Beatty,
Rapporteur. Committee on the Impact of Mobility and Change on the Lives of Young
Children, Schools, and Neighborhoods. Board on Children, Youth and Families,

54

Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
Newman, J. Sandra and Ann B. Schnare (1997). “…’And a Suitable Living
Environment’: The Failure of Housing Programs to Deliver on Neighborhood
Quality,” Housing Policy Debate, 8: 703-741.
Newman, Sandra and Joseph Harkness (2000). “Assisted housing and the educational
attainment of children.” Journal of Housing Economics. 4: 40-63.
Newman, Sandra and Joseph Harkness (2002). “The long-term effects of public housing
on self-sufficiency.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 21(1): 21-43.
Nichols, Albert and Richard Zeckhauser (1981). “Targeting Transfers Through
Restrictions on Recipients,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 72:
372-377.
O’Flaherty, Brendan and Ingrid Gould Ellen (2007). “Do government programs make
households too small? Evidence from New York City,” Population Research and
Policy Review 26 (4): 387-409.
O’Flaherty, Brendan and Ingrid G. Ellen (Eds.) (2010). How to House the Homeless.
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Olsen, Edgar O. (2003). “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” In MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States. Ed. Robert A. Moffitt. U. Chicago
Press. 365-442.
Olsen, Edgar O. (2008). Getting More from Low-Income Housing Assistance.
Washington, DC: The Hamilton Project.

55

Olsen, Edgar O. (2009). “The cost-effectiveness of alternative methods of delivering
housing subsidies.” Working Paper presented at the Annual Research Conference of
the Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management.
Olsen, O. Edgar and David M. Barton (1983). “The benefits and costs of public housing
in New York City.” 20(3). 299-332.
Olsen, Edgar O. and Jens Ludwig (2013). “Performance and legacy of housing policies.”
In Legacies of the War on Poverty. Edited by Martha J. Bailey and Sheldon Danziger.
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. pp. 206-234.
Olsen, Edgar O., Catherine A. Tyler, Jonathan W. King and Paul E. Carrillo (2005).
“The effects of different types of housing assistance on earnings and employment,”
Cityscape. 8(2): 163-188.
O’Regan, M. Katherine and Keren M. Horn (2013). “What Can we Learn About the
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program by Looking at the Tenants?” Housing
Policy Debate. 23(3): 597-613.
Oreopoulos, Philip (2003). "The Long Run Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor
Neighborhood." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1533–75.
Orr, Larry, Judith D. Feins, Robin Jacob, Erik Beecroft, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lawrence F.
Katz, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Jeffrey R. Kling (2003). “Moving to Opportunity for Fair
Housing Demonstration Program: Interim Impacts Evaluation,” Report prepared by
Abt Associates Inc. and the National Bureau of Economic Research for the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and David T. Ellwood (1979). “An empirical reconciliation of

56

micro and grouped estimates of the demand for housing.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 61(2): 199-205.
Poverty and Race Research Action Council. 2005. Keeping the Promise: Preserving
and Enhancing Housing Mobility in the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program:
Final Report of the Third National Conference on Housing Mobility. Appendix B,
updated 2014.
http://www.prrac.org/full_text.php?text_id=1048&item_id=9646&newsletter_id=0&h
eader=Current%20Projects
Quigley, John M. and Steven Raphael (2004). “Is housing unaffordable? Why isn’t it
more affordable?” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(1): 191-214.
Quigley, John M. and Steven Raphael (2005). “Regulation and the high cost of housing
in California.” American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings. 323-8.
Rice, Douglas, and Barbara Sard (2009). Decade of Neglect has Weakened Federal
Low-Income Housing Programs. Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities. Downloaded from http://www.cbpp.org/files/2-24-09hous.pdf on April 4,
2014.
Riis, Jacob, revised version ed. by Sam Bass Warner (1890/1970). How the Other half
Lives: Studies among the Tenements of New York. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Rosen, Eva (2014). "Selection, Matching, and the Rules of the Game: Landlords and the
Geographic Sorting of Low-Income Renters" Working Paper, W14-11. Joint Center
for Housing Studies, Harvard University.

57

Rosen, Harvey S. (1985). “Housing subsidies: Effects on housing decisions, efficiency,
and equity.” Handbook of Public Economics. Edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein. Edition 1, Volume 1, Chapter 7, pp. 375-420. Elsevier.
Rubinowitz, Leonard S., and James E. Rosenbaum (2000). Crossing the Class and
Color Lines: From Public Housing to White Suburbia. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Sampson, Robert J., Patrick Sharkey, and Stephen W. Raudenbush (2008). “Durable
effects of concentrated disadvantage on verbal ability among African-American
children.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(3): 845-52.
Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2006).
“Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement: Results from the MTO Experiment.”
Journal of Human Resources, 41(4): 649-91.
Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jens Ludwig, Lawrence F. Katz, Lisa A. Gennetian, Greg J.
Duncan, Ronald C. Kessler, Emma Adam, Thomas W. McDade, and Stacy Tessler
Lindau (2011). Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program:
Final Impacts Evaluation. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.
Santiago, Anna M., George C. Galster, and Peter Tatian (2001). Assessing the Property
Value Impacts of the Dispersed Housing Subsidy Program in Denver. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 20(1): 65-88.
Schill, Michael H. (1993). “Distressed public housing: Where do we go from here?”
University of Chicago Law Review. 60(2): 497-554.

58

Schill, Michael H., and Susan M. Wachter (1995). “The Spatial Bias of Federal Housing
Law and Policy: Concentrated Poverty in Urban America.” 143 University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 1285.
Schwartz, Alex F. (2014). Housing Policy in the United States (Third edition). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Shroder, D. Mark and Arthur J. Reiger (2000). “Vouchers Versus Production Revisited,”
Working paper. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Shroder, D. Mark (2002). “Does Housing Assistance Perversely Affect Self-Sufficiency?
A Review Essay,” Journal of Housing Economics, 11(4).
Schwartz, Amy, Ingrid Gould Ellen, Ioan Voicu and Michael Schill. (2006). “The
External Effects of Subsidized Housing.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 36:
679-707.
Schwartz, Heather (2012). “Housing policy is school policy: Economically integrative
housing promotes academic success in Montgomery County, Maryland.” In The
Future of School Integration, edited by Richard D. Kahlenberg (New York: Century
Foundation).
Shlay, A. and S. Holupka (1991). “Steps toward independence: The early effects of the
Lafayette Courts Family Development Center.” Johns Hopkins University, Institute
for Policy Studies.
Spence, Lewis H. (1993). “Rethinking the Social Role of Public Housing.” Housing
Policy Debate. 4(3). 355.
Susin, Scott (2005). “Longitudinal outcomes of subsidized housing recipients in
matched survey and administrative data.” Cityscape. 8(2): 189-218.

59

Tatian, Peter A. and Christopher Snow (2005). “The effects of housing assistance on
income, earnings and employment.” Cityscape. 8(2): 135-162.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (1974). Housing in the Seventies.
Washington, DC: HUD.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2012). “PHA Preferences Web
Census Survey.” Washington, DC: HUD Office of Policy Development and Research
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2013). “Worst Case Housing
Needs 2011: Report to Congress,” Washington, DC: HUD Office of Policy
Development and Research.
U.S. Government Accounting Office (2001). Federal Housing Programs: What They
Cost and What They Provide. GAO-01-901R. Washington, DC: GAO.
U.S. Government Accounting Office (2002). Federal Housing Assistance: Comparing
the Characteristics and Costs of Housing Programs. GAO-02-76. Washington, DC:
GAO.
Vale, Lawrence J. (2000). From the Puritans to the Projects: Public Housing and Public
Neighbors. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vale, Lawrence J. (2013). “Public Housing in the United States: Neighborhood Renewal
and the Poor.” In Naomi Carmon and Susan Fainstein, eds., Policy, Planning and
People Promoting Justice in Urban Development. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Von Hoffman, Alex (1996) “High Ambitions: The Past and Future of Low-Income
Housing Policy.” Housing Policy Debate. 7(4): 423-446.
Von Hoffman, Alexander (2012). “A Rambling Edifice: American Housing Policy in the

60

Twentieth Century.” Working Paper, W12-9. Joint Center for Housing Studies,
Harvard University.
Wallace, E. James, Abt Associates, and Housing Assistance Payments Program (1981).
Participation and benefits in the urban Section 8 program: new construction and
existing housing. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, submitted to Office of Policy
Development and Research, U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development.
Wilson, William J. (1996). When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor.
New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
Wright, Gwendolyn (1981). Building the Dream: A Social History of Housing in
America. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.

61

Figure 1: Assisted Housing Units and Households

0

500

1000

1500

2000

1940-2012

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980
year

Public Housing Units
Project Based Section 8

1990

2000

2010

Tenant Based Section 8
LIHTC Placed in Service

62

3000

.04

2000

.03

1000

.02

0

0

.01

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Public Housing
Max EITC Refund $2014

50

55

Vouchers

Source: Authors Calculations, HUD PIC 2014, Tax Policy Center 2014
Sample is households with positive wage earnings, one-wage earner, and one dependent

1

1.1

1.2

Figure 3: Real Rent v Real Income 1980-2013

.9

Percent of Earners

.05

4000

1-Earner, 1-Child

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
Source: Authors' Calculation; Data: CPI City Average Urban Consumers, CPS PUMS

CPI Rent Index/ Less Shelter Index

63

25th Pctile Income Index

Max EITC Refund $2014

Figure 2: Assisted Households with Earnings v. EITC Schedule

Figure 4: Budget set under Public Housing

Qx

Y/PX
L

(Y-.3Y)/PX

PH
M

H

QH
QPH

Y/PH

Notes: The figure above illustrates a static view of public housing assistance on the
budget set of participants, ignoring labor supply effect. Public housing amounts to an
offer of a fixed quality of housing, accepting this offer could result in lower housing
consumption with more of other goods consumed, more of both housing and other goods,
or only more housing. For example, a household could be optimizing with indifference
curve UL in absence of the public housing offer – and thus would consume more housing
but less of other goods if they were to accept the public housing unit due to their
increased rent contribution. A household selecting point M would consume more housing
if she were to accept the public housing unit and more of other goods, while a household
consuming at point H would consume less housing and more of other goods were she to
accept the public housing unit.

64

Figure 5: Budget set under Housing Vouchers

Qx

Y/PQ
A

(Y-.3Y)/PX

B

C

(Y-.4Y)/PX

D

Z
QH,min

S

E

(S+.1Y)/PH

Y/PH

(Y+S)/PH

QH

Notes: The figure above illustrates the budget set created by receipt of a housing voucher.
Without a voucher, a low-income household faces budget constraint AZ. The provision of
voucher changes the budget set. A voucher recipient must pay at least 30 percent of their
adjusted income (Y) towards rent, and must reside in a unit surpassing a minimum
quality threshold (Qmin). The voucher pays up to a maximum subsidy ceiling (S), this is
often the Fair Market Rent (FMR), but local PHAs have discretion to set the subsidy
ceiling from 90-110% of FMR. In the first year of the program, the budget constraint is
ABDZ. First year tenants can rent a unit that is more expensive than the maximum
subsidy (S), but cannot pay more than 40 percent of their adjusted income on rent, thus
the highest quality of housing they can occupy is (S+0.1Y)/PH. The presence of this
maximum expenditure ceiling means that theoretically the voucher could lead to reduced
housing consumption in the first year of the program. After the first year of the program,
tenants can pay more than 40 percent of their adjusted income towards rent, so they face
budget constraint ABCDE and should increase housing consumption.

65

Figure 6: Federal Housing Assistance Income and Substitution Effects

Consumption

A

U

U’

B

S
C
G

Z

Leisure

SE IE

Notes: The figure above provide illustrates the impact of housing assistance on labor
supply through a simple static, one period model. In the absence of a subsidy, the
household faces budget constraint AZ, and optimizes at U, where the wage rate equals the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure. The housing subsidy
modifies the budget constraint to ABC. Due to the program rules, the subsidy lowers the
relative price of leisure and induces a substitution effects equal to SE in figure 3. The
additional income from the subsidy has an income effect denoted IE as the household
shifts to U’. In this simple model, the housing subsidy reduces labor supply and the
effective value of the subsidy shrinks from G to S

66

Table 1: Current Program Income Eligibility and Rent Rules
Program

Income Limit
Upon Occupancy
80% of AMI,45
but 40% must
earn < 30% AMI

Ongoing Income
Requirements
PHAs have
discretion to evict
tenants if their
incomes rise above
eligibility limit.

Section 8 New
Construction and
Substantial
Rehabilitation
Low-Income Housing
Tax Credit Program

80% of AMI

Housing Choice
Voucher Program

50% of AMI, but
75% must earn <
30% AMI

Tenants can stay as
incomes rise, but
rents will rise
accordingly.
Tenants can stay as
incomes rise, but
next available unit
must be filled by
income-eligible
household.
Tenants lose
voucher if 30% of
their adjusted
income exceeds the
payment standard
for six months.

Public Housing

60% of AMI

Tenant Rent
30% of a tenant’s
adjusted income.
Families can choose
a flat rent, based on
comparable market
rent.
30% of a tenant’s
adjusted income.
Flat rent.

30% of a tenant’s
adjusted income if
unit rents below
payment standard;
Any amount if rents
are above payment
standard.

45 Families with incomes up to 80% of the area median income are eligible for vouchers if they have been
displaced from subsidized units by public housing demolition or expiring project-based Section 8
developments.

67

Table 2: Number of Units Eligible for Assistance and Assisted Households
Year
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985

Public Housing Units
23,783
58,459
89,250
101,951
141,569
144,095
144,095
144,803
145,785
146,549
145,703
156,084
204,815
259,116
304,383
343,907
365,896
374,172
401,467
425,481
465,481
482,714
511,047
539,841
577,347
608,554
639,631
687,336
767,723
830,454
892,651
989,419
1,047,000
1,109,000
1,151,000
1,172,000
1,174,000
1,173,000
1,178,000
1,192,000
1,204,000
1,224,000
1,313,816
1,340,575
1,355,152

LIHTC Placed in
Service‡

Tenant Based Section Project Based Section
8
8

162,085
297,256
427,331
521,329
599,122
650,817
690,643
728,406
748,543
797,383

111,181
155,879
263,583
377,112
554,189
668,110
836,040
1,021,498
1,161,269
1,212,923

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

1,379,679
1,390,098
1,397,907
1,403,816
1,404,870
1,410,137
1,409,191
1,407,923
1,409,455
1,397,205
1,388,746
1,372,260
1,295,437
1,273,500
1,266,980
1,219,238
1,208,730
1,206,721
1,188,649
1,162,808
1,172,204
1,155,377
1,140,294
1,128,891
1,060,392
1,082,393
1,091,758
1,090,471

16,091
50,889
93,138
135,227
181,085
225,151
282,454
345,581
427,456
514,268
595,896
681,070
790,507
889,211
990,651
1,092,739
1,212,844
1,329,343
1,445,625
1,563,639
1,672,788
1,754,222
1,820,279
1,883,129
1,944,374
1,984,137
na

892,863
956,181
1,024,689
1,089,598
1,137,244
1,166,257
1,326,250
1,391,794
1,486,533
1,413,311
1,464,588
1,460,899
1,605,898
1,681,774
1,837,428
1,966,171
1,997,733
2,051,967
2,087,344
2,056,430
2,084,917
2,110,000
2,071,195
2,091,700
2,142,668
2,183,276
2,207,724
2,193,545

1,250,476
1,283,322
1,307,773
1,330,265
1,363,218
1,381,738
1,396,227
1,420,214
1,439,426
1,498,381
1,493,574
1,482,735
1,395,037
1,386,533
1,358,797
1,343,574
1,328,532
1,319,632
1,309,427
1,306,740
1,287,529
1,286,662
1,285,331
1,279,383
1,179,298
1,179,327
1,174,914
1,171,092

‡Reports the number of Low-Income Units in LIHTC projects reported to be placed in service.
Sources: Public Housing, Tenant-Based Voucher, and Project-Based Section-8 come from HUD's Annual
Performance Report 1999-2013. Pre-1998 numbers for HUD programs comes from Olsen (2003). LIHTC
counts are low-income units placed in service from HUD's Low Income Housing Tax Credit Database.

Table 3: Characteristics of HUD-Subsidized Households 2013
Other
ALL
Housing
Project Multifam
Moderate
HUD
Choice Public
Based
ily
Section Rehab
Programs Vouchers Housing Section-8 Programs 236
Program
Variables
Subsidized Units (thousands)
5,256
2,386
1,151
841
656
127
22
Subsidized People (thousands)
10,077
5,360
2,335
1,247
946
156
33
% Occupied
94
92
94
96
95
93
89
Subsidized Households Reported (thousands)
4,553
2,113
1,071
785
493
63
28
Average Rent/Month, Inc. Utilities
304
346
275
274
255
211
153
Average Household Income/Year 12890
13138
13724
12172
11135
14347
8899
Average People/Household
2.1
2.4
2.2
1.5
1.8
1.7
1.6
Income as % of Area Median
0.23
0.22
0.25
0.24
0.21
0.24
0.18
Neighborhood Poverty Rate
0.25
0.22
0.32
0.23
0.27
0.26
0.31
%62+, Head or Spouse
0.33
0.22
0.31
0.56
0.44
0.47
0.23
% LT62 w/ Disability, Head or Spouse0.34
0.36
0.31
0.44
0.26
0.25
0.44
% Single Parent
0.35
0.43
0.35
0.18
0.3
0.25
0.24
% 2+ adults with children
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.02
% With Children Under 18
0.39
0.48
0.4
0.21
0.34
0.29
0.26
% LT 50% Area Median Income
0.95
0.96
0.91
0.96
0.98
0.93
0.99
% LT 30% Area Median Income
0.75
0.76
0.72
0.73
0.78
0.71
0.88
% Minority total
0.64
0.67
0.71
0.45
0.63
0.59
0.62
% Black
0.44
0.48
0.48
0.29
0.45
0.42
0.34
% Hispanic
0.17
0.15
0.23
0.14
0.16
0.15
0.28
Minority as % of Neighborhood
0.56
0.57
0.62
0.45
0.58
0.56
0.59

Source: HUD, A Picture of Subsidized Housing 2013
Notes: This table report summary statistics on households, persons and units by program. Units and
households are reported for the program under which units were initially constructed. This means that
some many households under the "other multifamily programs" category which includes: Section 8 Loan
Management, Rental Assistance Program (RAP), Rent Supplement (SUP), Property Disposition, Section
202/811 capital advance, and preservation may be receiving project-based rental assistance (but are not
double-counted).

Table 4: Rent Burdens of Renter Households by Income Quintile and Year
A. Rent as a percentage of household income
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
All Renters
0.19
0.2
0.25
0.26
0.26
Income Quintile
First
0.47
0.51
0.53
0.53
0.55
Second
0.23
0.23
0.24
0.28
0.29
Third
0.17
0.16
0.2
0.21
0.2
Fourth
0.14
0.13
0.15
0.16
0.15
Fifth
0.1
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.11
Poor Renters
0.44
0.57
0.63
0.63
0.64
B. Percentage of renters devoting more than 30 percent of income in rent
1960
1970
1980
All Renters
0.23
0.26
0.34
Income Quintile
First
0.62
0.67
0.69
Second
0.21
0.23
0.37
Third
0.04
0.04
0.09
Fourth
0.01
0.01
0.02
Fifth
0
0
0
Poor Renters
0.55
0.64
0.68

Data Source: IPUMS Decennial PUMS extracts 1960-2000; ACS PUMS 2012

2012
0.29
0.63
0.33
0.23
0.18
0.13
0.67

1990
0.37

2000
0.4

2012
0.49

0.72
0.42
0.14
0.05
0
0.71

0.79
0.44
0.12
0.03
0.02
0.77

0.83
0.59
0.24
0.08
0.02
0.82

Table 5: Federal Outlays for Housing Assistance 1980-2013
Year
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Outlays ($2013 Dollars)a

Outlays
5,480
6,861
8,064
9,449
10,048
11,402
11,441
11,278
12,727
13,979
15,481
16,958
18,776
21,397
23,804
27,438
26,660
27,693
28,686
27,645
28,788
30,067
33,046
35,306
36,574
37,710
38,002
39,436
40,245
41,405
46,628
47,743
43,801
42,376

13,179
15,091
16,702
18,831
19,337
21,262
20,912
20,102
21,918
23,171
24,744
26,233
28,399
31,611
34,434
38,879
37,100
37,889
38,826
36,853
37,523
38,315
41,475
43,448
43,804
43,756
42,779
43,242
43,278
44,191
49,167
49,324
44,453
42,376

Data Source: OMB historical tables, table 8.7: outlays for discretionary programs
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/Historicals
Housing Assistance includes the following major programs: Tenant Based Rental Assistance, Project-based Rental
Assistance, Public Housing Operating Fund, Public Housing Capital Fund, Home Investment Partnership Program,
Homeless Assistance Grants, RHS Rental Assistance Program, Housing for the Elderly, Native American Housing Block
Grant, Housing Certificate Fund, Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS, Housing for Persons with Disabilities,
Revitalization of Severely Distressed Public Housing (HOPE VI), Self-help Homeownership Opportunity Program, Rural
Housing Assistance Grants, Choice Neighborhoods,
a - real values adjusted using BEA annual GDP Implicit Price Deflator

Table 6: Estimated Budgetary Cost of Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (Billions) 2004-2013
Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Cost
4.3
4.7
4.8
5.1
5.2
8.3
5.1
5.4
6
6.4

Source: Joint Committee on Taxation, Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures
a- Real values adjusted using BEA annual GDP Implicit Price Deflator

Cost ($2013)a
5.1
5.5
5.4
5.6
5.6
8.9
5.4
5.6
6.1
6.4

