NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM LEVERAGE AND UNEMPLOYMENT DURING THE GREAT RECESSION
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 21076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We thank Nick Bloom, Itamar Drechsler, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Gertler, Ed Glaeser, Bob Hall, Theresa
Kuchler, Atif Mian, Jordan Nickerson, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Jonathan Parker, Thomas Philippon,
Paul Romer, Alexi Savov, David Scharfstein, Phillip Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Andrei Shleifer,
Rui Silva, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, and seminar participants at MIT, NYU, Stanford, UBC, ITAM
Finance Conference 2015, LBS Summer Finance Symposium 2015, and NBER CF Spring Meeting
2015 for helpful comments. We are grateful to Manuel Adelino and Albert Saiz for providing us with
data. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Firm Leverage and Unemployment during the Great Recession
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 21076
April 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E24,E32,R3
ABSTRACT
We argue that firms’ balance sheets were instrumental in the propagation of shocks during the Great
Recession. Using establishment-level data, we show that firms that tightened their debt capacity in
the run-up to the Great Recession (“highleverage firms”) exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment
in response to household demand shocks than firms that freed up debt capacity (“low-leverage firms”).
In fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices during the Great Recession are concentrated
among establishments of high-leverage firms. At the county level, we show that counties with a larger
fraction of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms exhibit a significantly larger decline in
employment in response to household demand shocks. Thus, firms’ balance sheets also matter for
aggregate employment.
Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgiroud@mit.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Prominent research argues that (non-financial) firms’ balance sheets play an important
role in the propagation of business cycle shocks (Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996, 1999), Sharpe (1994), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). And
yet, in the most recent Great Recession, the focus has been almost entirely on either
households’ balance sheets or those of financial intermediaries.1 A look at Figure 1 may
help understand why. While household leverage rose significantly in the years preceding
the Great Recession–and that of investment banks, already at high levels, rose even
further–the leverage of (non-financial) firms remained essentially flat.
This paper argues that firms’ balance sheets were instrumental in the propagation of
shocks during the Great Recession. To be clear, we do not mean to argue that household
balance sheets or those of financial intermediaries are unimportant. On the contrary, our
results are consistent with the view that falling house prices lead to a drop in consumer
demand by households (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013)), with important consequences for
employment (Mian and Sufi (2014)). But households do not lay oﬀ workers. Firms do.
Thus, the extent to which demand shocks by households translate into employment losses
depends on how firms respond to these shocks. To explore this issue, we construct a
unique data set that combines employment and wage data at the establishment level from
the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) with balance sheet and
income statement data at the firm level from Compustat and house price data at the ZIP
code and county level from Zillow.
According to the firm balance sheet channel, firms’ responses to household demand
shocks depend on the strength of their balance sheets. To this end, we note that the
seemingly flat line in Figure 1 masks an important fact: there is substantial variation
1

For work emphasizing the role of household balance sheets during the Great Recession, see, e.g.,
Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), Hall (2011),
Midrigan and Philippon (2011), and Eggertson and Krugman (2012). For work emphasizing the role
of financial intermediary balance sheets, and “lender health” more generally, see, e.g., Chodorow-Reich
(2014), Gertler and Kyotaki (2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014),
and Moreira and Savov (2014). A notable exception is Gilchrist et al. (2014), who document that firms
with weak balance sheets increase prices during the Great Recession, which might help explain why the
U.S. economy experienced only a mild disinflation during that period.

2

in leverage changes in the years prior to the Great Recession. Indeed, while the median
change in firm leverage (debt over assets) between 2002 and 2006 is virtually zero, the
average change in the above-median group is 0.179, and that in the below-median group
is -0.265. Thus, some firms come into the Great Recession having just tightened their
debt capacity, while others come into the Great Recession having just freed up debt
capacity. With a slight abuse of terminology, we call these firms “high-leverage” firms
and “low-leverage” firms, respectively.
Our results strongly support the firm balance sheet channel: establishments of highleverage firms exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment between 2007 and 2009
in response to household demand shocks than establishments of low-leverage firms. In
fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices are concentrated among
establishments of high-leverage firms.2 By contrast, there is no significant association
between changes in house prices and changes in employment during the Great Recession
among establishments of low-leverage firms. These results are based on more than a
quarter million observations and thus precisely estimated.
The granularity of our data allows us to include a wide array of fixed eﬀects. Most of
our analysis is cross-sectional–we examine the relation between changes in house prices
and changes in employment during the Great Recession. Our tightest specification includes both firm and ZIP code × industry fixed eﬀects. Thus, accounting for the possibility that high- and low-leverage firms may experience diﬀerential job losses for reasons
unrelated to changes in house prices, we compare establishments in the same ZIP code
and industry–e.g., a local Macy’s versus Nordstrom department store, a local Safeway
versus Kroger supermarket, or a local Target versus Kmart discount retailer–where some
establishments belong to high-leverage firms and others belong to low-leverage firms. We
also estimate a panel regression with establishment, firm × year, and ZIP code × industry
× year fixed eﬀects. The results are the same.
2

Based on evidence in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014)–as well as evidence in
Section 3.5–we use the terms “falling house prices” and “household demand shocks” interchangeably.
Importantly, these household demand shocks are orthogonal to whether firms tightened or freed up debt
capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession. As Panel (A) of Table 1 shows, establishments of lowand high-leverage firms experience the same drop in house prices between 2006 and 2009 and are located
in areas with the same housing supply elasticity.

3

In line with prior research, we find no significant correlation between changes in house
prices and changes in employment in the tradable sector. By contrast, we find positive
and significant correlations in the non-tradable and “other” sectors. Together, these two
sectors account for 97% of all establishments. Hence, there is no need to interact changes
in house prices with sector dummies in our regressions. Importantly, in both sectors, the
correlation between changes in house prices and changes in employment is only significant
among establishments of high-leverage firms. Thus, our results are not driven by industry
sector composition eﬀects.
Besides examining whether falling house prices lead to employment losses, we also
examine whether they lead to adjustments at the extensive margin, i.e., establishment
closures. They do. However, as in the case of employment losses, the eﬀect is entirely concentrated among establishments of high-leverage firms. By contrast, there is no significant
association between falling house prices and establishment closures among establishments
of low-leverage firms.
Why do establishments of high-leverage firms respond more strongly to household
demand shocks? The interpretation that appears most consistent with our results is
that high-leverage firms are financially constrained. First, high-leverage firms look like
“typical” financially constrained firms: they have higher leverage ratios (38.3% versus
19.5%) and score worse on popular measures of financial constraints, such as the KZ- and
WW-index (Kaplan and Zingales (1997), Whited and Wu (2006)). More important, they
also act like financially constrained firms. When faced with household demand shocks,
high-leverage firms do not (or cannot) raise additional external funds during the Great
Recession. Instead, they reduce employment, close down establishments, and cut back on
investment. Moreover, house-price induced shocks to establishments of high-leverage firms
spill over to other establishments within the same firm, a pattern commonly associated
with firms being financially constrained (Lamont (1997), Giroud and Mueller (2014)).
The exact opposite is true of low-leverage firms. When faced with household demand
shocks, these firms do not reduce employment, close down establishments, or cut back on
investment, and there are no spillovers across establishments. Instead, low-leverage firms
increase both their short- and long-term borrowing during the Great Recession, consistent
4

with these firms having freed up debt capacity in the run-up period.
The evidence presented in this paper mirrors survey evidence by Campello, Graham,
and Harvey (2010), who asked 574 U.S. CFOs in 2008 whether they perceive their firms as
being aﬀected by diﬃculties in accessing credit markets. The majority of CFOs reported
that they are either somewhat (210) or very (155) aﬀected.3 Importantly, firms classified
as financially constrained said they would reduce their capital spending by 9%, while
financially unconstrained firms said they would keep their capital spending rates largely
unchanged. Moreover, and especially relevant for us, financially constrained firms said
they would cut their employment by 10.9%, while financially unconstrained firms said
they would cut their employment only by 2.7%.
A natural interpretation of our results is that high-leverage firms, having increased
their leverage in the run-up to the Great Recession, are unable to borrow further and thus
forced to downsize and reduce employment when hit by demand shocks. An alternative
hypothesis is that these firms would have downsized and reduced employment even if they
were financially unconstrained. We explore three channels:
i) High-leverage firms expanded too much in the years prior to the Great Recession.
Consequently, they downsize more during the Great Recession.
ii) High-leverage firms have lower productivity. As a result, they suﬀer more when hit
by household demand shocks.
iii) High-leverage firms are more sensitive to business cycle shocks (“high beta”) for
reasons unrelated to financial constraints. We consider the sensitivity of firm-level employment with respect to both aggregate employment and house prices.
We find little support for any of these channels. If firms respond more strongly to
demand shocks in the Great Recession not because they are financially constrained but
rather because they expanded too much in prior years, then we would expect to find a
significant response also among establishments of low-leverage, high-growth firms. However, we find no significant response among such establishments. Likewise, we find no

3

Chodorow-Reich (2014) documents that firms borrowing from less “healthy” lenders experience
larger employment losses in the Great Recession, lending further support to the notion that financial
constraints matter for employment.

5

significant response among establishments of low-leverage, low-productivity firms or lowleverage, high-beta firms. By contrast, we always find a significant response among establishments of high-leverage firms, regardless of whether these firms have low or high
growth, low or high productivity, or low or high beta.
Do firms’ balance sheets also matter for aggregate employment? In a frictionless labor
market, wages would adjust downward, and low-leverage firms would pick up workers laid
oﬀ by high-leverage firms. As a result, aggregate employment would change only little, or
perhaps not at all. Our establishment-level results suggest that this is an unlikely scenario.
While high-leverage firms reduce employment in response to household demand shocks,
low-leverage firms do not increase employment. Thus, it would seem that firms’ balance
sheets also matter in the aggregate, with the implication that areas with a greater fraction
of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms should experience a larger decline in
employment in response to household demand shocks.
To explore this issue, we consider aggregate employment at the county level. In
one specification, we classify counties into low- and high-leverage counties based on the
employment-weighted fraction of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms. In another specification, we classify counties into low- and high-leverage counties based on
the employment-weighted average change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006 across
all establishments in the county. Regardless of which classification we use, we find that
high-leverage counties exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment in response to
household demand shocks than low-leverage counties. Thus, firms’ balance sheets also
matter for aggregate employment.
In seminal work, Mian and Sufi (2011) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) show that
rising house prices in the run-up to the Great Recession lead to the build-up of household leverage, causing a sharp drop in consumption as house prices fall between 2006 and
2009. Mian and Sufi (2014) examine the implications of these household demand shocks
for aggregate employment at the county level, concluding that the “housing net worth
channel” played a significant role during the Great Recession. Our focus is at the establishment level. In particular, we show that establishments of firms that tightened their
debt capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession exhibit a larger decline in employment
6

in response to household demand shocks than establishments of firms that freed up debt
capacity. In fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices are concentrated
among establishments of high-leverage firms.4
Other papers focus on the years prior to the Great Recession. Adelino, Schoar, and
Severino (2014) find that rising house prices in the housing boom years lead to more
county-level employment growth, especially among small businesses that require little
start-up capital. Likewise, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigo (2014) find that rising house
prices lead to higher wages and more employment growth, increasing the opportunity
cost for college enrollment. While the wage and employment eﬀects are undone by the
subsequent housing bust, the adverse eﬀect on schooling persists.
Aghion et al. (2015) also explore the role of firm-level heterogeneity during the Great
Recession. Using firm-level data from OECD countries and survey-based measures of
firms’ decentralization, they find that decentralized firms experience a smaller reduction in
sales, TFP, and profit growth than their centralized counterparts, especially in industries
that were hit hard during the Great Recession.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, sample
selection, main variables, and summary statistics. Section 3 presents our main results,
including a longitudinal analysis, instrumental variable (IV) specification, and industry
sector analysis. Section 4 presents evidence suggesting that high-leverage firms are financially constrained. Section 5 considers alternative channels. Section 6 focuses on
county-level employment. Section 7 concludes.

2

Data and Summary Statistics

We construct a unique data set that combines employment and wage data at the establishment level with balance sheet and income statement data at the firm level and house
price data at the ZIP code and county level.
4

Panel (A) of Table 1 shows that changes in firm leverage in the run-up to the Great Recession are
uncorrelated with changes in house prices during the Great Recession. Thus, financial constraints are not
an alternative explanation for the cross-sectional evidence presented in Mian and Sufi (2014). Rather,
they interact with demand shocks in a way that is consistent with the firm balance sheet channel.

7

The establishment-level data are provided by the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD). An establishment is a “single physical location where business
is conducted” (Jarmin and Miranda (2003, p. 15)), e.g., a retail store, restaurant, gas
station, warehouse, or manufacturing plant. The LBD covers all business establishments
in the U.S. with at least one paid employee.
The firm-level data are from Compustat. We exclude financial firms (SIC 60-69),
utilities (SIC 49), and firms with missing financial data between 2002 and 2009. We
match the remaining firms to establishments in the LBD using the Compustat-SSEL
bridge maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. As this bridge ends in 2005, we extend
the match to 2011 using employer name and ID number (EIN) following the procedure
described in McCue (2003). This leaves us with 327,500 establishments with non-missing
employment data from 2007 to 2009.5
The house price data are from Zillow.6 Out of the 327,500 establishments, we are able
to match 227,600 establishments to ZIP code-level house prices and 57,200 establishments
to county-level house prices, leaving us with a final sample of 284,800 establishments for
which we have both firm-level data and house price data.7
Our main dependent variable is the percentage change in employment at the establishment level between 2007 and 2009, ∆ Log(Emp)07−09  Our main independent variable
is the percentage change in house prices between 2006 and 2009, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 8 This
variable is highly correlated with similar variables used in prior research. For instance, the
correlation at the MSA level with ∆ Housing Net Worth, 2006-2009, the main explanatory
5

All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest hundred following disclosure guidelines by the U.S.
Census Bureau.
6

For the period 2006 to 2009, the Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) is available for 12,102 ZIP codes
and 1,048 counties. See www.zillow.com/research/data for an overview of the ZHVI methodology and a
comparison with the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index.
7

Our results are similar if we use only the 227,600 establishments for which we have ZIP code-level
house prices, or if we use the full set of 327,500 establishments by matching the remaining 327,500 284,800 = 42,700 establishments to state-level house prices constructed as population-weighted averages
of available ZIP code-level house prices. See Table IA-I of the Internet Appendix.
8

To facilitate comparison with prior research, we compute changes in house prices from December
2006 to December 2009. Our results are similar if we compute changes in house prices from either April
2006 or March 2007 (when residential house prices peaked) to May 2009 (when they bottomed out). See
Table IA-II of the Internet Appendix.

8

variable in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014), is 86.3%. Other papers
use house price data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) (e.g., Adelino,
Schoar, and Severino (2014), Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigo (2014)). The correlation
at the MSA level between our variable, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  and the corresponding variable
constructed from FHFA house price data is 96.4%.
Just like households that accumulated mortgage debt during the housing boom years
found themselves borrowing constrained once house prices started falling, we argue that
firms that increased their leverage in the years prior to the Great Recession found themselves borrowing constrained when hit by demand shocks during the Great Recession.
By contrast, firms that freed up debt capacity in the run-up period were able to borrow
additional funds during the Great Recession, avoiding the need to downsize and lay oﬀ
employees (see Table 6). To distinguish between firms that tightened and freed up debt
capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession, we sort all establishments based on their
firms’ change in leverage between 2002 and 2006, ∆ Lev02−06  where leverage is defined
as the ratio of the sum of debt in current liabilities and long-term debt divided by total
assets (from Compustat).910 The median value of ∆ Lev02−06 is virtually zero, meaning
about half of all establishments belong to firms that come into the Great Recession having
just tightened their debt capacity, while the other half belong to firms that come into the
Great Recession having just freed up debt capacity. With a slight abuse of terminology,
we call firms with above- and below-median values of ∆ Lev02−06 “high-leverage” firms
and “low-leverage” firms, respectively.
Panel (A) of Table 1 provides summary statistics for all establishments and separately
for establishments of high- and low-leverage firms.11 As can be seen, establishments of
high-leverage firms are slightly smaller and experience larger job losses during the Great
9

Our results are similar if we compute ∆ Lev02−06 using net leverage or market leverage. See Table
IA-III of the Internet Appendix.
10

For theoretical models emphasizing the role of leverage dynamics prior to crises, see, e.g., Fostel and
Geanakoplos (2008) and Geanakoplos (2010).
11

All growth rates (∆ Log(Emp)07−09  ∆ Log(HP)06−09  ∆ Log(Emp)02−06  ∆ Log(Assets)02−06 ),
financial ratios (ROA06  NPM06  TFP06  Lev06 ), and financial constraints measures (WW06  KZ06 ) are
winsorized at the 1% level. Changes from 2002 to 2006 in Panel (C) are not separately winsorized,
although they may be computed from winsorized 2002 and 2006 values.

9

Recession. Importantly, however, establishments of high- and low-leverage firms exhibit
the same decline in house prices between 2006 and 2009 and the same housing supply
elasticity. Hence, whether firms tightened or freed up debt capacity in the run-up to
the Great Recession is orthogonal to both the incidence and magnitude of household demand shocks during the Great Recession (but, as we will see, not to how firms respond
to these shocks). Interestingly, establishments of high-leverage firms are somewhat underrepresented in the non-tradable sector, while establishments of low-leverage firms are
underrepresented in the “other” sector (i.e., industries that are neither tradable nor nontradable). This is not a major concern, however. First, we perform separate analyses for
each sector and obtain similar results for the non-tradable and “other” sector. Second, all
our establishment-level regressions include industry fixed eﬀects or, in one instance, ZIP
code × industry fixed eﬀects.
Panel (B) provides summary statistics for high- and low-leverage firms as of 2006,
at the onset of the Great Recession. As can be seen, high-leverage firms have fewer
establishments than low-leverage firms (95 versus 109). Given that the total number of
establishments is the same in both groups, this implies that there are fewer low-leverage
firms than high-leverage firms (1,300 versus 1,500). Second, high-leverage firms are smaller
than low-leverage firms, both in terms of number of employees and book assets. Third,
high-leverage firms are less productive in 2006–they have a lower return on assets (ROA),
lower net profit margin (NPM), and lower total factor productivity (TFP). Lastly, highleverage firms have higher leverage ratios (0.383 versus 0.195) and score worse on popular
measures of financial constraints, such as the KZ- and WW-index (Kaplan and Zingales
(1997), Whited and Wu (2006)).
Panel (C) includes the same firm-level variables as Panel (B). However, instead of
showing their levels in 2006, it shows their changes between 2002 and 2006. Three results
stand out. First, high-leverage firms expand more than low-leverage firms in the years
prior to the Great Recession. This holds irrespective of whether we consider growth
in the number of establishments, number of employees, or book assets. Second, highleverage firms exhibit lower ROA and NPM growth than low-leverage firms. They also
exhibit lower TFP growth, albeit the diﬀerence is not significant. Third, high-leverage
10

firms experience a tightening of financial constraints (based on the KZ- and WW-index),
while low-leverage firms experience a loosening of financial constraints. This last result is
not surprising, given that high-leverage firms increased their leverage, while low-leverage
firms decreased their leverage. That being said, the diﬀerence between the two groups is
substantial: while the average change in leverage among high-leverage firms is 0.179, the
average change in leverage among low-leverage firms is -0.265.12
We would like to caution that the diﬀerences between low- and high-leverage firms may
not be independent of each other. On the contrary, it is plausible that high-leverage firms
increased their leverage because they needed to fund an expansion or a deficit arising from
a productivity shortfall. But this raises the possibility that high-leverage firms respond
more strongly to demand shocks during the Great Recession not because they are more
financially constrained, but rather because they expanded too much in the run-up period
or were less productive at the onset of the Great Recession. We will address these and
other alternative channels in Section 5.

3

The Firm Balance Sheet Channel

3.1

Sample Split

Our baseline regression consists of a straightforward sample split between low- and highleverage firms. The results are shown in Panel (A) of Table 2. The dependent variable is
the percentage change in employment at the establishment level between 2007 and 2009,
∆ Log(Emp)07−09  The main independent variable is the percentage change in house prices
between 2006 and 2009, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  The inclusion of industry fixed eﬀects accounts
for the possibility that industries may experience diﬀerential employment losses for reasons
unrelated to changes in house prices. Likewise, the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects accounts
for any unobserved heterogeneity across firms. All regressions are weighted by the size of
12

While leverage in 2002 and 2006 is winsorized at the 1% level, the change in leverage from 2002 to
2006, ∆ Lev02−06 , is not separately winsorized. Thus, the mean values of 0.179 and -0.265 may appear
high. We do not separately winsorize ∆ Lev02−06 because–besides aﬀecting the summary statistics in
Table 1–it is immaterial for our results. All that matters is whether a firm’s value of ∆ Lev02−06 lies
below or above the median. That, however, is unaﬀected by how ∆ Lev02−06 is winsorized.

11

establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors are clustered at both
the state and firm level.
Columns (1) to (3) show that changes in house prices during the Great Recession
are associated with profound changes in employment at the establishment level. Across
all establishments, a one percent decline in house prices is associated with a 0.053 to
0.068 percent drop in employment. To put these numbers into perspective, consider two
establishments, one located in a ZIP code associated with a 10th percentile change in
house prices (-40.2%) and the other located in a ZIP code associated with a 90th percentile change in house prices (3.5%). Our results suggest that the former establishment
experiences an additional employment loss of 2.32 to 2.97 percent.
We should note that the specification with firm fixed eﬀects is a rather conservative
specification that may be “controlling away” some of the eﬀects we are trying to document. For example, some firms may be “regionally concentrated,” i.e., they may have
most of their establishments in the same region. Given that the firm fixed eﬀects force
comparison to be made among establishments within the same firm, this implies that, for
regionally concentrated firms, there exists relatively little within-firm variation in house
price changes, making it diﬃcult to identify the eﬀect on employment changes. Indeed,
moving from columns (1) or (2) to column (3), which includes firm fixed eﬀects, the
coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 drops from 0.066 and 0.068, respectively, to 0.053.
In columns (4) to (6), we estimate the eﬀect of changes in house prices on changes
in employment separately for establishments of high-leverage firms. As can be seen, the
eﬀect for establishments of high-leverage firms is much stronger than the average eﬀect
documented in columns (1) to (3), providing support for the firm balance sheet channel.
Lastly, columns (7) to (9) show the eﬀect for establishments of low-leverage firms. Once
industry fixed eﬀects are included, there is no significant association between changes in
house prices and changes in employment. Overall, these results bring to light a clear
pattern that we will also encounter in all our subsequent regressions: establishments of
high-leverage firms respond more strongly to household demand shocks than establishments of low-leverage firms. In fact, the latter appear not to respond at all.

12

3.2

Interaction Term

In Panel (B) we do not split the sample into low- and high-leverage firms but rather interact ∆ Log(HP)06−09 with a dummy variable indicating whether an establishment belongs
to a high-leverage firm. The interaction term is always positive and significant, confirming
that the diﬀerences between low- and high-leverage firms in Panel (A) are statistically
significant. Also, as is shown in columns (1), (2), and (4), there is no significant association between changes in house prices and changes in employment among establishments
of low-leverage firms.
To illustrate the role of fixed eﬀects in this setting, consider column (6), which is
arguably our “tightest” specification. While the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects accounts
for any unobserved heterogeneity across firms, the ZIP code × industry fixed eﬀects force
comparison to be made between establishments within the same ZIP code and 4-digit
NAICS industry. To this end, we note that while our sample firms are all in Compustat,
their establishments are relatively small, with an average size of 39 employees (see Panel
(A) of Table 1). Thus, accounting for the possibility that high- and low-leverage firms
may exhibit diﬀerential job losses for reasons unrelated to changes in house prices, our
specification forces comparison to be made between relatively small, local establishments
in the same industry and ZIP code, e.g., a local Macy’s versus Nordstrom department
store, a local Safeway versus Kroger supermarket, or a local Target versus Kmart discount
retailer, where some establishments belong to high-leverage firms and others belong to
low-leverage firms.

3.3

Longitudinal Analysis

In line with other research on this topic, our analysis is cross-sectional. That said, we
obtain similar results if we estimate a panel regression in which the dependent variable
is the logarithm of employment at the establishment level in year t, log(Emp)t , and the
main independent variable is the logarithm of house prices in year t-1, log(HP)t-1 . The
sample period is from 2007 to 2011. Hence, our sample includes employment data from
2007 to 2011 and house price data from 2006 to 2010.
13

The main benefit of estimating a panel regression is that we can include establishment
fixed eﬀects. Accordingly, we can examine whether within-establishment changes in house
prices aﬀect within-establishment changes in employment diﬀerently for establishments
belonging to low- and high-leverage firms. They do. As Panel (C) shows, establishments
of high-leverage firms respond more strongly to changes in house prices than establishments of low-leverage firms. In fact, and similar to our results in Panels (A) and (B),
establishments of low-leverage firms appear not to respond at all. These results are robust
across diﬀerent fixed-eﬀect specifications, including one that has establishment, firm ×
year, and ZIP code × industry × year fixed eﬀects.

3.4

Instrumental Variable (IV) Estimation

Unobserved heterogeneity may be driving both changes in house prices and changes in
employment. We address this issue by instrumenting changes in house prices using the
housing supply elasticity instrument from Saiz (2010). This instrument captures geographical and regulatory constraints to new construction. Accordingly, areas with inelastic housing supply are facing supply constraints due to their topography (steep hills and
water bodies) and local regulation.
As Panel (A) of Table 1 shows, housing supply elasticity is orthogonal to whether firms
tightened or freed up debt capacity in the years prior to the Great Recession. While the
average housing supply elasticity among establishments of high-leverage firms is 1.789,
the average housing supply elasticity among establishments of low-leverage firms is 1.809.
The diﬀerence is not statistically significant (p-value 0.518).13 Unfortunately, the housing
supply elasticity instrument is only available for Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs),
implying that we lose some of our observations, especially of establishments located in
rural areas. Table IA-IV of the Internet Appendix replicates the OLS results from Table 2
for the reduced sample of establishments with available housing supply elasticity (247,800
establishments). As can be seen, the results are virtually identical to those in Table 2 (cf.

13

Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2014) compare low- and highelasticity counties along various other dimensions.

14

columns (3), (6), and (9) of Panel (A)).
Table 3 presents the IV results. The first-stage regression is shown in column (1). Similar to other first-stage regressions (e.g., Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Mian and Sufi (2014),
and Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2014)), we also find that housing supply elasticity is
a strong predictor of house price changes. Importantly, the results of the second-stage
regressions in columns (2) to (4) confirm our previous results that establishments of highleverage firms respond more strongly to household demand shocks than establishments of
low-leverage firms.
A possible concern with the housing supply instrument is that it includes local regulatory constraints, which may be driven by the same unobserved heterogeneity that also
drives employment dynamics. To mitigate this concern, we consider only the part of the
instrument based on an area’s topology, “share of unavailable land.”14 As is shown in
columns (5) to (8), all results remain similar.

3.5

Industry Sectors

Panel (A) of Table 1 shows that establishments of high-leverage firms are somewhat
underrepresented in the non-tradable sector, while establishments of low-leverage firms
are underrepresented in the “other” sector. While our establishment-level regressions
include industry fixed eﬀects, we can directly address concerns related to industry sector
composition by performing separate analyses for each sector.15
Table 4 presents the results. Across all establishments, we find no significant correlation between changes in house prices and changes in employment in the tradable sector.
By contrast, we find a positive and significant correlation in the non-tradable sector.

14

We are grateful to Albert Saiz for providing us with the data.

15

Mian and Sufi (2014) classify an industry as tradable if imports plus exports exceed $10,000 per
worker or $500M in total. Retail industries and restaurants are classified as non-tradable. The Appendix
of Mian and Sufi provides a list of all 4-digit NAICS industries and their classification. We label industries
that are neither tradable nor non-tradable as “other.” The “other” sector is comprised of a diverse
set of industries that includes, e.g., news and entertainment, transportation and trucking, healthcare
and hospitals, and wholesale. Mian and Sufi also provide a second industry classification based on the
geographical concentration of industries. Our results are similar if we use this alternative classification.
See Table IA-V of the Internet Appendix.

15

Together, these findings confirm similar results by Mian and Sufi (2014), who examine
changes in employment at the county level. While diﬀerences across industry sectors are
often a concern, the opposite is true here. Indeed, if the shock in question is a shock
to consumer demand by households, then (geographical) variation in house prices should
explain variation in employment primarily in the non-tradable sector, where demand by
households is local. In contrast, variation in house prices should not correlate strongly
with variation in employment in the tradable sector, where demand is largely national
or global. Given the evidence in Table 4–as well as evidence by Mian, Rao, and Sufi
(2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014)–we use the terms “falling house prices” and “household
demand shocks” interchangeably.16
Two further results in Table 4 are important. First, the correlation between changes
in house prices and changes in employment across all establishments is positive and significant both in the non-tradable and “other” sector. Together, these two sectors account
for 97% of all establishments (see Panel (A) of Table 1). Hence, there is no need to
interact changes in house prices with sector dummies in our regressions. Second, in both
sectors, the correlation between changes in house prices and changes in employment is
only significant among establishments of high-leverage firms. Consequently, our results
are not driven by industry sector composition eﬀects.

3.6

Establishment Closures

Does the drop in house prices between 2006 and 2009 also lead to adjustments at the
extensive margin, i.e., establishment closures? Arguably, establishment closures constitute
an extreme form of employment reduction. On the other hand, it is precisely a feature of
the firm balance sheet channel that (even) moderate shocks can get amplified into large
losses, making extreme outcomes possible.
16

The main alternatives are: i) falling house prices aﬀect local employment by impairing the value
of collateral associated with local firms’ commercial mortgages, and ii) falling house prices aﬀect local
employment by aﬀecting local credit supply, e.g., local banks cut lending to local firms after experiencing
losses on their local mortgage loan portfolios. In either case, however, it is unclear why employment in
the tradable sector would remain unaﬀected; see Mian and Sufi (2014) for further discussions. Moreover,
Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) provide direct evidence showing that areas with stronger declines in housing
net worth exhibit larger drops in consumption spending during the Great Recession.

16

In Table 5, we estimate again our baseline regression, except that the sample now
also includes establishments that are closed between 2007 and 2009. The dependent
variable is a dummy indicating whether an establishment is closed during that period.
As can be seen, changes in house prices are negatively and significantly associated with
establishment closures on average. However, like in our employment regressions, the eﬀect
is entirely concentrated among establishments of high-leverage firms. By contrast, there
is no significant association between changes in house prices and establishment closures
among establishments of low-leverage firms.

4

Financial Constraints

A natural interpretation of our results is that high-leverage firms, having increased their
leverage in the run-up to the Great Recession, are financially constrained during the Great
Recession. This interpretation is consistent with Panel (B) of Table 1, which shows that
high-leverage firms have much higher leverage ratios (38.3% versus 19.5%) and score worse
on widely used measures of financial constraints, such as the KZ- and WW-index (Kaplan
and Zingales (1997), Whited and Wu (2006)).
But do high-leverage firms also act like financially constrained firms? To examine this
question, we turn to firm-level regressions. Precisely, we estimate the firm-level analogue
of our baseline regression, except that the main independent variable, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  is
the employment-weighted average change in house prices between 2006 and 2009 across
all of the firm’s establishments. Accordingly, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 is the average household
demand shock faced by a firm. The dependent variable is either the change in shortterm debt, long-term debt, or equity, the change in employment or investment, or the
fraction of establishments closed, all between 2007 and 2009. The first three dependent
variables measure a firm’s access to external finance during the Great Recession (Panel
(A)). The last three dependent variables measure if being financially constrained has real
consequences at the firm level (Panel (B)).
Table 6 presents the results. As is shown, high-leverage firms indeed act like financially
constrained firms in the Great Recession. When faced with household demand shocks,
17

these firms do not (or cannot) raise additional external finance. Instead, high-leverage
firms reduce employment, close down establishments, and cut back on investment. The
opposite is true of low-leverage firms. When faced with household demand shocks, these
firms do not reduce employment, close down establishments, or cut back on investment.
Instead, low-leverage firms increase both their short- and long-term borrowing, consistent
with these firms having freed up debt capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession.
Table 7 provides auxiliary evidence. We estimate a standard “internal capital markets
regression” (Lamont (1997), Giroud and Mueller (2014)) in which the main independent
variable, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  is augmented by another variable, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (Other
Est.), measuring the employment-weighted average change in house prices between 2006
and 2009 across all of the firm’s other establishments. If a firm is financially constrained,
optimality dictates that income shocks to one firm unit be spread across other units
to equate the marginal revenue product across units. Thus, we would expect to find a
positive coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (Other Est.). Indeed, we find that among highleverage firms, house-price induced shocks spill over to other establishments within the
same firm, consistent with these firms being financially constrained.17 By contrast, we
find no spillovers among establishments of low-leverage firms.
The evidence presented in this paper mirrors survey evidence by Campello, Graham,
and Harvey (2010), who asked 574 U.S. CFOs in 2008 whether they perceive their firms
as being financially constrained and what they are planning to do in 2009. The majority
of CFOs said that they are either somewhat (210) or very (155) aﬀected by diﬃculties
in accessing credit markets. As the authors note, these perceptions are backed by “tangible financing diﬃculties” (p. 471). For instance, 81% of firms classified as financially
constrained said they experience credit rationing (quantity constraint), 59% complained
about higher costs of borrowing (price constraint), and 55% said they had diﬃculties
in initiating or renewing a credit line. Importantly, firms classified as financially constrained said they would reduce their capital spending by 9% in 2009, while financially

17

The “own” coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 is three times larger than the coeﬃcient on ∆
Log(HP)06−09 (Other Est.), implying that internal capital markets oﬀer some, but not perfect, insurance.

18

unconstrained firms said they would keep their capital spending rates largely unchanged.
Furthermore, and especially relevant for us, financially constrained firms planned to cut
their employment by 10.9% in 2009, whereas financially unconstrained firms planned to
cut their employment only by 2.7%.

5

Alternative Channels

According to Table 1, high-leverage firms expanded more than low-leverage firms in the
years prior to the Great Recession, and they are less productive at the onset of the Great
Recession. We already cautioned that these diﬀerences may not be independent of each
other. On the contrary, it is plausible that high-leverage firms increased their leverage
because they needed to fund an expansion or a deficit arising from a productivity shortfall. However, this raises the possibility that high-leverage firms respond more strongly
to household demand shocks during the Great Recession not because they are more financially constrained, but rather because they expanded too much in the run-up period
or were less productive at the onset of the Great Recession.
Maybe high-leverage firms are simply “high-beta” firms that are generally more sensitive to business cycle shocks, i.e., for reasons unrelated to financial constraints? For
instance, low-leverage firms may smooth employment over the business cycle, while highleverage firms may not. Or customers of high-leverage firms may switch to alternative
(e.g., cheaper) brands during economic downturns, while those of low-leverage firms may
not. In either case, high-leverage firms may be more sensitive to business cycle shocks,
albeit for reasons unrelated to financial constraints.
In what follows, we address each of these alternative channels.18 In analogy to our
main specification, we split the sample along various dimensions using independent sorts.
That being said, we obtain identical results if we run regressions on the full sample using
triple interaction eﬀects (see Table IA-VII of the Internet Appendix).

18

Our fixed-eﬀects specification already addresses some alternative hypotheses. For instance, we can
rule out alternative channels in which low- and high-leverage firms diﬀer along industry or regional
dimensions (see, in particular, Panel (B) of Table 2).

19

5.1

Employment and Asset Growth

Table 8 examines if our results are driven by firms expanding too much in the years prior
to the Great Recession. We split the sample along two dimensions using independent
sorts. The first dimension is the familiar change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006,
∆ Lev02−06  The second dimension is the percentage growth in either employment (Panel
(A)) or assets (Panel (B)) between 2002 and 2006. As before, sample splits are based
on median values. There are four groups: high-leverage, high-growth firms, i.e., those
with above-median values of both ∆ Lev02−06 and ∆ Log(Emp)02−06 (column (1)), highleverage, low-growth firms (column (2)), low-leverage, high-growth firms (column (3)),
and low-leverage, low-growth firms (column (4)).
The number of observations in the four groups is uneven, reflecting the fact that
changes in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006 and changes in employment or asset
growth during the same time period are correlated. That said, the correlations are small
(4.7% and 6.3%, respectively). Indeed, the mean growth rates in the two high-growth
groups (columns (1) and (3)) are not statistically diﬀerent from one another. Likewise, the
mean growth rates in the two low-growth groups (columns (2) and (4)) are not statistically
diﬀerent from one another. Hence, the comparison is between establishments of firms with
similar growth in the years prior to the Great Recession, except that some firms increased
their leverage and others decreased their leverage during that period.
If firms respond more strongly to demand shocks in the Great Recession not because
they are financially constrained but rather because they expanded too much in the runup period, then we would expect to find a significant coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 in
columns (1) and (3) but not in columns (2) and (4). That is, we would expect to find
a significant response only among establishments of high-growth firms. Alternatively,
if both financial constraints and firm growth matter, then we would expect to find a
significant coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 in columns (1), (2), and (3) but not in column
(4). That is, we would expect to find a significant response to household demand shocks
among all types of establishments, except those belonging to low-leverage, low-growth
firms. In either case, we would expect to find a significant coeﬃcient in column (3), that

20

is, among establishments of low-leverage, high-growth firms.
As can be seen, however, the coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 in column (3) is insignificant in both panels, suggesting that establishments of low-leverage, high-growth firms do
not respond significantly to household demand shocks. In fact, the coeﬃcient is always
insignificant among establishments of low-leverage firms. By contrast, the coeﬃcient is
always positive and significant among establishments of high-leverage firms, regardless of
whether these firms exhibit low or high growth in the years prior to the Great Recession.

5.2

Productivity

Table 9 examines whether our results are driven by firms having low productivity at the
onset of the Great Recession. We again split the sample along two dimensions using
independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and
2006, ∆ Lev02−06 . The second dimension is either the return on assets (Panel (A)), net
profit margin (Panel (B)), or total factor productivity (Panel (C)), all measured in 2006.
As before, sample splits are based on median values. The group means in columns (1)
and (3), as well as those in columns (2) and (4), are again comparable, meaning the
comparison is between establishments of firms with similar productivity at the onset of
the Great Recession, except that some firms increased their leverage and others decreased
their leverage in the run-up period.
By arguments similar to those above, our focus is on establishments of low-leverage,
low-productivity firms. If firms respond more strongly to household demand shocks in
the Great Recession not because they are financially constrained but rather because they
have low productivity–or if both financial constraints and productivity matter–then we
would expect to find a significant coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 in column (3), that is,
among establishments of low-leverage, low-productivity firms. As can be seen, however,
the coeﬃcient in column (3) is insignificant in all three panels. In fact, the coeﬃcient
is always insignificant among establishments of low-leverage firms, regardless of whether
these firms have low or high productivity. By contrast, it is always positive and significant
among establishments of high-leverage firms.

21

5.3

Employment Beta

Tables 10 and 11 examine if our results are driven by firms being more sensitive to
business cycle shocks in general, i.e., for reasons unrelated to financial constraints. We
can separately identify both eﬀects because firms with weak balance sheets in the Great
Recession may not have had weak balance sheets in prior recessions.
We consider a variety of measures. In Table 10, we consider the sensitivity of firm-level
employment to aggregate employment over a 10-year (Panel (A)) or 20-year (Panel (B))
time period ending in 2006.19 We also identify firms with above-median employment losses
in the 2001 recession–the most recent economic downturn before the Great Recession
(Panel (C)). In Table 11, we consider the sensitivity of firm-level employment to house
prices over a 10-year time period (Panel (A)), during the housing boom from 2002 to 2006
(Panel (B)), and during the 2001 recession (Panel (C)). In each case, we split the sample
along two dimensions using independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm
leverage between 2002 and 2006, ∆ Lev02−06 . The second dimension is the sensitivity
(“beta”) of firm-level employment to either aggregate employment or house prices, as
detailed above. Sample splits are based on median values.
The uneven number of observations in columns (1) to (4) indicates that changes in
firm leverage between 2002 and 2006 and firms’ sensitivity to business cycle shocks are
correlated. That said, the correlations are small (between 2.2% and 9.2%), and the group
means in columns (1) and (3), as well as those in columns (2) and (4), are again comparable. Thus, the comparison is between establishments of firms with similar employment
betas, except that some firms increased their leverage and others decreased their leverage
in the years prior to the Great Recession. Indeed, almost half of all observations lie in the
“oﬀ-diagonals:” 45.9% of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms belong to firms
with below-median employment beta. Conversely, 46.1% of establishments belonging to
low-leverage firms belong to firms with above-median employment beta, allowing us to
separate out the eﬀects of being financially constrained during the Great Recession from
having a high sensitivity to business cycle shocks in general.
19

Table IA-VII of the Internet Appendix additionally considers 15-year and 30-year betas.

22

As before, our focus is on establishments of low-leverage, high-beta firms. If firms
respond more strongly to demand shocks in the Great Recession not because they are
financially constrained but rather because they have a high sensitivity to business cycle
shocks in general, then we would expect to find a significant coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09
in column (3), that is, among establishments of low-leverage, high-beta firms. As can be
seen, however, the coeﬃcient in column (3) is always insignificant, regardless of whether
we consider the sensitivity of firm-level employment to aggregate employment or house
prices, and regardless of whether we consider longer time periods or individual episodes,
like the housing boom from 2002 to 2006 or the 2001 recession. In fact, the coeﬃcient is
always insignificant among establishments of low-leverage firms. By contrast, it is always
positive and significant among establishments of high-leverage firms, regardless of whether
these firms have low or high employment betas.

6

County-Level Analysis

Do firms’ balance sheets also matter for aggregate employment? In a frictionless labor
market, wages would adjust downward, and low-leverage firms would pick up workers
laid oﬀ by high-leverage firms. As a consequence, aggregate employment would change
only little, or perhaps not at all. Our results thus far suggest that this is an unlikely
scenario. While high-leverage firms reduce employment in response to household demand
shocks, low-leverage firms do not increase employment. Accordingly, it would seem that
firms’ balance sheets also matter in the aggregate, with the implication that areas with
a greater fraction of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms should experience a
larger decline in employment in response to household demand shocks.
To investigate this issue, we consider employment at the county level. We classify
counties into high- and low-leverage counties based on two diﬀerent measures. The first
measure is the employment-weighted fraction of establishments in a county belonging
to high-leverage firms. The second measure is the employment-weighted average value
of ∆ Lev02−06 across all of the county’s establishments. In either case, we classify a
county as high (low) leverage if the respective measure is above (below) the median
23

across all counties. The dependent variable is the percentage change in county-level
employment between 2007 and 2009, ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 20 The main independent variable
is the percentage change in house prices at the county level between 2006 and 2009,
∆ Log(HP)06−09  All regressions are weighted by the number of employees in a county.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Table 11 presents the results. As columns (2) and (3) show, high-leverage counties
exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment in response to household demand
shocks than low-leverage counties do. This holds regardless of how we classify counties into
low- and high-leverage counties. Of course, and unlike our establishment-level regressions,
low-leverage counties do respond significantly to household demand shocks. After all,
these counties have a sizable fraction of high-leverage firms–they merely have fewer of
them than high-leverage counties do. Importantly, the interaction term in column (4) is
positive and significant, confirming that the diﬀerences between low- and high-leverage
counties in columns (2) and (3) are statistically significant. Thus, firms’ balance sheets
also matter for aggregate employment.

7

Conclusion

This paper argues that firms’ balance sheets were instrumental in the propagation of
shocks during the Great Recession. Using establishment-level data, we show that establishments of firms that tightened their debt capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession
(“high-leverage firms”) exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment in response to
household demand shocks than establishments of firms that freed up debt capacity (“lowleverage firms”). In fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices during
the Great Recession are concentrated among establishments of high-leverage firms. We
also find that counties with a larger fraction of establishments belonging to high-leverage
firms exhibit a larger decline in employment in response to household demand shocks.
Thus, firms’ balance sheets also matter for aggregate employment.
Our research has implications for macroeconomic modeling. In particular, it suggests
20

County-level employment is based on the full LBD sample, not the merged LBD-Compustat sample.

24

that a model in which households’, firms’, and financial intermediaries’ balance sheets
interact might be a useful way to think about the Great Recession. Accordingly, falling
house prices may erode the balance sheets of households, leading to a decline in consumer
demand. The latter disproportionately aﬀects firms with weak balance sheets, forcing
them to downsize and reduce employment. At the same time, falling house prices may
erode the balance sheets of financial intermediaries, impairing their capital and access to
funding and therefore their ability and/or willingness to lend. This tightening of lending
standards in turn disproportionately aﬀects firms with weak balance sheets, reinforcing
the adverse eﬀects of household demand shocks.21

8

References

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, 2014, House Prices, Collateral
and Self-Employment, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Aghion, Philippe, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Rafaella Sadun, and John van Reenen,
2015, Growth and Decentralization in Bad Times, mimeo, Stanford University.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations, American Economic Review 79, 14-31.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1996, The Financial Accelerator
and the Flight to Quality, Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 1-15.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, The Financial Accelerator
in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework, in: Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Volume 1, John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.), Chapter 21, 1341-1393.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
21

When credit is tight, there is often a flight to quality, with the implication that borrowers with weak
balance sheets are disproportionately aﬀected. For instance, Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) document
that during the (near-) collapse of the syndicated loan market–when lending fell from $701.5 billion in
2007:Q2 to $150.2 billion in 2008:Q4–non-investment grade lending fell significantly more than investment grade lending. The authors conclude that “the near disappearance of non-investment grade issues
was part of an overall flight to quality, an extreme version of what is typically observed in recessions
(Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1996)” (p. 324).

25

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A Macroeconomic Model with a
Financial Sector, American Economic Review 104, 379-421.
Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2010, The Real Eﬀects
of Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis, Journal of Financial
Economics 97, 470-487.
Charles, Kerwin K., Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, 2014, Housing Booms, Labor Market Outcomes, and Educational Attainment, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014, The Employment Eﬀects of Credit Market Disruptions:
Firm-Level Evidence from the 2008-09 Financial Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1-59.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2012, Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 14691513.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,
American Economic Review 98, 1211-1244.
Geanakoplos, John, 2010, The Leverage Cycle, in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
Volume 24, Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and Michael Woodford (eds.), 1-65,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2011, Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy
in Business Cycle Analysis, in: Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford (eds.), Chapter 11, 547-599. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2014, Inflation
Dynamics during the Financial Crisis, mimeo, Boston University.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2014, Capital and Labor Reallocation within
Firms, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
26

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings,
and the Liquidity Trap, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Hall, Robert E., 2011, The Long Slump, American Economic Review 101, 431-469.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, American
Economic Review 103, 732-770.
Ivashnina, Victoria, and David S. Scharfstein, 2010, Bank Lending during the Financial
Crisis of 2008, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 319-338.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, 2003, The Longitudinal Business Database, CES
Working Paper 02-17.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do Financing Constraints Explain Why
Investment Is Correlated with Cash Flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
169-215.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit Cycles, Journal of Political Economy
105, 211-248.
Lamont, Owen A., 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
Markets, Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.
McCue, Kristin, 2003, Matching Compustat Data to the SSEL, mimeo, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?
Econometrica 82, 2197-2223.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2013, Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1-40.

27

Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Thomas Philippon, 2011, Household Leverage and the Recession,
mimeo, New York University.
Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov, 2014, The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking, mimeo,
New York University.
Saiz, Albert, 2010, The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125, 1253-1296.
Sharpe, Steven A., 1994, Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of Employment, American Economic Review 84, 1060-1074.
Whited, Toni M., and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial Constraints Risk, Review of Financial
Studies 19, 531-559.

28

Figure 1
Household, Firm, and Investment Bank Leverage
Panel (A) plots the time series of households’ debt-to-income ratios and non-financial firms’ debt-to-equity ratios. Debt-to-income
ratio is total household debt divided by total household income (wages and salaries). Household debt is obtained from the FRBNY
Consumer Credit Panel. Household income is obtained from the BEA. Debt-to-equity ratio is the ratio of total liabilities to
stockholders’ equity from Compustat. The figure shows the median across all non-financial firms. Panel (B) plots the time series of
the debt-to-equity ratios of the top five investment banks.

Panel (A): Households’ Debt-to-Income Ratios and Non-Financial Firms’ Debt-to-Equity Ratios
Households

Non-Financial Firms

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Panel (B): Investment Banks’ Debt-to-Equity Ratios
Average
Lehman Brothers

Goldman Sachs
Merrill Lynch

Morgan Stanley
Bear Stearns

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Table 1
Summary Statistics
Panel (A) provides establishment-level summary statistics. Δ Lev02-06 > Median and Δ Lev02-06 < Median refers to establishments
with above- and below-median values of Δ Lev02-06, respectively. The last column reports the p-value of the difference-in-means test
comparing both groups. Δ Lev02-06 is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006. Leverage is the ratio of the sum of debt in
current liabilities and long-term debt to total assets. Wages is the ratio of payroll divided by the number of employees. HP (house
price) is the Zillow Home Value Index in the establishment’s ZIP code or county (if the ZIP code information is missing). Housing
Supply Elasticity is described in Saiz (2010). Tradable and non-tradable industries are described in Mian and Sufi (2014). “Other”
industries are those that are neither tradable nor non-tradable. Panels (B) and (C) provide firm-level summary statistics. Assets is the
book value of total assets. ROA (return on assets) is the ratio of operating income before depreciation to total assets. NPM (net profit
margin) is the ratio of operating income before depreciation to sales. TFP (total factor productivity) is the residual from estimating a
regression of log(sales) on log(employees) and log(PP&E) across all Compustat firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry. WW is the
financial constraints index of Whited and Wu (2006). KZ is the financial constraints index of Kaplan and Zingales (1997). All figures
are sample means. Standard deviations are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Panel (A): Establishment Level
All
Employees 06
Wages 06
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09
Housing Supply Elasticity

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

p -value

39
(63)
45,362
(345,108)
-8.2
(24.2)
-14.5
(16.1)
1.799
(0.927)

36
(60)
46,711
(475,871)
-9.2
(23.4)
-14.8
(16.1)
1.789
(0.926)

43
(66)
44,013
(108,569)
-7.4
(25.0)
-14.1
(16.0)
1.809
(0.927)

0.094*

0.17
(0.38)
0.21
(0.41)
0.38
(0.49)
0.24
(0.42)

0.16
(0.37)
0.21
(0.41)
0.39
(0.49)
0.24
(0.43)

0.18
(0.39)
0.21
(0.41)
0.38
(0.49)
0.23
(0.42)

0.194

0.03
(0.18)
0.44
(0.50)
0.53
(0.50)

0.03
(0.17)
0.36
(0.48)
0.61
(0.49)

0.04
(0.20)
0.51
(0.50)
0.45
(0.50)

284,800

142,400

142,400

0.536
0.097*
0.426
0.518

Census Regions
Northeast
Midwest
South
West

0.940
0.782
0.408

Industry Sectors
Tradable
Non-Tradable
Other

Observations

0.058*
0.050**
0.033**

Table 1
(Continued)
Panel (B): Firm Level (2006)

All

Establishments 06
Employees 06
Assets 06
ROA 06
NPM 06
TFP06
Lev 06
WW 06
KZ06

Observations

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

101
(451)
4,005
(16,384)
3,040
(18,515)
0.045
(0.177)
0.024
(0.280)
-0.002
(0.599)
0.296
(0.814)
-0.251
(0.135)
-4.067
(44.295)

95
(471)
3,430
(14,443)
2,971
(22,402)
0.026
(0.182)
0.006
(0.292)
-0.023
(0.620)
0.383
(1.024)
-0.241
(0.133)
-2.289
(50.188)

109
(426)
4,663
(18,339)
3,119
(12,689)
0.066
(0.168)
0.044
(0.264)
0.021
(0.575)
0.195
(0.453)
-0.263
(0.136)
-6.101
(36.313)

2,800

1,500

1,300

p -value

0.146
0.049**
0.083*
0.000***
0.000***
0.049**
0.000***
0.000***
0.020**

Table 1
(Continued)
Panel (C): Firm Level (2002-2006)

All

Δ Establishments 02-06
Δ Log(Emp)02-06
Δ Log(Assets)02-06
Δ ROA 02-06
Δ NPM 02-06
Δ TFP02-06
Δ Lev 02-06
Δ WW 02-06
Δ KZ02-06

Observations

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

4.4
(10.2)
0.052
(0.093)
0.110
(0.133)
0.022
(0.127)
0.020
(0.225)
-0.001
(0.569)
-0.027
(0.984)
-0.006
(0.080)
-0.370
(49.633)

5.3
(9.4)
0.059
(0.092)
0.116
(0.139)
0.014
(0.128)
0.010
(0.231)
-0.011
(0.599)
0.179
(0.899)
0.002
(0.079)
1.756
(54.979)

3.4
(10.9)
0.044
(0.092)
0.104
(0.133)
0.032
(0.127)
0.032
(0.218)
0.011
(0.534)
-0.265
(1.024)
-0.015
(0.081)
-2.803
(42.594)

2,800

1,500

1,300

p -value

0.000***
0.000***
0.013**
0.000***
0.011**
0.290
0.000***
0.000***
0.013**

Table 2
Firm Leverage and Unemployment
In Panels (A) and (B), the dependent variable is the percentage change in establishment-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. The main independent variable is the
percentage change in house prices in the establishment’s ZIP code or county (if the ZIP code information is missing) from 2006 to 2009, Δ Log(HP)06-09. HP and Δ Lev02-06 are described
in Table 1. In Panel (C), the sample is a pooled panel comprised of all establishment-year observations from 2007 to 2011. The dependent variable is the logarithm of establishment-level
employment, Log(Emp)t. The main independent variable is the logarithm of house prices in the preceding year, Log(HP)t-1. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All
regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Sample Split
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

All

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.066***

0.068***

0.053***

0.098***

0.103***

0.084***

0.036*

0.031

0.023

(0.019)

(0.018)

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

R-squared

0.00

0.03

0.17

0.00

0.04

0.18

0.00

0.05

0.17

284,800

284,800

284,800

142,400

142,400

142,400

142,400

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

(7)

(8)

(9)

Table 2
(Continued)
Panel (B): Interaction Term
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
(1)

Δ Log(HP)06-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median)
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.035

0.032

0.027

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.021)

0.063***

0.075***

0.075***

0.058***

0.055***

0.059***

(0.015)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.013)

-0.008*

0.003

0.006

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.005)

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

-

Firm Fixed Effects

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

ZIP Code Fixed Effects
ZIP Code × Industry Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

-

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Industry Fixed Effects

R-squared
Observations

0.00

0.04

0.13

0.17

0.25

0.31

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

Table 2
(Continued)
Panel (C): Longitudinal Analysis

Log(Emp)t
(1)

Log(HP)t–1

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.004

0.002

0.006

(0.006)

(0.004)

(0.013)

0.056***

0.055***

0.049***

0.042***

0.045**

(0.015)

(0.013)

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.013)

Establishment Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Fixed Effects
Industry × Year Fixed Effects

Yes

-

-

-

-

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

-

Firm × Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

ZIP Code × Year Fixed Effects

No

No

No

Yes

-

ZIP Code × Industry × Year Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

Yes

Log(HP)t–1 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median)

R-squared
Observations

0.92

0.92

0.93

0.93

0.93

1,256,000

1,256,000

1,256,000

1,256,000

1,256,000

Table 3
Instrumental Variable (IV) Estimation
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 is instrumented with housing supply elasticity (columns (2) to (4)) and
share of unavailable land (columns (6) to (8)), respectively. Both instruments are described in Saiz (2010). For brevity, the table only displays the first-stage regressions associated with
columns (2) and (6). Those associated with columns (3) to (4) and (7) to (8) are virtually identical. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted
by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Instrument: Housing Supply Elasticity
Δ Log(HP)06-09

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

First Stage

IV

First Stage

IV

All
(1)

Housing Supply Elasticity

Instrument: Share of Unavailable Land

(2)

Δ Lev 02-06 > Med. Δ Lev 02-06 < Med.
(3)

(4)

All
(5)

Δ Lev 02-06 > Med. Δ Lev 02-06 < Med.

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.072***
(0.016)

Share of Unavailable Land

-0.292***
(0.083)

Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.051***

0.093***

0.009

0.052**

0.105***

-0.002

(0.019)

(0.025)

(0.025)

(0.027)

(0.036)

(0.032)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.28

0.18

0.19

0.17

0.24

0.18

0.19

0.17

247,800

247,800

124,500

123,300

247,800

247,800

124,500

123,300

Observations

Table 4
Industry Sectors
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample is partitioned into nontradable, tradable, and “other” industries as described in Table 1. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All
regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Non-Tradable Industries
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.052**

0.104***

0.009

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.024)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared
Observations

0.23

0.27

0.21

124,100

50,900

73,200

Panel (B): Tradable Industries
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.009

0.013

-0.031

(0.022)

(0.041)

(0.031)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared

0.31

0.33

0.29

Observations

9,900

4,000

5,900

Table 4
(Continued)
Panel (C): Other Industries
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

0.060***

0.079***

0.020

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.021)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.18

0.19

0.13

150,800

87,500

63,300

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

(3)

Table 5
Establishment Closures
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample also includes
establishments that are closed between 2007 and 2009. The dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether an establishment is
closed during that time period. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of
establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **,
and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Establishment Closure07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.013**

-0.018***

-0.008

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.009)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared
Observations

0.21

0.22

0.22

338,100

170,100

168,000

Table 6
Firm-Level Analysis
This table presents firm-level analogues of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2. Short-Term Debt is the ratio of debt in current liabilities divided by total assets.
Long-term debt is the ratio of long-term debt divided by total assets. Equity is the ratio of the book value of equity divided by total assets. CAPEX is the ratio of capital expenditures
divided by property, plant and equipment (PP&E). Establishment closures is the number of establishments closed between 2007 and 2009 divided by the number of establishments in 2007.
Δ Log(HP)06-09 is aggregated at the firm level by computing the employment-weighted average across all of the firm’s establishments. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS
codes. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): External Finance
Δ Short-Term Debt 07-09

Δ Long-Term Debt07-09

Δ Equity 07-09

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.019**

-0.003

-0.022**

-0.005

0.004

0.001

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.012)

(0.029)

(0.031)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.15

0.13

0.12

0.10

0.16

0.10

Observations

1,300

1,500

1,300

1,500

1,300

1,500

Δ Log(HP)06-09

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel (B): Employment and Investment
Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Establishment Closures 07-09

Δ CAPEX07-09

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.015

0.074***

0.006

-0.024**

0.001

0.024**

(0.027)

(0.027)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.011)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.16

0.15

0.16

0.15

0.18

0.17

Observations

1,300

1,500

1,300

1,500

1,300

1,500

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Table 7
Within-Firm Spillovers
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which an additional independent
variable, Δ Log(HP)06-09 (Other Est.), is included measuring the employment-weighted average value of Δ Log(HP)06-09 across all
of the firm’s other establishments, excluding the establishment itself. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes.
All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.078***

0.085***

0.027

0.027

(0.013)

(0.010)

(0.021)

(0.020)

0.025***

0.028***

0.013

0.008

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.009)

(0.008)

Industry Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

R-squared

0.00

0.04

0.00

0.05

142,400

142,400

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)06-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (Other Est.)

Observations

Table 8
Alternative Channel: Employment and Asset Growth
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample is split along two
dimensions using independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006, Δ Lev₀₂₋₀₆. In
Panel (A), the second dimension is the growth in firm-level employment from 2002 to 2006, Δ Log(Emp)02-06. In Panel (B), the
second dimension is the growth in firm-level assets from 2002 to 2006, Δ Log(Assets)02-06. Assets is described in Table 1. Sample
splits are based on median values. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the
size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Employment Growth
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Δ Log(Emp)02-06 > Med

Δ Log(Emp)02-06 < Med

Δ Log(Emp)02-06 > Med

Δ Log(Emp)02-06 < Med

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.088***

0.077***

0.022

0.025

(0.017)

(0.024)

(0.019)

(0.025)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared
Observations

0.21

0.16

0.24

0.12

79,700

62,700

53,900

88,500

Panel (B): Asset Growth
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Log(Assets)02-06 > Med Δ Log(Assets)02-06 < Med Δ Log(Assets)02-06 > Med Δ Log(Assets)02-06 < Med

Δ Log(HP)06-09

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.086***

0.078***

0.025

0.022

(0.017)

(0.019)

(0.025)

(0.024)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.19

0.18

0.22

0.15

86,800

55,600

52,300

90,100

Observations

Table 9
Alternative Channel: Productivity
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample is split along two
dimensions using independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006, Δ Lev₀₂₋₀₆. The
second dimension is either the firm’s return on assets (ROA) (Panel (A)), net profit margin (NPM) (Panel (B)), or total factor
productivity (TFP) (Panel (C)), all measured in 2006. ROA, NPM, and TFP are described in Table 1. Sample splits are based on
median values. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of
establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *,
**, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): ROA
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

ROA 06 < Median

ROA 06 > Median

ROA 06 < Median

ROA 06 > Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.089***

0.077***

0.028

0.018

(0.018)

(0.023)

(0.034)

(0.015)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.16

0.24

0.19

0.15

77,200

65,200

66,800

75,600

Panel (B): NPM
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

NPM 06 < Median

NPM 06 > Median

NPM 06 < Median

NPM 06 > Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.089***

0.076***

0.026

0.016

(0.014)

(0.027)

(0.019)

(0.027)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared
Observations

0.18

0.20

0.13

0.20

82,500

59,900

59,700

82,700

Table 9
(Continued)
Panel (C): TFP
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Log(HP)06-09

TFP06 < Median

TFP06 > Median

TFP06 < Median

TFP06 > Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.088***

0.078***

0.028

0.019

(0.018)

(0.017)

(0.020)

(0.025)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.19

0.18

0.12

0.21

75,200

67,200

66,200

76,200

Table 10
Alternative Channel: Sensitivity to Aggregate Employment
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample is split along two
dimensions using independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006, Δ Lev₀₂₋₀₆. In
Panels (A) and (B), the second dimension is the firm’s employment beta, which is computed by estimating a firm-level regression
of Δ Log(firm employment) on a constant and Δ Log(total LBD employment) using all available years from 1997 to 2006 (Panel
(A)) and 1987 to 2006 (Panel (B)), respectively. In Panel (C), the second dimension is the firm’s percentage employment loss
during the 2001 recession. Sample splits are based on median values. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes.
All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): 10-Year Employment Beta
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.089***

0.078***

0.028

0.019

(0.013)

(0.029)

(0.026)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.16

0.23

0.19

0.16

79,900

62,500

62,600

79,800

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Panel (B): 20-Year Employment Beta
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.085***

0.083***

0.025

0.022

(0.013)

(0.027)

(0.025)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09

R-squared
Observations

0.16

0.23

0.18

0.17

75,700

66,700

66,600

75,800

Table 10
(Continued)
Panel (C): Employment Loss during 2001 Recession
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Emp. Loss > Median

Emp. Loss < Median

Emp. Loss > Median

Emp. Loss < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.089***

0.077***

0.026

0.020

(0.018)

(0.025)

(0.015)

(0.029)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.21

0.15

0.20

75,200

67,200

67,200

75,200

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table 11
Alternative Channel: Sensitivity to House Prices
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which the sample is split along two
dimensions using independent sorts. The first dimension is the change in firm leverage between 2002 and 2006, Δ Lev₀₂₋₀₆. The
second dimension is the sensitivity of the firm’s employment to house prices, which is computed as the employment-weighted
average sensitivity across all of the firm’s establishments. In Panel (A), the sensitivity of establishment-level employment to
house prices is computed by estimating an establishment-level regression of Δ Log(employment) on a constant and Δ Log(HP)
using all available years from 1997 to 2006. In Panels (B) and (C), it is computed as the percentage change in establishment-level
employment divided by the percentage change in house prices during the 2002-2006 housing boom (Panel (B)) and 2001
recession (Panel (C)), respectively. Sample splits are based on median values. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS
codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Panel (A): 10-Year Employment-House Price Sensitivity
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.086***

0.082***

0.026

0.022

(0.020)

(0.015)

(0.026)

(0.019)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.21

0.17

0.15

0.18

78,700

63,700

63,300

79,100

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table 11
(Continued)
Panel (B): Employment-House Price Sensitivity during 2002-2006 Housing Boom
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.087***

0.081***

0.025

0.021

(0.020)

(0.015)

(0.026)

(0.019)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.21

0.17

0.16

0.18

80,700

61,700

62,200

80,200

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Panel (C): Employment-House Price Sensitivity during 2001 Recession
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

Sensitivity > Median

Sensitivity < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.085***

0.085***

0.023

0.023

(0.022)

(0.014)

(0.024)

(0.021)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.21

0.18

0.16

0.18

72,300

70,100

71,700

70,700

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table 12
County-Level Analysis
This table presents county-level analogues of the establishment-level regressions in Panels (A) and (B) of Table 2. Counties are
classified into high- and low-leverage counties based on two measures. The first measure is the fraction of establishments in the
county belonging to high-leverage firms. The second measure is the employment-weighted average value of Δ Lev02-06 across all
of the county’s establishments. In both cases, a county is classified as High (Low) Leverage if the respective measure is above
(below) the median across all counties. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Fraction of Establishments Belonging to High-Leverage Firms
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Subsamples

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Interaction

All

High Leverage

Low Leverage

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.146***

0.188***

0.127***

0.127***

(0.013)

(0.022)

(0.017)

(0.016)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × High Leverage

0.061**

High Leverage

-0.011**

(0.029)
(0.006)
R-squared

0.10

0.12

0.09

0.10

Observations

1,000

500

500

1,000

Panel (B): Employment-Weighted Average Value of Δ Lev02-06
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Subsamples

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Interaction

All

High Leverage

Low Leverage

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.146***

0.185***

0.129***

0.129***

(0.013)

(0.024)

(0.016)

(0.016)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × High Leverage

0.055*

High Leverage

-0.010*

(0.029)
(0.006)
R-squared

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

Observations

1,000

500

500

1,000

Internet Appendix

Table IA-I
Matching House Prices to Establishments
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2. In Panel (A), the sample is restricted to
establishments with non-missing house prices at the ZIP code level. In panel (B), establishments with missing house prices at the
ZIP code or county level are assigned state-level house prices computed as population-weighted averages of available ZIP codelevel house prices. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of
establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *,
**, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Reduced Sample with Non-Missing House Prices at the ZIP Code Level

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.048***

0.077***

0.020

(0.016)

(0.016)

(0.018)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.18

0.20

0.17

227,600

113,300

114,300

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Panel (B): Extended (Full) Sample with Imputed State-Level House Prices

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.059***

0.087***

0.032

(0.018)

(0.017)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.18

0.16

327,500

161,300

166,200

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-II
Alternative Housing Bust Periods
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2. In Panel (A), Δ Log(HP) is computed
for the period April 2006 to May 2009. In Panel (B), Δ Log(HP) is computed for the period March 2007 to May 2009. Industry
fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of
employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): April 2006 to May 2009

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.053***

0.085***

0.023

(0.017)

(0.015)

(0.019)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.19

0.17

284,800

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)April 06- May 09

Observations

Panel (B): March 2007 to May 2009

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.058***

0.095***

0.022

(0.021)

(0.019)

(0.023)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.18

0.17

284,800

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)March 07- May 09

Observations

Table IA-III
Net Leverage and Market Leverage
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Panel (A) of Table 2 in which Leverage is replaced with Net
Leverage and Market Leverage, respectively. Net Leverage is defined as the ratio of debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt
minus cash and short-term investments divided by total assets. Market Leverage is defined as the ratio of debt in current
liabilities plus long-term debt divided by total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity (stock price
multiplied by the number of shares outstanding). Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are
weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the
state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Net Leverage
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Net Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Net Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.053***

0.076***

0.029

(0.017)

(0.012)

(0.024)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.18

0.18

284, 800

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Panel (B): Market Leverage
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Mkt Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Mkt Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.053***

0.086***

0.023

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.19

0.16

284, 800

142,400

142,400

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-IV
OLS Regressions Associated with IV Estimation
This table presents the OLS regressions associated with the IV regressions in Table 3. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit
NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.052***

0.083***

0.021

(0.017)

(0.015)

(0.019)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.18

0.19

0.17

247,800

124,500

123,300

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-V
Geographical Concentration Index
This table presents variants of the establishment-level regressions in Table 4 in which the sample is partitioned based on the
geographical concentration (GC) index of Mian and Sufi (2014). Industries in the top quartile are classified as tradable while
those in the bottom quartile are classified as non-tradable. “Other” industries are those that are neither tradable nor non-tradable.
Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their
number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Non-Tradable Industries (Bottom Quartile GC Index)
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

0.067***

0.108***

0.027

(0.021)

(0.016)

(0.026)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.22

0.22

0.23

130,700

70,300

60,400

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

(3)

Panel (B): Tradable Industries (Top Quartile GC Index)
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.006

0.015

-0.002

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.066)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.29

0.33

0.25

15,900

8,200

7,700

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-V
(Continued)
Panel (C): Other Industries (Second and Third Quartile GC Index)
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
All

Δ Lev 02-06 > Median Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.040**

0.054**

0.028

(0.016)

(0.021)

(0.018)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.18

0.17

138,200

63,900

74,300

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-VI
Alternative Employment Betas
This table presents variants of the regressions in Panel (A) of Table 10, except that the firm’s employment beta is computed using
all available years from 1992 to 2006 (Panel (A)) and 1977 to 2006 (Panel (B)), respectively. Sample splits are based on median
values. Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are weighted by the size of establishments (i.e.,
their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): 15-Year Employment Beta
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.086***

0.082***

0.027

0.021

(0.013)

(0.029)

(0.025)

(0.020)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.16

0.24

0.19

0.17

78,700

63,700

63,500

78,900

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Panel (B): 30-Year Employment Beta
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Lev 02-06 > Median

Δ Lev 02-06 < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

Beta > Median

Beta < Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.084***

0.082***

0.022

0.024

(0.011)

(0.028)

(0.026)

(0.021)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.18

0.20

0.18

0.17

75,000

67,400

67,500

74,900

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Observations

Table IA-VII
Full Sample Estimates with Triple Interaction Effects
This table presents variants of the regressions in Tables 8 to 11 where—instead of using sample splits based on independent double sorts—regressions are run on the full sample
using triple interaction terms. All regressions are fully specified: double interaction terms and stand-alone terms are either collinear with the triple interaction terms or absorbed by
the firm fixed effects. (Recall that Δ Lev02-06 > Median and Δ Lev02-06 < Median are dummy variables.) Industry fixed effects are based on 4-digit NAICS codes. All regressions are
weighted by the size of establishments (i.e., their number of employees). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the state and firm level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Growth and Productivity

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median) × High
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median) × Low
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 < Median) × High

Employment

Asset

ROA

NPM

TFP

Growth

Growth

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.089***

0.086***

0.080***

0.082***

0.078***

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.022)

(0.025)

(0.016)

0.079***

0.078***

0.089***

0.086***

0.093***

(0.024)

(0.020)

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.017)

0.027

0.028

0.021

0.021

0.026

(0.019)

(0.026)

(0.016)

(0.029)

(0.020)

0.028

0.027

0.032

0.028

0.028

(0.025)

(0.025)

(0.035)

(0.020)

(0.028)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 < Median) × Low

R-squared
Observations

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

Table IA-VII
(Continued)
Panel (B): Sensitivity to Aggregate Employment and House Prices

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median) × High
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 > Median) × Low
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 < Median) × High
Δ Log(HP)06-09 × (Δ Lev 02-06 < Median) × Low

Emp. Beta

Emp. Beta

Emp. Losses

Emp.-HP Sens.

Emp.-HP Sens.

Emp.-HP Sens.

10-Year

20-Year

2001 Recession

10-Year

2002-2006

2001 Recession

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.089***

0.087***

0.090***

0.086***

0.087***

0.085***

(0.013)

(0.024)

(0.017)

(0.019)

(0.018)

(0.020)

0.082***

0.084***

0.078***

0.079***

0.078***

0.084***

(0.026)

(0.013)

(0.024)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.013)

0.031

0.028

0.030

0.034

0.034

0.030

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.030)

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.023)

0.024

0.026

0.021

0.024

0.022

0.023

(0.020)

(0.019)

(0.015)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.022)

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

284,800

Observations

