                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    DIVERSITY AND CONFLICT

                                           Cemal Eren Arbatl
                                           Quamrul H. Ashraf
                                              Oded Galor
                                             Marc Klemp

                                         Working Paper 21079
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21079


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
We thank the editor, four anonymous referees,AprilRan 2015
                                                      Abramitzky, Alberto Alesina, Yann Algan, Sascha
Becker, Moshe Buchinsky, Matteo Cervellati, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, David de la Croix, Emilio Depetris-Chauvin,
Paul Dower, Joan Esteban, James Fenske, Raquel Fernandez, Boris Gershman, Avner Greif, Pauline
Grosjean, Elhanan Helpman, Murat Iyigun, Noel Johnson, Garett Jones, Mark Koyama, Stelios Michalopoulos,
Steven Nafziger, Nathan Nunn, John Nye, Omer Ozak, Elias Papaioannou, Sergey Popov, Stephen
Smith, Enrico Spolaore, Uwe Sunde, Mathias Thoenig, Nico Voigtlander, Joachim Voth, Romain
Wacziarg, Fabian Waldinger, David Weil, Ludger Woessmann, Noam Yuchtman, Alexei Zakharov,
and seminar participants at George Mason University, George Washington University, HSE/NES Moscow,
the AEA Annual Meeting, the conference on "Deep Determinants of International Comparative Development"
at Brown University, the workshop on "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics" at the NBER Summer
Institute, the conference on "Culture, Diversity, and Development" at HSE/NES Moscow, the conference
on "The Long Shadow of History: Mechanisms of Persistence in Economics and the Social Sciences"
at LMU Munich, the fall meeting of the NBER Political Economy Program, the session on "Economic
Growth" at the AEA Continuing Education Program, the workshop on "Biology and Behavior in Political
Economy" at HSE Moscow, and the Economic Workshop at IDC Herzliya for valuable comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Cemal Eren Arbatl, Quamrul H. Ashraf, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversity and Conflict
Cemal Eren Arbatl , Quamrul H. Ashraf, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp
NBER Working Paper No. 21079
April 2015, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D74,N30,N40,O11,O43,Z13

                                               ABSTRACT

This research advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that interpersonal population diversity,
rather than fractionalization or polarization across ethnic groups, has been pivotal to the emergence,
prevalence, recurrence, and severity of intrasocietal conflicts. Exploiting an exogenous source of variations
in population diversity across nations and ethnic groups, as determined predominantly during the exodus
of humans from Africa tens of thousands of years ago, the study demonstrates that population diversity,
and its impact on the degree of diversity within ethnic groups, has contributed significantly to the risk
and intensity of historical and contemporary civil conflicts. The findings arguably reflect the contribution
of population diversity to the non-cohesivnesss of society, as reflected partly in the prevalence of mistrust,
the divergence in preferences for public goods and redistributive policies, and the degree of fractionalization
and polarization across ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups.


Cemal Eren Arbatl                                      Oded Galor
Faculty of Economic Sciences                           Department of Economics
National Research University                           Brown University
Higher School of Economics                             Box B
26 Shabolovka St. Building 3                           Providence, RI 02912
3116A Moscow, Russia                                   and CEPR
earbatli@gmail.com                                     and also NBER
                                                       oded_galor@brown.edu
Quamrul H. Ashraf
Williams College                                       Marc Klemp
Department of Economics                                Økonomisk Institut
24 Hopkins Hall Drive                                  University of Copenhagen
Williamstown, MA 01267                                 Øster Farimagsgade 5, bygning 26
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu                          1353 København K
                                                       and Brown University
                                                       marc.klemp@econ.ku.dk
1    Introduction
Over the course of the 20th century, in the period following World War II, civil conflicts have been
responsible for more than 16 million casualties worldwide, well surpassing the cumulative loss of
human life associated with international conflicts. Nations plagued by civil conflict have experienced
significant fatalities from violence, substantial loss of productive resources, and considerable declines
in their standards of living. While the number of countries experiencing conflict has declined from
its peak in the early 1990s, as many as 35 nations have been afflicted by the prevalence of civil
conflict since 2010, and more than a quarter of all nations encountered the incidence of civil conflict
for at least a decade during the 1960–2017 time period.
         This research explores the origins of the prevailing variation in the emergence, prevalence,
recurrence, and severity of intrasocietal conflicts across countries, regions, and ethnic groups. It
highlights one of their deepest roots, molded during the dawn of the dispersion of anatomically
modern humans across the globe and its differential impact on the level of population diversity
across regions. The study advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that interpersonal
diversity with each ethnic group, rather than fractionalization or polarization across ethnic groups,
is pivotal for the understanding of civil conflicts. Exploiting an exogenous source of variations in
population diversity across nations and ethnic groups, as determined predominantly during the
exodus of Homo sapiens from Africa tens of thousands of years ago, the study establishes that
interpersonal population diversity, and its impact on the degree of diversity within ethnic groups,
has contributed significantly to conflicts in the course of human history. The study further suggests
that the contribution of interpersonal population diversity to the non-cohesiveness of society, as
reflected partly by the prevalence of mistrust, the divergence in preferences for public goods and
redistributive policies, and the degree of fractionalization and polarization across ethnic, linguistic,
and religious groups, has fostered social, political, and economic instability and magnified the
vulnerability of society to internal conflicts.
         Population diversity at the national or subnational level may contribute to intergroup as
well as intra-group conflicts through several mechanisms. First, population diversity may have an
adverse effect on the prevalence of mutual trust, and excessive diversity could therefore depress
the level of social capital below a threshold that could have averted the emergence of social,
political, and economic grievances and, thus, prevented violent hostilities. Second, to the extent
that population diversity captures interpersonal divergence in preferences for public goods and
redistributive policies, highly diverse societies may find it difficult to reconcile such differences
through collective action, thereby intensifying their susceptibility to conflict. Third, insofar as
population diversity reflects interpersonal heterogeneity in traits that are differentially rewarded,
it can potentially cultivate resentments that are rooted in inequality, thereby magnifying the
vulnerability to internal belligerence.
         Moreover, the prehistorical variation in the level population diversity across regions and its
potential role in facilitating the formation of ethnic groups may have contributed to the emergence
of social conflicts. In particular, following the “out of Africa” migration of humans, the initial
endowment of population diversity in each region may have influenced the process of group forma-
tion, reflecting the trade-off associated with the scale of the population. While a larger group may
benefit from economies of scale, its productivity tends to be affected adversely by its incohesiveness.
Thus, in light of the adverse impact of diversity on social cohesiveness, a larger initial endowment
of population diversity have plausibly led to the emergence of a larger number of groups, and due to
the forces of “cultural drift” and “biased transmission” of cultural markers (e.g., traditions, norms,
and dialects), to the formation of distinct ethnic identities. The emergent fragmentation could have



                                                   1
                                                                     Between-group
                                                                       Diversity
                                                                     Within-group
                                                                      Diversity
                                                                                           Social Cohesion
   Migratory             Interpersonal                                                                               Conflict
                                                                                          Intra- & Inter-group
  Distance from           Population         Group Formation                                                       Intra- & Inter-
                                                                                           Trust, Preference
   East Africa             Diversity                                                                               group Conflict
                                                                                             Homogeneity

                                                                     Fragmentation
                                                                     Fractionalization,
                                                                       Polarization




    Figure 1: The Evolution of Population Diversity in a Location and Its Impact on Conflict
Notes: Solid arrows represent hypothesized links that are confirmed by the empirical analysis, whereas dashed arrows represent
hypothesized links that do not gain consistent support. In particular, interpersonal diversity within as well as between groups
affect both inter-group and intra-group conflict, partly via their adverse effect on social cohesion within and across ethnic
groups.



fueled excessive inter-group competition and dissension, and could have created fertile grounds for
the use of a divide-and-rule strategy by political elites, contributing to the emergence of conflict.
         The exploration of the contribution of interpersonal population diversity to conflict within
nations and ethnic groups relies on a novel measure that encompasses various dimensions of
population diversity – proportional representation of ethnic groups, interpersonal diversity between
groups, and interpersonal diversity within groups. While some aspects of population diversity at the
national level can be captured by indexes of ethnolinguistic fractionalization and polarization, these
measures predominantly reflect the proportional representation of ethnic groups in the population,
disregarding the importance of the degree of interpersonal diversity within each ethnic group for the
overall level of diversity at the national level. These deficient measures of population diversity may
thus obfuscate the true impact of population diversity on civil conflicts within nations, and they
do not permit the exploration of the role of diversity within an ethnic group on either intra-group
or inter-group conflicts.
         Exploiting variations across countries and ethnic homelands, the analysis demonstrates that
interpersonal population diversity within and between ethnic groups has contributed fundamentally
– as illustrated in Figure 1 – to the emergence, prevalence, recurrence, and severity of historical and
contemporary intrasocietal conflicts across countries, regions, and ethnic groups. Furthermore, the
country-level analysis documents that the contribution of population diversity to intrastate conflicts
has plausibly operated partly via the number of ethnic groups in the population, the prevalence of
mistrust, and the degree of dispersion in political preferences.
         The dual analysis at the national and at the ethnic-homeland levels has several virtues.
First, it permits the exploration of the impact of population diversity on the emergence of conflicts
in societies of different scales, suggesting that population diversity reduces social cohesion and
increases the likelihood of social conflicts within national as well as subnational populations.
Second, since the boundaries of ethnic homelands largely predate the formation of modern nation
states, the ethnic-homeland level analysis mitigates potential concerns regarding the impact of
population diversity and internal conflicts on contemporary national borders (Alesina and Spolaore,
2003). Third, the focus on ethnic groups as well as on national populations permits the analysis
to disentangle the impact of population diversity within an ethnic group, from the impact of
ethnic diversity across groups, in the emergence of inter-group as well as intra-group conflicts.
Fourth, because populations within ethnic homelands have been largely native to their locations,



                                                               2
the analysis at the ethnicity level diminishes potential concerns about the effect of conflicts on
migrations across countries and on the global distribution of national population diversity.
         The research employs several empirical strategies to mitigate concerns about the potential
role of reverse causality, omitted cultural, geographical, and human characteristics, as well as
sorting, in the observed association between population diversity and intrasocietal conflicts. In
the course of human history, conflicts have plausibly altered the observed levels of diversity within
ethnic groups, and the association between observed population diversity within an ethnic group
and intra-group conflict may partly reflect reverse causality from conflict to diversity. Furthermore,
the association between population diversity and internal conflicts at the ethnicity level may be
governed by omitted cultural, geographical, and human characteristics. In order to mitigate these
concerns, the empirical analysis exploits the negative association between the observed population
diversity of an indigenous contemporary ethnic group and its migratory distance from East Africa,
due to the serial founder effect (e.g., Harpending and Rogers, 2000; Ramachandran et al., 2005;
Ashraf and Galor, 2013a), to predict population diversity for a globally representative sample of
more than 900 ethnic groups.1
         Nevertheless, several scenarios could a priori weaken the credibility of this methodology.
First, selective migration out of Africa, or natural selection along the migratory paths, could have
affected human traits and, therefore, conflict independently of the impact of migratory distance
from Africa on the degree of diversity in human traits. However, while migratory distance from
Africa has a significant negative association with the degree of diversity in human traits, it appears
to be uncorrelated with the mean level of traits in a population, such as height, weight, and
skin reflectance, conditional on distance from the equator (Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). Second,
migratory distance from Africa could be correlated with distances from focal historical locations
(e.g., technological frontiers) and could, therefore, capture the effect of these other distances on the
process of development and the emergence of conflicts, rather than the effect of these migratory
distances via population diversity. Nevertheless, conditional on migratory distance from East
Africa, distances from historical technological frontiers in the years 1, 1000, and 1500 do not
qualitatively alter the impact of predicted diversity on internal conflicts, further justifying the
reliance on the “out of Africa” hypothesis and the serial founder effect for identifying the influence
of population diversity on intrasocietal conflicts.
         Moreover, a threat to identification would emerge if the actual migratory paths from Africa
would have been correlated with geographical characteristics that are directly conducive to conflict
(e.g., soil quality, ruggedness, climatic conditions, and propensity to trade). This would have
involved, however, that the conduciveness of these geographical characteristics to conflicts would
be aligned along the main root of the migratory path out of Africa as well as along each of the
main forks that emerge from this primary path. In particular, in several important forks of this
migration process (e.g., the Fertile Crescent and the associated eastward migration into Asia and
westward migration into Europe), geographical characteristics that are conducive to conflicts would
have to diminish symmetrically along these divergent secondary migratory paths. Nevertheless, the
analysis establishes that the results are qualitatively unaffected when it accounts for a wide range
of potentially confounding geographical characteristics of ethnic homelands, spatial dependence, as
   1
     The contemporary worldwide distribution of observed population diversity across indigenous ethnic groups
overwhelmingly reflects a serial founder effect – i.e., a chain of ancient population bottlenecks – originating in East
Africa. In particular, because the spatial diffusion of humans to the rest of the world occurred in a stepwise migration
process beginning around 90,000–60,000 BP, where in each step, a subgroup of individuals left their parental colony
to establish a new settlement farther away, carrying with them only a subset of the diversity of their parental colony,
the population diversity of a prehistorically indigenous ethnic group as observed today decreases with the distance
along ancient human migratory paths from East Africa.



                                                           3
well as time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity in each region, identifying the association between
interpersonal population diversity and internal conflicts across societies in the same region.
        The observed association between population diversity and internal conflict at the ethnic-
homeland level may further reflect the sorting of less diverse populations into geographical niches
that are less conducive to conflicts. While sorting would not affect the existence of a positive
association between population diversity and conflicts, it would weaken the proposed interpretation
of this association. However, such sorting would require that the spatial distribution of ex-ante
conflict risk would have to be negatively correlated with migratory distance from Africa and the
conduciveness of geographical characteristics to conflicts would have to be negatively aligned with
the primary migratory path out of Africa as well as with each of the main subsequent forks and
their associated secondary migratory paths. These concerns are further mitigated by accounting
for heterogeneity in a wide range of geographical characteristics across ethnic homelands, spatial
autocorrelation, and regional fixed effects.
        Further, to the extent that interregional migration flows in the post-1500 era, and thus
the proportional representation of ethnic groups within each national population, may have been
affected by historically persistent spatial patterns of conflict risk, contemporary national population
diversity may be endogenous to intrastate conflicts. Thus, to mitigate these concerns two alternative
empirical strategies are developed, yielding remarkably similar results. The first strategy confines
the analysis to variations in a sample of countries that only belong to the Old World (i.e., Africa,
Europe, and Asia), where diversity of contemporary national populations predominantly reflects
the diversity of indigenous populations that became native to their current locations well before the
colonial era. This strategy rests on the observation that post-1500 population movements within
the Old World did not result in the significant admixture of populations that were very distant
from one another. The second strategy exploits variations in a globally representative sample
of countries using an estimator, in which the migratory distance of a country’s prehistorically
native population from East Africa is employed as an instrumental variable for the diversity of
its contemporary national population. It rests on the identifying assumption that the migratory
distance of a country’s prehistorically native population from East Africa is exogenous to the risk
of intrastate conflict faced by the country’s overall population in the last half-century.
        The empirical analysis at the country level establishes that, accounting for the potentially
confounding effects of geographical and institutional characteristics, ethnolinguistic fragmentation,
outcomes of economic development, and continent fixed effects, an increase in national population
diversity that corresponds to the movement from the 10th to the 90th percentile of its global cross-
country distribution (i.e., a movement from the diversity level of the Republic of Korea to that of
the Democratic Republic of Congo) is associated with 2.3 new civil conflict outbreaks during the
1960–2017 time horizon (relative to a sample mean of 1.2 and a standard deviation of 1.7 new civil
conflict outbreaks). In addition, this increase in diversity is also associated with (i) an increase
in the likelihood of observing the incidence of civil conflict in any given 5-year interval during the
1960–2017 period from 18 percent to 34 percent; (ii) an increase in the likelihood of observing the
onset of a new civil conflict in any given year during the 1960–2017 time horizon from 1 percent to
4 percent; (iii) an increase in the likelihood of observing the incidence of one or more intra-group
factional conflict events in any given year during the 1985–2006 time horizon from 6 percent to 60
percent; and (iv) an increase in the intensity of social unrest by either 26 percent or 38 percent of
a standard deviation of the observed distribution of intrastate conflict severity across countries in
the post-1960 time period (depending on the employed measure of intrastate conflict severity).
        Similarly, the analysis at the ethnic-homeland level establishes that, accounting for the
potentially confounding influence of a wide range of geographical and historical factors, outcomes
of economic development, and regional fixed effects, an increase in observed population diversity

                                                  4
of an ethnic group from the 10th percentile (e.g., the Mamusi people of Oceania) to the 90th
percentile (e.g., the Pare people of Eastern Africa) of its global distribution is associated with an
increase in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008
by 0.43 (relative to a sample mean of 0.14 and a standard deviation of 0.27). Further, this change
in ethnic population diversity is also associated with an increase of about 57 conflict events, 9,731
conflict-related deaths, and 924 deaths per conflict during the same time period.


2       Related Literature
This study is related to several well-established lines of inquiry. Specifically, the paper contributes to
the vast literature on the determinants of civil conflict. The determinants of civil conflict have been
the focus of intensive research over the past two decades, highlighting the role of social, political, and
economic grievances, along with the capability of the state to subdue armed opposition groups, the
conduciveness of geographical characteristics towards rebel insurgencies, and the opportunity cost
of engaging in rebellions, among other contributing factors (Sambanis, 2002; Fearon and Laitin,
2003; Collier and Hoeffler, 2007; Blattman and Miguel, 2010). The present study advances the
understanding of the nature of grievance-related mechanisms in civil conflict, emphasizing the role
of interpersonal population diversity and its deep determinants on the emergence of intra-group as
well as inter-group social divisions.
        The role of fractionalization was initially at the forefront of empirical analyses of the
underlying determinants of civil conflict, in light of the conventional wisdom that inter-group
competition over ownership of productive resources and political power, along with conflicting
preferences for public goods and redistributive policies, are more difficult to reconcile in societies
that are fragmented ethnolinguistically. Nevertheless, early evidence regarding the influence of
ethnic, linguistic, and religious fractionalization on the risk of civil conflict in society had been
largely inconclusive (Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Collier and Hoeffler, 2007), arguably due in part to
conceptual limitations associated with fractionalization indices. The introduction of polarization
indices to the analyses of civil conflict has led to more affirmative findings demonstrating that
inter-group grievances are indeed contributors to the risk of civil conflict in society (Montalvo and
Reynal-Querol, 2005; Esteban et al., 2012).2
        Nevertheless, while measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation are unable to account for the
potentially critical role of intra-group heterogeneity in augmenting the risk of conflict in society
at large, a central virtue of the proposed measure of population diversity is that it captures
the impact of diversity across individuals within ethnic groups. Furthermore, even as a proxy
for interethnic divisions, the proposed measure generates substantial insights relative to existing
proxies that are based on fractionalization and polarization indices. Specifically, the commonly
used measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation typically do not exploit information beyond the
proportional representations of ethnolinguistically differentiated groups in the national population
– namely, they implicitly assume that these ethnic groups are internally homogenous and culturally
“equidistant” from one another.3 In contrast, the proposed measure of national population diversity
    2
     However, in network-based models of conflict involving multiple groups (e.g., König et al., 2017), greater inter-
group divergence could mitigate conflict propensity by reducing the strength of inter-group network alliances within
one side or another of such conflicts.
   3
     More sophisticated measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation – such as (i) the Greenberg index of “cultural
diversity,” as measured by Fearon (2003) and Desmet et al. (2009), or (ii) the ethnolinguistic polarization index,
as measured by Desmet et al. (2009) and by Esteban et al. (2012) – incorporate information on pairwise linguistic
distances, wherein pairwise linguistic proximity monotonically increases in the number of shared branches between any
two languages in a hierarchical linguistic tree. This information, however, is constrained by the nature of a hierarchical



                                                            5
incorporates information on pairwise inter-group genetic distances, as well as the genetic diversity
within each ethnic group, as determined predominantly over the course of the “out of Africa” demic
diffusion of humans to the rest of the globe tens of thousands of years ago.4
         Moreover, the use of conventional measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation in the explo-
ration of the impact of fragmentation on conflict is unsatisfactory due to plausible concerns about
reverse causality and measurement error. Due to the association of conflict with atrocities as
well as voluntary and forced migrations, the degree of ethnolinguistic fractionalization is likely
to be affected by past and potential conflicts. Although the proposed measure of population
diversity exploits information on the population shares of subnational groups possessing ethnically
differentiated ancestries, because the endowment of population diversity in a given location was
overwhelmingly determined during the prehistoric “out of Africa” expansion of humans, the analysis
is able to exploit a plausibly exogenous source of the contemporary cross-country variation in this
measure, thereby mitigating the biases associated with measurement and endogeneity issues that
plague the widely used proxies of ethnolinguistic fragmentation. Furthermore, in contrast to the
plausibly exogenous component of population diversity, the degree of ethnolinguistic fragmentation
may be systematically mismeasured in more conflict-prone societies, due to (i) the political economy
of national census categorizations of subnational groups, and (ii) the endogenous constructivism of
individual self-identification with an ethnic group (Eifert et al., 2010; Caselli and Coleman, 2013;
Besley and Reynal-Querol, 2014).
         The present study also contributes to a vast literature that explores the impact of ethnolin-
guistic fragmentation and interethnic economic inequality on other societal outcomes, including the
rate of economic growth, the quality of national institutions, the extent of financial development,
the efficiency in the provision of public goods, and the level of social capital (Easterly and Levine,
1997; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005; Alesina et al., 2016). In particular, since population diversity
encompasses the degree of heterogeneity within each ethnic group as well as the pairwise distances
amongst them, the current analysis is uniquely positioned to capture the contribution of these
additional dimensions of diversity to social dissonance and aggregate inefficiency.
         Furthermore, in light of the view that the contemporary variation in population diversity
across the globe predominantly reflects the human expansion out of Africa tens of thousands of years
ago, the paper contributes to the exploration of the role of deeply rooted human characteristics in
comparative economic development. In particular, the study contributes to the understanding of the
importance of inter-personal population diversity for social outcomes in the course of human history
(e.g., population density, urbanization, and income) as explored by Ashraf and Galor (2013a).5
         Finally, the study is consistent with the primordialist theories of conflict, maintaining that
ethnic conflict springs from differences in ethnic identity, as well as with the instrumentalist theories,
suggesting that ethnic conflict may emerge for pragmatic reasons (e.g., inequality, security, and
competition).6 In particular, since the initial endowment of interpersonal population diversity at a
linguistic tree, where languages residing at the same level of branching of the tree are necessarily equidistant from
one another.
    4
      The genetic distance between any two ethnic groups in a contemporary national population predominantly reflects
the prehistoric migratory distance between their respective ancestral populations (from the precolonial era), and as
follows from the continuity of geographical distances, the proposed population diversity measure captures continuous
inter-group distances. Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016) documents a negative relationship between genetic distance and
interstate warfare. They argue that if genetic relatedness proxies for unobserved similarity in preferences over rival
and excludable goods, then conflict over the control of such resources would be more likely to arise between nations
that are genetically closer to one another.
    5
      The importance of prehistorically determined human characteristics is further explored by Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2013) and Ashraf and Galor (2013b, 2018).
    6
      In addition, the modernist viewpoint (Bates, 1983; Gellner, 1983; Wimmer, 2002) stresses that interethnic conflict
arises from increased competition over scarce resources, especially when previously marginalized groups that were


                                                           6
given location may have facilitated the endogenous formation of groups, whose collective identities
diverged over time under the forces of cultural drift, a reduced-form link between the prehistorically
determined diversity and the contemporary risk of interethnic conflict may well be apparent in the
data, regardless of whether these groups are mobilized into conflict by primordial or instrumentalist
reasons.


3     Population Diversity and Conflict at the Country Level
3.1     Empirical Framework and Strategy
This section describes the various layers of the country-level analyses of the influence of population
diversity on intrastate conflicts, the key variables employed, and the strategies implemented to
identify the impact of population diversity on conflict.
        The analysis initially focuses on contemporary conflicts, exploiting variations in either
cross-country or repeated cross-country data. It explores the explanatory power of interpersonal
population diversity for (i) the average frequency of new conflict outbreaks, (ii) the persistence of
conflicts, as captured by the likelihood of conflict prevalence, and (iii) the likelihood of conflict
outbreak. It then analyzes the impact of interpersonal diversity on intra-group factional conflicts
within a national population. Finally, it explores the influence of interpersonal diversity on conflicts
in the distant past.
        Following the convention in the civil conflict literature, the contemporary analysis is confined
to the post-1960 time period, when most of the European colonies in Sub-Saharan Africa, the
Middle East, and South and Southeast Asia had already gained independence. This time horizon
thus permits an assessment of the correlates of civil conflict at the national level, independently of
their interactions with the contemporaneous influence of the colonial powers. The baseline sample
for the contemporary analysis contains information on 150 countries for the 1960–2017 time period,
of which 123 are in the Old World.

3.1.1    Main Outcome Variables: Frequency, Incidence, and Onset of Civil Conflict
The main outcome variable in the cross-country regressions is the average number of new civil
conflicts per annum during the 1960–2017 time period. It is based on conflict events listed in
version 18.1 of the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al., 2002; Pettersson and
Eck, 2018). In this data set, a civil conflict is defined as an armed conflict between the government
of a state and internal opposition groups over a given incompatibility. Recurrent episodes of the
same conflict between state actors and armed opposition groups are not treated as new conflicts.
The study employs the most comprehensive armed conflict coding (PRIO25), encompassing all civil
conflict events that resulted in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a given year.
        The country-level analysis additionally exploits the temporal dimension of armed conflict
events, examining the incidence of PRIO25 civil conflicts in a repeated cross-section of countries.
In this analysis, the outcome variable is an indicator, coded 1 for each country-period (a period
being a 5-year time interval) in which at least one active PRIO25 civil conflict is observed, and 0
otherwise. The study also examines the predictive power of population diversity for the onset of
new PRIO25 civil conflicts in annually repeated cross-country data. This variable is coded 1 for
each year in which at least one new PRIO25 civil conflict had erupted, and 0 otherwise. Moreover,
outbreaks of subsequent episodes of the same conflict are not considered new conflict onsets.
excluded from the nation-building process experience socioeconomic modernization and, thus, begin to challenge the
status quo.


                                                        7
3.1.2    Population Diversity: Measurement and Identification Strategy
The interpersonal population diversity of each country is captured by the measure of predicted
genetic diversity developed by Ashraf and Galor (2013a). It is based on (i) the proportional
representation of each of the ancestral populations of a contemporary nation, (ii) the genetic
diversity of each of these ancestral populations, as predicted by its migratory distance from Africa,
and (iii) the pairwise genetic distances between each pair of these ancestral populations, as predicted
by their migratory distances from one another.
         Observed genetic diversity at the ethnic group level is measured by an index referred to
by population geneticists as expected heterozygosity. This index reflects the probability that two
individuals, selected at random from the relevant population, are different from one another with
respect to a given spectrum of genetic traits. The index is constructed by population geneticists
using data on allelic frequencies (i.e., the frequency with which a gene variant or allele occurs in a
given population).7 Expected heterozygosity, Hexp , takes the form:

                                                         l  m   k
                                                     1 XX
                                          Hexp   =1−       p2i ,
                                                     m
                                                            l=1 i=1

where m is the number of genes or DNA loci in the sample, kl is observed variants or alleles of gene
l, and pi denotes the frequency of occurrence of the ith allele.
         Population geneticists have computed this index of expected heterozygosity, along with
pairwise genetic distances, for a sample of 53 globally representative ethnic groups from the Human
Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel.8 These ethnic groups have been not only prehistorically native
to their current geographical locations but also largely isolated from genetic flows from other ethnic
groups. The index is constructed using data on allelic frequencies for a particular class of DNA loci
called microsattelites, residing in non-protein-coding or “neutral” regions of the human genome –
i.e., regions that do not directly result in phenotypic expression. Thus, this measure of observed
genetic diversity has the advantage of not being tainted by the differential forces of natural selection
that may have operated on these populations since their prehistoric exodus from Africa.
         Nevertheless, like measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation based on fractionalization or
polarization indices, observed genetic diversity might be endogenous to civil conflict, since it could
be tainted by genetic admixtures resulting from the movement of populations across space, triggered
by cross-regional differences in patterns of historical conflict potential, the nature of political
institutions, and levels of economic prosperity. To circumvent this concern, the analysis is based on
the measure of predicted genetic diversity introduced by Ashraf and Galor (2013a). Exploiting the
explanatory power of a serial founder effect associated with the “out of Africa” migration process,
the diversity of a country’s prehistorically indigenous population is predicted by the coefficients
obtained from an ethnic-group-level regression of expected heterozygosity on migratory distance
from Addis Ababa in the aforementioned sample comprising 53 globally representative ethnic groups
from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel. This measure captures the component of
observed interpersonal diversity within a country’s indigenous ethnic groups that is predicted by
migratory distance from Addis Ababa to the country’s modern-day capital city, along prehistoric
land-connected human migration routes.9
   7
     See Ashraf and Galor (2018).
   8
     The Human Genome Diversity Cell Line is compiled by the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) in
collaboration with the Centre d’Etudes du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH).
   9
     Consistent with the serial founder effects associated with the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration process,
expected heterozygosity in microsattelites declines with migratory distance from East Africa across ethnic groups.



                                                        8
         In the absence of systematic and large-scale population movements across geographically
(and, thus, genetically) distant regions, as had been largely true during the precolonial era, the
interpersonal diversity of the prehistorically native population in a given location serves as a good
proxy for the contemporary population diversity of that location. While this continues to remain
true to a large extent for nations in the Old World (i.e., Africa, Europe, and Asia), post-1500
population flows from the Old World to the New World have had a considerable impact on the
ethnic composition and, thus, the contemporary interpersonal diversity of national populations in
the Americas and Oceania. Thus, instead of employing the interpersonal diversity of prehistori-
cally native populations (i.e., precolonial diversity) at the expense of limiting the analysis to the
Old World, the measure of ancestry-adjusted genetic diversity from Ashraf and Galor (2013a) is
employed as the main proxy for contemporary population diversity. Using the shares of different
groups in a country’s modern-day population, this measure accounts for (i) the diversity within the
ethnic groups that can trace own ancestry around year 1500 to their current homelands, (ii) the
diversity of those descended from immigrant settlers over the past half-millennium, and (iii) the
additional component of population diversity at the national level that arises from the pairwise
genetic distances amongst these different subnational groups.10
         However, ancestry-adjusted population diversity may still be afflicted by endogeneity bias
because it accounts for the impact of cross-country migrations in the post-1500 era on the diversity
of contemporary national populations. In particular, these migrations may have been spurred by
historically persistent spatial patterns of conflict. Two alternative strategies are implemented to
address this issue. The first strategy is to exploit variations across countries that only belong to
the Old World, where as discussed previously, the interpersonal diversity of contemporary national
populations overwhelmingly reflects the diversity within populations that have been native to their
current locations since well before the colonial era. This strategy is based on the view that
the great human migrations of the post-1500 era had systematically differential impacts on the
genetic composition of national populations in the Old World versus the New World. Specifically,
although post-1500 population flows had a dramatic effect on the interpersonal diversity of national
populations in the Americas and Oceania, the diversity of populations in Africa, Europe, and
Asia remained largely unaltered, primarily because native populations in the Old World were not
subjected to substantial inflows of migrant that were descended from genetically distant ancestral
populations. By confining the analysis to the Old World, this strategy effectively exploits the
spatial variation in contemporary population diversity that largely coincides with the variation in
diversity of prehistorically indigenous populations, as determined overwhelmingly by an ancient
serial founder effect associated with the “out of Africa” migration process.
         The second strategy employs the migratory distance of the prehistorically native populations
in each country from East Africa as an instrument for the country’s contemporary population
diversity. This strategy utilizes the observation that the mark of ancient population bottlenecks
that occurred during the prehistoric “out of Africa” demic diffusion of humans across the globe
Mounting evidence from the fields of physical and cognitive anthropology, surveyed in Ashraf and Galor (2018),
additionally reflect the influence of serial founder effects on various forms of intra-group phenotypic and cognitive
diversity, including phonemic diversity and interpersonal diversity in skeletal features pertaining to cranial
characteristics, dental attributes, and pelvic traits. Thus, the association of heterozygosity in neutral genetic markers
with socioeconomic outcomes may plausibly reflect the influence of diversity in various observed and unobserved
phenotypic characteristics.
  10
     The data on the population shares of these different subnational groups at the country level are obtained from
the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and Weil (2010), who compile for each country in their data
set, the share of the country’s population in 2000 that is descended from the population of every other country in
1500. For an in-depth discussion of the methodology underlying the construction of the ancestry-adjusted measure
of genetic diversity, the reader is referred to the data appendix of Ashraf and Galor (2013a).



                                                           9
continues to be seen in the worldwide pattern of genetic diversity across contemporary national
populations, as reflected by the sizable correlation of 0.75 between the proxies for precolonial
and contemporary population diversity in a global sample of countries. This strategy rests on
the identifying assumption that the migratory distance of a country’s prehistorically indigenous
population from East Africa has no direct effect on the potential for civil conflict faced by its modern
national population, conditional on a large set of controls for the geographical and institutional
determinants of conflict as well as the correlates of economic development.

3.1.3    Confounding Characteristics
The vast empirical literature on civil conflict has considered a large number of contributing factors.
Drawing on this literature, a wide range of control variables are included in the baseline specifi-
cations. The discussion below describes these potential confounders. Additional control variables
used in robustness checks are discussed in corresponding Appendices.11
Geographical Characteristics The study accounts for a wide range of geographical attributes
that may be correlated with prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa and can influence
conflict risk through channels unrelated to population diversity. Absolute latitude and distance to
the nearest waterway, for instance, can exert an influence on economic development and, thus, on
conflict potential through climatological, institutional, and trade-related mechanisms.
        Rugged terrains can provide safe havens for rebels and enable them to sustain continued
resistance by protecting them from superior government forces (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). Moreover,
in regions with rough terrains, subgroups of a regional population may be geographically more iso-
lated. Such isolation may strengthen the forces of “cultural drift” and ethnic differentiation among
these groups (Michalopoulos, 2012), thus increasing the potential for inter-group conflict. Further,
in light of evidence that conditional on their respective country-level means, greater intracountry
dispersion in agricultural land suitability and elevation can contribute to ethnolinguistic diversity
(Michalopoulos, 2012), these natural attributes could also generate an indirect influence on conflict
propensity through the ethnolinguistic fragmentation of the population.12 To account for these
factors, the baseline analysis controls for terrain ruggedness, as well as the mean and range of both
agricultural land suitability and elevation.
        The baseline specifications also include a dummy for island nations. Due to their greater
isolation in space, islands nations possibly followed different historical trajectories than nations
that are connected by land to one another. For example, the settlement process that took place
in island nations and their relative immunity from cross-border spillovers may influence both
population diversity and conflict potential. Finally, the baseline specifications additionally account
for a complete set of continent fixed effects to ensure that the estimated reduced-form impact of
population diversity on conflict potential is not simply reflecting the latent influence of unobserved
time-invariant cultural, institutional, and geographical factors at the continent level.
Institutional Factors Colonial legacies may have significantly shaped the political economy of
interethnic cleavages in newly independent states (Posner, 2003). More generally, the heritage of
colonial rule and the identity of the former colonizers may have important ramifications for the
nature and stability of contemporary political institutions at the national level, thereby influencing
  11
     The definitions and data sources of all variables employed by the analysis at the country level are listed in
Section A.4 of the Supplemental Material.
  12
     Although these measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation are directly accounted for, their exogenous geographical
determinants may still explain some unobserved component of intrapopulation heterogeneity in ethnic and cultural
traits, thereby exerting some influence on the potential for conflict in society.



                                                         10
the potential for conflict in society. Two different sets of covariates are included in the baseline
specifications to account for the impact of colonial legacies. Depending on the unit of analysis, the
first set comprises either binary indicators for the historical prevalence of colonial rule (as is the case
in the cross-country regressions) or time-varying measures of the lagged prevalence of colonial rule
(as is the case in the regressions using repeated cross-country data). In either case, a distinction
is made between colonial rule by the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power. The
second set of covariates comprises time-invariant binary indicators for British and French legal
origins, included to account for any latent influence of legal codes and institutions that may not
necessarily be captured by colonial experience.
         The baseline specifications additionally include three control variables, all based on yearly
data at the country level from the Polity IV Project, in order to account for the direct influence
of contemporary political institutions on the risk of civil conflict. The first variable is based on
an ordinal index that reflects the degree of executive constraints in any given year, whereas the
other two variables are based on binary indicators for the type of political regime, reflecting the
prevalence of either democracy (when the polity score is above 5) or autocracy (when the polity
score is below -5) in a given year.13
Ethnolinguistic Fragmentation Previous empirical findings regarding the role of ethnic frag-
mentation in civil conflicts have been somewhat mixed, exhibiting substantial sensitivity to model
specifications and conflict codings (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). Moreover, theoretical work on the
link between the ethnic composition of a society and the risk of civil conflict suggests that ethnic
fractionalization by itself may be insufficient to fully capture the conflict potential that can be
attributed to broader ethnolinguistic configurations of the population (Esteban and Ray, 2011a).
In light of their well-grounded structural foundations, indices of polarization have gained popularity
as a substitute for – or in addition to – the fractionalization measures commonly considered by
empirical analyses of civil conflict. Indeed, many empirical studies find that ethnic polarization
is a stronger predictor of the likelihood of civil conflict (e.g., Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005;
Esteban et al., 2012).
         Two time-invariant controls are thus included in the baseline specifications to capture the
influence of the ethnolinguistic composition of national populations on the potential for civil conflict.
The first proxy is the well-known ethnic fractionalization index of Alesina et al. (2003), reflecting
the probability that two individuals, randomly selected from a country’s population, will belong to
different ethnic groups. The second proxy for this channel is an index of ethnolinguistic polarization,
obtained from the data set of Desmet et al. (2012). The authors provide measures of several such
polarization indices, constructed at different levels of aggregation of linguistic groups in a country’s
population (based on hierarchical linguistic trees). The specific polarization measure employed
here corresponds to the most disaggregated level of the linguistic tree and reflects the extent of
polarization across subnational groups classified according to modern-day languages.14
Natural Resources and Development Outcomes Natural resources can foster the risk of
civil conflict by weakening political institutions and facilitating state capture, easing the financial
constraints on rebel organizations (e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Dube and Vargas, 2013; Collier
and Hoeffler, 2007), increasing the vulnerability of political elites to terms-of-trade shocks (e.g.,
  13
     The prevalence of anocracy, occurring when the polity score is between -5 and 5, therefore serves as the omitted
political regime category.
  14
     The choice of Desmet et al. (2012) as the data source for ethnolinguistic polarization is primarily due to the more
comprehensive geographical coverage of their data set, relative to other potential data sources such as Montalvo and
Reynal-Querol (2005) or Esteban et al. (2012).




                                                          11
Humphreys, 2005), and raising the return to regional secession (e.g., Ross, 2006). The baseline
specifications thus include an indicator for the presence of oil or gas reserves.
        Average living standards can influence civil conflict potential in a country through several
channels. One argument, due to Grossman (1991) and Hirshleifer (1995), is that higher per-capita
incomes raise the opportunity cost for potential rebels to engage in insurrections, thus predicting an
inverse relationship between the level or growth rate of income, on the one hand, and the risk of civil
conflict, on the other (Miguel et al., 2004; Collier and Hoeffler, 2007). Another argument, due to
Hirshleifer (1991) and Grossman (1999), is that by raising the return to predation, higher per-capita
incomes can contribute to the risk of rapacious activities over society’s resources, consistently with
empirical findings from some of the aforementioned studies on the link between income from natural
resources and conflict potential. Furthermore, to the extent that income per capita serves as a proxy
for state capabilities (Fearon and Laitin, 2003), a higher level of per-capita income can reflect the
notion of a state that is better able to prevent or defend itself against rebel insurgencies; an idea
that has also found some recent empirical support (e.g., Bazzi and Blattman, 2014). Therefore,
the baseline specifications control for GDP per capita, as reported by the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI). Importantly, because population diversity, as proxied by genetic
diversity, has been shown to confer a hump-shaped influence on productivity at the country level
(Ashraf and Galor, 2013a), the inclusion of GDP per capita accounts for the indirect effect of
population diversity on conflict potential via the income channel.
        Like income per capita, population size is also a standard covariate in empirical models
of conflict. One reason is that operational definitions of civil conflict typically impose a death
threshold, and violence-related casualties may be mechanically related to the size of population. In
addition, a larger population may imply a greater recruitment pool for rebels (Fearon and Laitin,
2003). Further, to the extent that more populous countries exhibit greater intrapopulation hetero-
geneity, they could also harbor stronger motives for secessionist conflicts (Alesina and Spolaore,
2003; Desmet et al., 2011). The baseline specifications thus include controls for population size.
        It should be noted that many of the aforementioned controls for institutional quality,
ethnolinguistic fragmentation, and the correlates of economic development are endogenous in an
empirical model of civil conflict, and as such, their estimated coefficients in the regressions do not
permit a causal interpretation. Nonetheless, controlling for these factors is essential to minimize
specification errors and assess the extent to which the reduced-form influence of population diversity
on conflict potential can be attributed to more conventional explanations in the literature.
        Appendix A.4 presents the summary statistics of all the main variables exploited by the
baseline cross-country analysis of civil conflict frequency.

3.2   Empirical Results
This section presents the main findings from several country-level analyses, establishing a highly
significant and robust reduced-form causal influence of population diversity on various intrastate
conflict outcomes over the past half-century. The exposition commences with the results of the
baseline cross-country regressions that explain the annual frequency of civil conflict outbreaks in
the post-1960 time period. It then discusses the results from conflict incidence and onset regressions
that exploit variations in repeated cross-country data, before presenting evidence that population
diversity has also been a significant predictor of contemporary intra-group conflict outcomes. The
section concludes with an analysis of conflicts during the 1400–1799 period, showing that population
diversity has had a deep influence on the conflict potential of societies over many centuries. The
analysis of each conflict outcome includes several robustness checks. Some of these are collected



                                                  12
and discussed in Appendix A.2 while others are relegated to Sections A.1–A.2 of the Supplemental
Material.

3.2.1    Analysis of Civil Conflict Frequency in Cross-Country Data
The cross-country regressions attempt to explain the variation across countries in the annual
frequency of new civil conflict onsets – i.e., the average number of new PRIO25 civil conflict
eruptions per year – during the 1960–2017 time horizon. Specifically, the baseline empirical model
for the cross-country analysis is as follows.

                                [i + β20 GEOi + β30 ET Hi + β40 IN Si + β50 DEVi + εi ,
                  CFi = β0 + β1 DIV                                                                                 (1)

where CFi is the (log-transformed) average number of new PRIO25 civil conflict outbreaks per
year in country i; DIV
                     [i is the ancestry-adjusted population diversity of the national population;
GEOi , ET Hi , IN Si , and DEVi are the respective vectors of control variables for geographical
characteristics (including continent dummies), ethnolinguistic fragmentation, institutional factors,
and the correlates of economic development, as described in Section 3.1; and finally, εi is a country-
specific disturbance term. All time-varying controls for institutional factors and development
outcomes enter the model as their respective temporal means over the 1960–2017 time horizon.
        Table I presents the results from the baseline cross-country analysis. The analysis begins
with a bivariate regression in Column 1, showing that population diversity is indeed a positive
and highly significant correlate of the annual frequency of new civil conflict eruptions. Specifically,
the estimated coefficient suggests that a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the cross-
country distribution of population diversity is associated with an increase in conflict frequency
by 0.014 new civil conflict outbreaks per year, a relationship that is statistically significant at
the 1 percent level. Bearing in mind that the sample mean of the dependent variable is 0.022
outbreaks per year, this association is also of sizable economic significance, reflecting 44 percent of
a standard deviation across countries in the temporal frequency of new civil conflict onsets. Next,
beginning with Column 2, the analysis progressively includes an expanding set of covariates to the
specification. It first incorporates exogenous geographical characteristics and then additionally
accounts for measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation, before controlling for semi-endogenous
institutional factors and more endogenous outcomes of economic development in the full empirical
model in Column 8.
        Upon accounting for the potentially confounding influence of geographical characteristics in
Column 2, population diversity continues to remain statistically significant at the 1 percent level,
but now, its coefficient is more than twice as large as the unconditioned estimate from Column 1.
This increase appears to be largely driven by the inclusion of absolute latitude and the range
of elevation and of land suitability as covariates to the model, as all three variables enter the
regression significantly and with expected signs.15 Based on the specification in Column 2, the
scatter plots in Figure 2 depict the positive and statistically significant cross-country relationship
between population diversity and the annual frequency of new civil conflict onsets, both in the full
sample of countries and in a sample that omits apparently influential outliers.
        As revealed by the regression in Column 3, the point estimate of the impact of population
diversity on conflict becomes somewhat diminished once the specification is conditioned to only
  15
     Specifically, countries located farther from the equator have seen fewer conflict outbreaks on average, while those
with greater dispersion in their respective land endowments have experienced such outbreaks more frequently, a result
that plausibly reflects the conflict-promoting role of ethnolinguistic fragmentation, following the rationale provided
by the findings of Michalopoulos (2012).



                                                          13
Table I: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries – The
Baseline Analysis
Cross-country sample:                                                                          Global                                                  Old World                  Global
                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)           (10)        (11)            (12)
                                                      OLS         OLS        OLS        OLS         OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS         OLS           OLS         2SLS            2SLS
                                                                                        Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)             0.209***   0.439***   0.306***   0.290**     0.326***   0.318***               0.309**    0.548***      0.597***    0.537***     0.602***
                                                      (0.066)    (0.104)    (0.115)   (0.113)      (0.118)    (0.119)               (0.130)     (0.191)       (0.209)     (0.176)      (0.185)
Within-group population diversity                                                                                       0.364***
                                                                                                                         (0.140)
Between-group population diversity                                                                                       0.284*
                                                                                                                         (0.166)
Ethnic fractionalization                                                               0.011                   0.004      0.004      0.001                     0.002                   −0.005
                                                                                      (0.012)                 (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.010)                   (0.012)                  (0.010)
Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                        0.016      0.014      0.014      0.012                     0.016                    0.020*
                                                                                                   (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.012)                   (0.014)                  (0.012)
Absolute latitude                                               −0.307**   −0.396*     −0.294     −0.435**    −0.392     −0.391      0.166      −0.319         0.289     −0.477**      −0.046
                                                                 (0.124)    (0.204)    (0.249)     (0.199)    (0.244)    (0.245)    (0.242)     (0.255)       (0.305)     (0.201)      (0.243)
Ruggedness                                                        0.015     −0.005     −0.001       0.000      0.001      0.003      0.031       0.002         0.048      −0.001        0.028
                                                                 (0.030)    (0.035)    (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.036)    (0.036)    (0.036)     (0.040)       (0.041)     (0.034)      (0.033)
Mean elevation                                                  −0.019**   −0.018*    −0.018*     −0.019*    −0.019*    −0.020*    −0.020**    −0.023**      −0.023**    −0.019**     −0.021**
                                                                 (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.012)       (0.011)     (0.009)      (0.009)
Range of elevation                                              0.011***   0.012***   0.011***    0.011***   0.011***   0.011***     0.004     0.014***        0.004     0.012***      0.005*
                                                                 (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.005)       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)
Mean land suitability                                             0.014      0.020      0.023      0.024*     0.024*      0.025      0.001       0.018         0.000      0.021*       −0.000
                                                                 (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.014)     (0.014)    (0.015)    (0.015)    (0.014)     (0.016)       (0.017)     (0.012)      (0.013)
Range of land suitability                                        0.014*      0.014      0.013      0.017*      0.017      0.017      0.008       0.017         0.007      0.017*        0.011
                                                                 (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.012)       (0.015)     (0.010)      (0.012)
Distance to nearest waterway                                      0.007      0.006      0.005       0.006      0.006      0.006      0.003       0.005         0.005       0.005        0.002
                                                                 (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)
Island nation dummy                                              −0.012    −0.015**   −0.015**    −0.015**   −0.015**   −0.015**   −0.021**     −0.008        −0.021*    −0.015**     −0.022***
                                                                 (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.010)       (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.008)
Executive constraints, 1960–2017 average                                                                                            −0.002                    −0.003                   −0.000
                                                                                                                                    (0.004)                   (0.005)                  (0.004)
Fraction of years under democracy, 1960–2017                                                                                         0.017                     0.023                    0.013
                                                                                                                                    (0.018)                   (0.019)                  (0.017)
Fraction of years under autocracy, 1960–2017                                                                                        −0.009                    −0.010                   −0.010
                                                                                                                                    (0.015)                   (0.016)                  (0.014)
Oil or gas reserve discovery                                                                                                        0.008*                     0.007                    0.007
                                                                                                                                    (0.005)                   (0.005)                  (0.005)
Log population, 1960–2017 average                                                                                                   0.005**                   0.007**                  0.005**
                                                                                                                                    (0.003)                   (0.003)                  (0.002)
Log GDP per capita, 1960–2017 average                                                                                              −0.010***                 −0.009***                −0.010***
                                                                                                                                    (0.002)                   (0.003)                  (0.002)
Continent dummies                                                             ×          ×              ×       ×          ×           ×           ×            ×           ×               ×
Legal origin dummies                                                                                                                   ×                        ×                           ×
Colonial history dummies                                                                                                               ×                        ×                           ×
Observations                                           150        150        150        150          150       150        150         147         123           121         150            147
Partial R2 of population diversity                               0.128      0.044      0.040        0.050     0.046                  0.051       0.068         0.088
Partial R2 of within-group                                                                                               0.042
Partial R2 of between-group                                                                                              0.015
Adjusted R2                                           0.029      0.189      0.213      0.212        0.220     0.215      0.212       0.358       0.225         0.392
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity           0.014***   0.029***   0.020***   0.019**     0.022***   0.021***               0.021**    0.026***      0.026***    0.036***     0.041***
                                                      (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)               (0.009)     (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.012)      (0.013)
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in within-group                                                                           0.037***
                                                                                                                         (0.014)
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in between-group                                                                           0.023*
                                                                                                                         (0.013)
FIRST STAGE                                                                                                                                                               Population diversity
                                                                                                                                                                          (ancestry adjusted)
Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                                                                                                                       −0.068***    −0.065***
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.005)      (0.007)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                                                                   153.543      92.693

Notes: This table exploits cross-country variations to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of contemporary
population diversity on the annual frequency of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets during the 1960–2017 time period, conditional
on ethnic diversity measures as well as the proximate geographical, institutional, and development-related correlates of conflict.
For regressions based on the global sample, the set of continent dummies includes five indicators for Africa, Asia, North America,
South America, and Oceania, whereas for regressions based on the Old-World sample, the set includes two indicators for Africa
and Asia. The set of legal origin dummies includes two indicators for British and French legal origins, and the set of colonial
history dummies includes three indicators for experience as a colony of the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power.
The 2SLS regressions exploit prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a
country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population diversity. The estimated effect associated with
increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms
of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



exploit intra-continental cross-country variations. However, even after including a complete set of
continent dummies, the coefficient of interest remains statistically significant at the 1 percent level
and larger than the unconditioned estimate from Column 1. It suggests that a move from the 10th


                                                                                               14
to the 90th percentile of the cross-country distribution of population diversity is associated with an
increase in conflict frequency by 0.020 civil conflict outbreaks per year, corresponding to 65 percent
of a standard deviation of the cross-country conflict frequency distribution.
         The regressions in Columns 4–6 indicate that when additionally subjected to controls for
ethnic fractionalization and ethnolinguistic polarization, either individually or jointly, the point
estimate of the coefficient on population diversity continues to remain largely stable in both mag-
nitude and statistical precision.16 In contrast, neither ethnic fractionalization nor ethnolinguistic
polarization appears to possess any significant explanatory power for the cross-country variation
in the temporal frequency of civil conflict outbreaks, conditional on population diversity and the
baseline set of geographical covariates.17
         The analysis in Column 7 replicates the specification from Column 6 except that it de-
composes the measure of overall interpersonal diversity of the national population into its two
components and jointly examines their conditional associations with conflict. The two components
of overall diversity capture the average interpersonal diversity within versus between groups in the
contemporary national population, where the subnational groups are categorized by their ancestral
origins prior to the great intercontinental migrations of the post-1500 era.18 The results indicate
that the within-group component of population diversity is economically and statistically more
important for explaining civil conflict. Specifically, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of the cross-country distribution of within-group diversity is associated with an increase in conflict
frequency by 0.037 civil conflict outbreaks per year, a relationship that is statistically significant
at the 1 percent level. On the other hand, a similar move along the cross-country distribution of
between-group diversity is associated with a less pronounced increase of 0.023 new civil conflict
onsets per year. The estimated response in the latter case is also statistically less precise, reflecting
statistical significance only at the 10 percent level. The greater importance of the within-group
component of population diversity is additionally reflected by a corresponding partial R2 statistic
that is nearly 3 times as large as that associated with the between-group component.
         The full specification in Column 8 augments the intermediate specification from Column 6
with controls for colonial legacy and contemporary institutional factors, as well as controls for
the natural resource curse, population size, and GDP per capita. Reassuringly, regardless of
the potential endogeneity of these additional covariates, the point estimate of the coefficient on
population diversity remains remarkably stable in both magnitude and statistical significance in
comparison to the estimates from previous columns. In particular, the coefficient of interest from
this regression suggests that conditional on the complete set of controls for geographical character-
istics, ethnolinguistic fragmentation, institutional factors, and outcomes of economic development,
a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the cross-country distribution of population diversity
is associated with an increase in conflict frequency by 0.021 new PRIO25 civil conflict outbreaks
  16
     By restricting both fractionalization and polarization measures to enter the regressions linearly, the current
approach follows Esteban et al. (2012). Nevertheless, a robustness check of the main finding to employing alternative
specifications that allow for both a linear and a quadratic term in ethnic fractionalization yielded qualitatively similar
results (not reported).
  17
     The analysis in Table SA.IX in Section A.1 of the Supplemental Material shows that although the two measures of
ethnolinguistic fragmentation do independently possess some explanatory power for the temporal frequency of conflict
onsets after accounting for geographical confounders, these conditional relationships are not statistically robust to
the inclusion of continent dummies to the specifications.
  18
     Thus, for a given contemporary national population, the within-group component of overall diversity reflects
the weighted average group-level interpersonal diversity, using the population shares of these subnational groups as
weights, whereas the between-group component reflects the residual fraction of overall diversity that is unexplained
by the within-group component. The latter component therefore corresponds to an aggregate measure of intergroup
distances amongst all subnational groups in the national population.



                                                           15
                                                         .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .1
 Log number of new civil conflict onsets




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Log number of new civil conflict onsets
                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                         .1                                                                                                        UKR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RUS
                                                                                                                                                             BIH                                      ETH
         per year, 1960-2017




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         per year, 1960-2017


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NGA
                                                                                                                                                                         GEO                                                                                                                                                                                                           MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SYR AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BGD
                                           (Residuals)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Residuals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YUG
                                                                                                                                           RUS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MLI
                                                         .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NER                                                 SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IRN HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MKD                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                              SYR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                AZE                                                                                                                                                                                      LSO                                   AGO
                                                                                                                                        BGD
                                                                                                                                        NER                   MMR                                                                                                                                                                               PHL                                                            ERI
                                                                                                                                        MLI                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LKA    TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IDN                    MAR
                                                                                                                                                                      YUG            SDN                                                                                                                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                                                                                             YEM                                                                                                                                                                                        TJK
                                                                                                                                                              MKD          ZAR                                                                                                                                                         MYS    MRT                     LBY
                                                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                                                            MDA                       TUR                                                                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                                                                                   HRV
                                                                                                                                                                             PAK                                                                                                                                                                                  URYAFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GNB                    ROMCMRLBN                    KEN
                                                                                                                               PHL      LSO           LKA                                  ERI                                                                                                                      SLV                                                  DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JOR ESP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                              MRT                           TUN      EGY
                                                                                                                                                                       AGO                                                                                                                                                                                   GMB              ISR NPL FRA
                                                                                                                                                        LBY                                                                                                                                                                                                                RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZWE                       MDG
                                                                                                                                                           MAR                                                                                                                                                                                                           BDI TGO            MOZ         HTI
                                                                                                                    MYS                TJK                                                                                                                                                                           MEX PNG     NIC                         OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEN SLE  GIN                         DOM
                                                                                                                                     IDN GMB GNB     JOR         ZAF                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAU       GHA TCD
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                           CMR LBN                                                                                                                                                    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         THA               LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EST BLRUZB         LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ARM     HUN
                                                                                                    SLV                                     GBR    AFG DZA   RWAISR                 MDG        KEN                                                                                                                                   JPN           LVA      DNKBELBFA CZEUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CIV IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SVN       UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GAB                 SOM
                                                                                                                                              OMN URY     BDI
                                                                                                                                                          ZWE           ROM                                                                                                                                                                  FIN IRL SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NLD            POLCOG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DEU     SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWZ        ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BGR
                                                                                                                                                SEN SLE  SAU COG
                                                                                                                                                        ESP       TGO TCD
                                                                                                                                                                             MOZ          HTI                                                                                                               PER                     KOR      CHL VEN     KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PRTCHN                         CUB     GRC
                                                                                                               NIC    PAN THA FIN EST
                                                                                                                        KHM         LVA BLR
                                                                                                                                        NZLUZB
                                                                                                                                            KWT
                                                                                                                                            QAT
                                                                                                                                          LTU      BFALBR
                                                                                                                                                        GIN CIV   GHA GAB
                                                                                                                                                                 IRQ     UGA               SOM                                                                                                                                                  PRK NOR QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COL                          BTN
                                                                                                                      JPN                  LUX
                                                                                                                                          ARE      ARMCZE SWZ           FRA                                                                                                                      PRY        GTM        HND      BLZ       BWA          ARE AUS NAM            CAF                     ITA
                                                                                                  MEX PNG                  BWA IRL SWE  NLDDNK
                                                                                                                                      NOR      BEL
                                                                                                                                               AUS           HUNNPL
                                                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                                SVN
                                                                                                                                                              CHECAF
                                                                                                                                                               SVK
                                                                                                                                                              GNQ        ALB
                                                                                                                                                                           CUB      DOM                                                                                                                                     LAO                                             BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GNQ
                                                                                                                     KOR                   PRT     NAM  POL
                                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                                         USA            BGR                                                                                                                                                           VNM              CRI                                    MWI
                                                                                                              LAO               VEN                           BEN                  GRC                                                                                                                                                                               ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GUY                                TZA
                                                                               PRY                   HND         BLZ                                        BTN
                                                                                      PER                             VNMCHLCOLPRK                    ZMB
                                                                                                                                                    GUY                                                                                                                                                        MNG ECU                                    BRA
                                                                                        GTM MNG                                       CRICHN                                  MWI    ITA                                                                                                   BOL                                              KGZ                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                            KGZ          BRA                                           TZA
                                                                                                                                          TKM                                                                                                                                                                                                            TKM
                                                                                              ECU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                         -.05




                                                                       BOL                                                              CAN
                                                                                                                                                                               ARG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                                                       KAZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KAZ

                                                                -.1                           -.05                                                 0                                                 .05                                                                        -.1                             -.05                                                 0                                                     .05

                                                                                                                   (Residuals)                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Residuals)
                                                                                        Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)                                                                                                                                                                          Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)

                                                                      Africa         Europe                Asia            Oceania                 N. America                   S. America                                                                                            Africa           Europe             Asia               Oceania                 N. America                        S. America


      Relationship in the global sample; conditional on baseline geographical controls                                                                                                                                Relationship in the global sample with influential outliers eliminated; conditional on baseline geographical controls
      Slope coeﬃcient = 0.443; (robust) standard error = 0.101; t-statistic = 4.401; partial R-squared = 0.129; observations = 151                                                                                    Slope coeﬃcient = 0.257; (robust) standard error = 0.058; t-statistic = 4.407; partial R-squared = 0.085; observations = 146




                                                                                     (a) Full sample                                                                                                                                                                                             (b) Outliers omitted

                             Figure 2: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries

Notes: This figure depicts the global cross-country relationship between contemporary population diversity and the annual
frequency of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets during the 1960–2017 time period, conditional on the baseline geographical
correlates of conflict, as considered by the specification in Column 2 of Table I. The relationship is depicted for either an
unrestricted sample of countries (Panel (a)) or a sample that omits apparently influential outliers (Panel (b)). Each of the two
panels presents an added-variable plot with a partial regression line. Given that the unrestricted sample employed by the left
panel is not constrained by the availability of data on other covariates considered by the analysis in Table I, the regression
coefficients reported in this panel are marginally different from those presented in Column 2 of Table I. The set of influential
outliers omitted from the sample in Panel (b) includes Bosnia and Herzegovina (BIH), Ethiopia (ETH), Georgia (GEO), India
(IND), and Ukraine (UKR).



per year, or 68 percent of a standard deviation of the cross-country conflict frequency distribution.
Moreover, the adjusted R2 statistic of the regression suggests that the full empirical model explains
about 36 percent of the cross-country variation in conflict frequency, whereas the partial R2 statistic
associated with population diversity indicates that 5 percent of the residual cross-country variation
in conflict frequency can be explained by the residual cross-country variation in population diversity.
Addressing Endogeneity The results thus far demonstrate a highly significant and robust
cross-country association between population diversity and the temporal frequency of civil conflict
onsets over the last half-century, even after conditioning the analysis on a sizable set of controls for
geographical characteristics, ethnolinguistic fragmentation, institutional factors, and development
outcomes. Nevertheless, this association could be marred by endogeneity bias, in light of the
possibility that the large-scale human migrations of the post-1500 era – as captured by the ancestry-
adjusted measure of interpersonal diversity for contemporary national populations – and the spatial
pattern of conflicts in the modern era could be codetermined by common unobserved forces (e.g.,
the spatial pattern of historical conflicts) that may not be fully accounted for by covariates.
Although the stability of the coefficient of interest across specifications suggests that selection
on unobservables needs to be unreasonably strong to fully explain away the main finding, one
cannot rely entirely on OLS point estimates to assess causality.19 Thus, as discussed previously
in Section 3.1, the analysis exploits two alternative identification strategies to address this issue.
The specifications in Columns 9–10 implement the first approach to causal identification by simply
restricting the OLS estimator to exploit variations in a subsample of countries that only belong
to the Old World. Then, in Columns 11–12, the analysis conducts 2SLS regressions that employ
the migratory distance of the prehistorically native population in each country from East Africa as
            19
                                       For a more formal analysis of selection on observables and unobservables, see Appendix A.2.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
an instrument for the country’s contemporary population diversity. The identifying assumption is
that migratory distance from East Africa is plausibly exogenous to the risk of civil conflict in the
post-1960 time period, conditional on the sizable vector of control variables.
        As is evident from the regressions in Columns 9–12, the two alternative identification
strategies yield remarkably similar results, with the point estimate of the coefficient on population
diversity being noticeably larger in magnitude, relative to its less well-identified counterpart in the
global-sample OLS regressions (from either Column 3 or Column 8). In particular, the coefficient
is highly statistically significant across the four better-identified specifications, and as estimated
by the 2SLS regression in Column 12, it suggests that a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of the global cross-country distribution of population diversity is associated with an increase in
conflict frequency by 0.041 new PRIO25 civil conflict outbreaks per year, corresponding to 133
percent of a standard deviation of the global cross-country conflict frequency distribution.
        There are plausibly three distinct rationales – perhaps operating in tandem – for why the
better-identified point estimates of the coefficient on population diversity are larger than their
less well-identified counterparts. First, the spatial pattern of social conflict may exhibit long-term
persistence for reasons other than population diversity. If persistent conflict spurred emigrations
and atrocities that gradually led to systematically more homogeneous populations (Fletcher and
Iyigun, 2010) in conflict-prone areas, there should be a downward bias in the estimated coefficient
on population diversity in an OLS regression that explains the global variation in civil conflict
potential in the modern era.
        A second plausible explanation is that the pattern of conflict risk in the modern era,
especially across populations in the New World that experienced a substantial increase in diversity
from migrations in the post-1500 era, has been influenced not so much by the higher population
diversity of the immigrants but more so by the unobserved (or observed but noisily measured)
human capital that European settlers brought with them, the colonization strategies that they
pursued, and the socio-political institutions that they established. To the extent that these
unobserved factors associated with European settlers in the New World served, in one way or
another, to reduce the risk of social conflict in the modern national populations of the Americas
and Oceania, they could also introduce a negative bias in the OLS estimates of the relationship
between population diversity and conflict risk in a global sample of countries.
        A third possible rationale is that in the end, population diversity explains the conflict
propensity of a population mostly through its prehistorically determined component. This compo-
nent may have contributed to the formation and ethnic differentiation of native groups in a given
location and, thus, to more deeply rooted inter-ethnic divisions amongst these groups. As such,
conditional on continent fixed effects that absorb any systematic differences in the pattern of post-
1500 population flows into locations in the Old World versus the New World, the ancestry-adjusted
measure of interpersonal diversity – which incorporates the diversity of both native and non-native
groups in a contemporary national population – might be a noisy proxy for the “true” measure of
prehistorically determined population diversity. Therefore, as a result of this “measurement error,”
the influence of the ancestry-adjusted measure of population diversity might be attenuated in an
OLS regression that exploits worldwide variations.
        Given that both of the identification strategies ultimately exploit the variation in population
diversity across populations that have been prehistorically indigenous to their current locations,
either by omitting the modern national populations of the New World from the estimation sample or
by instrumenting contemporary population diversity in a globally representative sample of countries
with the prehistoric migratory distance of a country’s geographical location from East Africa, the
better-identified estimates mitigate all the aforementioned sources of negative bias.



                                                  17
Robustness Checks The analysis in Appendix A.2 shows that population diversity possesses
significant power for explaining the cross-country variation in the total count of new conflict onsets
during the 1960–2017 time period (Table A.II). It also establishes the robustness of the baseline
cross-country findings to accounting for: spatial dependence across observations by estimating
spatial regressions (Table A.III); and the property of population diversity as a generated regressor
by bootstrapping the standard errors (Table A.IV).
         Further, Section A.1 of the Supplemental Material presents several robustness checks for
the cross-country analysis of the influence of population diversity on the temporal frequency of
civil conflict outbreaks in the post-1960 time horizon. It demonstrates that the main findings
are qualitatively robust to (1) accounting for various ecological and climatic covariates, including
the temporal means and volatilities of annual temperature and precipitation over the relevant
sample period as well as time-invariant measures of ecological fractionalization and polarization
(Table SA.I); (2) accounting for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, state antiquity, the
duration of human settlement, and distance from the regional technological frontier in 1500 (Ta-
ble SA.II); (3) accounting for inequality across ethnic homelands as well as overall spatial inequality
in nighttime luminosity within a country (Table SA.III); (4) accounting for linguistic rather
than ethnic fractionalization as a baseline covariate (Table SA.IV); (5) accounting for alternative
measures of ethnolinguistic fractionalization and polarization, based on the spatial distribution
of language homelands and on gridded population data (Table SA.V); (6) accounting for the
initial-year values of time-varying baseline covariates rather than their temporal means over the
sample period (Table SA.VI); (7) accounting for spatial autocorrelation in unobserved heterogeneity
(Table SA.VII); and (8) the elimination of world regions from the estimation sample that could
have been statistically influential for generating the key empirical pattern (Table SA.VIII).

3.2.2    Analysis of Civil Conflict Incidence in Repeated Cross-Country Data
The analysis now proceeds to examine the temporal prevalence of civil conflict. Specifically,
exploiting the time structure of quinquennially repeated cross-country data, it investigates the
predictive power of population diversity for the likelihood of observing the incidence of one or more
active conflict episodes in a given 5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time horizon. The following
probit model is therefore estimated using maximum-likelihood estimation.
            ∗            [i + γ20 GEOi + γ30 IN Si,t−1 + γ40 ET Hi + γ50 DEVi,t−1 + γ6 Ci,t−1
         CPi,t = γ0 + γ1 DIV
                      + γ70 δt + ηi,t ≡ γ 0 Zi,t + ηi,t ;                                                       (2)
                                                          ∗
                                                             ≥ D∗ ;
                                                                  
                                              Ci,t = 1 CPi,t                                                    (3)
                                                       ∗
                                                         ≥ D∗ |Zi,t = Φ γ 0 Zi,t − D∗ ,
                                                                                    
                      P r (Ci,t   = 1|Zi,t ) = P r CPi,t                                                        (4)
where CPi,t∗ is a latent variable measuring the potential for an active conflict episode in country i

during any given 5-year interval, t, and it is modeled as a linear function of explanatory variables. In
particular, the time-invariant explanatory variables DIV[i , GEOi , and ET Hi are all as previously
defined, but now, the time-varying covariates included in IN Si,t−1 and DEVi,t−1 enter as their
respective temporal means over the previous 5-year interval. Further, δt is a vector of time-
interval (5-year period) dummies, and ηi,t is a country-period-specific disturbance term.20 By
   20
      The robustness of the current analysis of conflict incidence to exploiting variations in annually (rather than
quinquennially) repeated cross-country data is confirmed in Appendix A.2. Naturally, in those regressions, the time-
dependent covariates enter as their lagged annual values (instead of their lagged 5-year temporal means) and time
fixed effects are captured by a set of year dummies.



                                                            18
specifying each of the time-varying controls to enter the model with a one-period lag, the analysis
aims to mitigate the concern that the use of contemporaneous measures of these covariates may
exacerbate reverse-causality bias in their estimated coefficients.21 Finally, the model assumes that
contemporary conflict potential additionally depends on the lagged incidence of civil conflict, Ci,t−1 ,
which accounts for the possibility that countries with a conflict experience in the immediate past
may exhibit a higher conflict potential in the current period, mainly because of the intertemporal
spillovers that are common to most conflict processes – e.g., the self-reinforcing nature of past
casualties on either side of a conflict.22 Because the continuous variable reflecting conflict potential,
    ∗ , is unobserved, its level can only be inferred from the binary incidence variable, C , indicating
CPi,t                                                                                         i,t
whether the latent conflict potential was sufficiently intense for the annual battle-related death
threshold of a civil conflict episode to have been surpassed during a given 5-year interval. As is
evident from equations (3)-(4), D∗ is the corresponding threshold for unobserved conflict potential,
and it appears as an intercept in Φ (.), the cumulative distribution function for the disturbance
term, ηi,t .
          The main results for the temporal prevalence (or incidence) of PRIO25 civil conflict episodes
are presented in Columns 1–4 of Table II. In the interest of brevity, the analysis exclusively reports
the better-identified point estimates – namely, from probit regressions in a sample of countries
belonging only to the Old World, and from IV probit regressions that exploit migratory distance
from East Africa as an instrument for contemporary population diversity in a global sample of
countries. For each of these two identification strategies, two distinct specifications are estimated;
one that partials out the influence of only exogenous geographical covariates (including continent
fixed effects), and another that conditions the analysis on the full set of control variables from the
empirical model of conflict incidence.
          As is evident from the results, interpersonal population diversity enters all four specifications
with a positive and highly significant coefficient. To interpret the coefficient of interest, the IV probit
regression presented in Column 4 suggests that conditional on the complete set of control variables,
a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity leads to an increase in the quinquennial
likelihood of a PRIO25 civil conflict incidence by 2.6 percentage points. Indeed, this sample-wide
average marginal effect of population diversity is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. In
addition, the economic significance of population diversity for conflict incidence is evident in the
plots presented in Figure SA.1 in Section A.3 of the Supplemental Material. Based on the regressions
in Columns 2 and 4, these plots illustrate how the predicted quinquennial likelihood of a civil conflict
incidence varies as one moves along the cross-country distribution of population diversity in the
relevant estimation sample. Specifically, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the cross-
country distribution of population diversity leads to an increase in the predicted quinquennial
likelihood of civil conflict incidence from about 23 to 33 percent amongst countries in the Old
World, and from about 18 to 34 percent in the global sample of countries.
  21
     An alternative method to address the reverse-causality problem, in the context of quinquennially repeated cross-
country data, would have been to control for time-dependent covariates as measured in the initial year of each 5-year
interval. Although this method would retain the first-period observation for each country, which is dropped under
the current specification, it leaves open the possibility that the presence or absence of an active conflict in the first
year of each period may still exert a direct influence on the time-varying controls.
  22
     In adopting this strategy, the current analysis of conflict incidence follows Esteban et al. (2012). It may also
be noted here that because the measure of population diversity is time-invariant (as is the case with all known
measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation, based on fractionalization or polarization indices), the analysis is unable
to either account for country fixed effects or exploit dynamic panel estimation methods, despite the time dimension
of the repeated cross-country data. In all regressions exploiting such data, however, the robust standard errors of the
estimated coefficients are always clustered at the country level.




                                                           19
Table II: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-
Country Data

Cross-country sample:                                       Old World                      Global               Old World                   Global
                                                       (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)
                                                      Probit       Probit        IV Probit     IV Probit     Probit      Probit   IV Probit     IV Probit
                                                            Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict                        Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                                  incidence, 1960–2017                                     onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)             13.366***   12.203***       14.304***     13.578***     6.172**    6.356**    7.066***     8.804***
                                                      (3.700)     (3.787)         (3.652)       (4.210)      (2.576)    (2.645)     (2.594)      (3.170)
Ethnic fractionalization                                          −0.399                        −0.519                  −0.084                   −0.322
                                                                  (0.353)                       (0.332)                 (0.252)                  (0.280)
Ethnolinguistic polarization                                       0.049                         0.322                   0.172                    0.334
                                                                  (0.344)                       (0.340)                 (0.248)                  (0.254)
Continent dummies                                       ×               ×           ×                 ×        ×           ×          ×               ×
Time dummies                                            ×               ×           ×                 ×        ×           ×          ×               ×
Controls for temporal spillovers                        ×               ×           ×                 ×        ×           ×          ×               ×
Controls for geography                                  ×               ×           ×                 ×        ×           ×          ×               ×
Controls for institutions                                               ×                             ×                    ×                          ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                ×                             ×                    ×                          ×
Observations                                           1,270       1,045           1,583            1,311     5,452      4,377      6,996            5,757
Countries                                               123         121             150              147       123        121        150              147
Pseudo R2                                              0.416       0.440                                      0.131      0.161
Marginal effect of diversity                         2.553***     2.261***       2.817***      2.595***      0.324**    0.332**    0.336**       0.421**
                                                      (0.683)      (0.709)        (0.741)       (0.850)      (0.139)    (0.140)    (0.133)       (0.170)
FIRST STAGE                                                                       Population diversity                              Population diversity
                                                                                  (ancestry adjusted)                               (ancestry adjusted)
Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                               −0.068***     −0.066***                          −0.068***     −0.066***
                                                                                  (0.006)       (0.006)                            (0.006)       (0.006)
First-stage F statistic                                                           145.394           99.876                         151.502       102.614

Notes: This table exploits variations in repeated cross-country data to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact
of contemporary population diversity on the likelihood of observing (i) the incidence of a PRIO25 civil conflict in any given
5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time period (Columns 1–4); and (ii) the onset of a new PRIO25 civil conflict in any
given year during the 1960–2017 time period (Columns 5–8), conditional on ethnic diversity measures as well as the proximate
geographical, institutional, and development-related correlates of conflict. The controls for geography include absolute latitude,
ruggedness, distance to the nearest waterway, the mean and range of agricultural suitability, the mean and range of elevation,
and an indicator for small island nations. The controls for institutions include a set of legal origin dummies, comprising two
indicators for British and French legal origins, as well as six time-dependent covariates, comprising the degree of executive
constraints, two indicators for the type of political regime (democracy and autocracy), and three indicators for experience as
a colony of the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power. The control for oil presence is a time-invariant indicator
for the discovery of a petroleum (oil or gas) reserve by the year 2003. The controls for population and income are the time-
dependent log-transformed values of total population and GDP per capita. In Columns 1–4, all time-dependent covariates
assume their average annual values over the previous 5-year interval, whereas in Columns 5–8, they assume their annual values
from the previous year. To account for duration dependence and temporal spillovers in conflict outcomes, all regressions control
for the lagged incidence of conflict, and the regressions in Columns 5–8 additionally control for a set of cubic splines of the
number of peace years. For regressions based on the global sample, the set of continent dummies includes five indicators for
Africa, Asia, North America, South America, and Oceania, whereas for regressions based on the Old-World sample, the set
includes two indicators for Africa and Asia. The IV probit regressions exploit prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa
to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population
diversity. The estimated marginal effect of a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity is the average marginal effect
across the entire cross-section of observed diversity values, and it reflects the increase in either the quinquennial likelihood of a
conflict incidence (Columns 1–4) or the annual likelihood of a conflict onset (Columns 5–8), both expressed in percentage points.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



Robustness Checks The analysis in Appendix A.2 shows that the influence of population
diversity on the incidence or prevalence of conflict is robust to: considering alternative defini-
tions and types of intrastate conflict as the outcome variable, such as the prevalence of large-
scale civil conflicts (i.e., “civil wars”) and of intrastate conflicts involving only non-state actors
(Table A.V); exploiting variations in annually rather than quinquennially repeated cross-country
data (Table A.VI, Columns 1–4); and considering an alternative coding of conflict prevalence that
captures the share of years with an active civil conflict in a given 5-year interval (Table A.VI,
Columns 5–8).

                                                                            20
        Further, Section A.2 of the Supplemental Material demonstrates that the main findings
for the impact of population diversity on civil conflict incidence are qualitatively insensitive to
(1) accounting for time-invariant fractionalization and polarization indices of ecological diversity
as well as time-varying climatic covariates, including the inter-annual means and volatilities of
temperature and precipitation over the previous 5-year interval (Table SA.X, Columns 1–4); (2) ac-
counting for various deep-rooted correlates of long-run economic development, such as the depth of
state antiquity, the time elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution, the duration of human settlement,
and distance to the year-1500 technological frontier (Table SA.XI, Columns 1–4); (3) accounting
for inequality in nighttime luminosity across gridded space and across ethnic homelands within
a country (Table SA.XII, Columns 1–4); (4) accounting for alternative distributional indices of
intergroup diversity (Alesina et al., 2003; Fearon, 2003; Esteban et al., 2012) and for additional
time-invariant geographical and historical correlates of conflict incidence potential, including the
percentage of mountainous terrain, the presence of noncontiguous subnational territories, and the
intensity of the disease environment (Table SA.XIII); (5) empirically modeling conflict prevalence
using either classical logit or “rare events” logit (King and Zeng, 2001) estimators, in lieu of the
standard probit estimator (Table SA.XIV, Columns 1–4); and (6) allowing for spatiotemporal
dependence across country-time observations by exploiting two-dimensional clustering of standard
errors (Table SA.XV, Columns 1–4).
        Finally, akin to the current analysis of conflict prevalence, the analysis in Appendix A.1
exploits variations in quinquennially repeated cross-country data to establish interpersonal popula-
tion diversity as a significant predictor of the intensity of social conflicts. In particular, it examines
both ordinal and continuous measures that capture the “severity” of intrastate conflicts and of
events related to general social unrest, including but not limited to armed conflict.

3.2.3    Analysis of Civil Conflict Onset in Repeated Cross-Country Data
This section examines the onset of civil conflict. Unlike the model of conflict incidence, the onset
model focuses solely on explaining the outbreak of conflict events, classifying the subsequent years
into which a given conflict persists as nonevent years (akin to civil peace), unless they coincide
with the eruption of a “new” conflict.23 Conceptually, this analysis assesses the extent to which
population diversity at the national level influences socio-political instability by triggering conflicts,
rather than contributing to their perpetuation over time. The probit model for the analysis of
conflict onset is similar to the one for conflict incidence, as described by equations (2)-(4), but
with two notable exceptions. Specifically, following the convention in the literature, the model
(i) exploits variations in annually repeated cross-country data, with the binary outcome variable
assuming a value of 1 if a country-year observation coincides with the first year of a new civil
conflict, and 0 otherwise; and (ii) controls for a set of cubic splines in the number of preceding years
of uninterrupted peace, along with year dummies, in order to account for temporal or duration
dependence (Beck et al., 1998). To mitigate issues of causal identification of the influence of
population diversity on conflict onset, the analysis implements the same two strategies followed by
the preceding analyses of conflict frequency and conflict incidence.
        The main results for the onset of new PRIO25 civil conflicts are presented in Columns 5–8
of Table II. Irrespective of the identification strategy employed, or the set of covariates considered
by the specification, population diversity appears to confer a statistically significant and robust
positive influence on the annual likelihood of new civil conflict outbreaks. To elucidate the economic
  23
     A “new” civil conflict in a country is defined as one involving a previously unobserved set of actors and/or a
previously unobserved set of contentious issues.



                                                        21
significance of this impact in the global sample of countries, the sample-wide average marginal effect
estimated by the specification in Column 8 suggests that conditional on the complete set of control
variables, a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity leads to an increase in the annual
likelihood of a new PRIO25 civil conflict outbreak by 0.4 percentage points. Further, based on
the regressions in Columns 6 and 8, the plots presented in Figure SA.2 in Section A.3 of the
Supplemental Material depict how the predicted annual likelihood of a new conflict onset responds
as one moves along the cross-country distribution of population diversity in the relevant estimation
sample. For instance, in response to a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the cross-
country distribution of population diversity, the predicted annual likelihood of a new conflict onset
rises from about 1.9 to 3.4 percent in the Old-World sample of countries, and from about 1.1 to
3.6 percent amongst countries worldwide.
Robustness Checks Section A.2 of the Supplemental Material demonstrates that the main
findings regarding the impact of population diversity on civil conflict onset remain qualitatively
unaffected after (1) accounting for time-invariant fractionalization and polarization indices of
ecological diversity as well as time-varying climatic covariates, including the lagged annual val-
ues of temperature and precipitation and their inter-annual volatilities over the previous 5 years
(Table SA.X, Columns 5–8); (2) accounting for various deep-rooted correlates of long-run economic
development, such as the depth of state antiquity, the time elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution,
the duration of human settlement, and distance to the year-1500 technological frontier (Table SA.XI,
Columns 5–8); (3) accounting for inequality in nighttime luminosity across gridded space and across
ethnic homelands within a country (Table SA.XII, Columns 5–8); (4) empirically modeling conflict
onset using either classical logit or “rare events” logit (King and Zeng, 2001) estimators, in lieu
of the standard probit estimator (Table SA.XIV, Columns 5–8); (5) allowing for spatiotemporal
dependence across country-year observations by exploiting two-dimensional clustering of standard
errors (Table SA.XV, Columns 5–8); (6) accounting for the influence of additional correlates of
conflict onset potential, including the time-invariant “ethnic dominance” indicator of Collier and
Hoeffler (2004) and the time-varying “political instability” and “new state” indicators of Fearon
and Laitin (2003) (Table SA.XVI); and (7) accounting for the contemporaneous and lagged values
of annual price shocks to various export commodities, as studied by Bazzi and Blattman (2014)
(Table SA.XVII).

3.2.4   Analyses of Intra-group Conflict Incidence in Cross-Country and Repeated
        Cross-Country Data
One crucial dimension in which the advanced measure of population diversity adds value beyond
standard indices of ethnolinguistic fragmentation is that it incorporates information on interper-
sonal heterogeneity not only across group boundaries but within such boundaries as well. Thus, in
contrast to standard measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation at the national level, to the extent
that interpersonal diversity can be expected to give rise to social, political, and economic grievances
that culminate to violent contentions even within ethnically or linguistically homogeneous groups,
the measure is naturally better-suited to empirically link population diversity with intra-group
conflicts in society. The analysis in this section provides evidence that supports this important
aspect of the advanced measure, exploiting cross-country variations to establish a positive link
between population diversity and the incidence of intra-group conflict events during the 1985–2006
time period.
        The primary source of the exploited data on the incidence of intra-group conflict events
across the globe is the All Minorities at Risk (AMAR) Phase 1 Sample Data (Birnir et al., 2018).
The AMAR Sample Data is a single integrated data set, combining information on 291 subnational

                                                  22
groups originally included in the Minorities at Risk (MAR) project with information on 74 new
groups randomly selected from the AMAR Sample Frame of “socially relevant” subnational groups,
in order to correct for potential selection issues in the original MAR data (Phases I–V). A “socially
relevant” subnational group is defined as an ethnic group (majority or minority) that satisfies five
criteria outlined and discussed in (Birnir et al., 2015).24 For each subnational group in the AMAR
Sample Data, the data set provides information on whether the group experienced one or more
intra-group conflicts in each year during the 1985–2006 time horizon.
         Table III presents two distinct analyses of intra-group conflict incidence. The outcome
variable for the cross-country analysis (Panel A) is the share of group-years in a given country with
at least one active intra-group conflict over the sample period. For the analysis based on annually
repeated cross-country data (Panel B), the outcome is a binary variable that reflects whether any of
the AMAR groups within a given country experienced one or more intra-group conflicts in a given
year. Depending on the identification strategy from earlier sections (i.e., restricting the estimation
sample to countries in the Old World versus exploiting migratory distance from East Africa as an
excluded instrument for population diversity in a global sample of countries), the analysis employs
either OLS or 2SLS estimators in Panel A, and either probit or IV probit estimators in Panel B.
For each outcome variable, and for each of the two identification strategies, three alternative
specifications are estimated. The first two of these follow from the methodology in previous
sections, in that one conditions the analysis on only exogenous geographical covariates (including
continent fixed effects), whereas the other partials out the influence of the full set of controls for
geographical characteristics, ethnolinguistic fragmentation, institutional factors, and development
outcomes. However, to account for the possibility that the AMAR groups in a given country may
not be fully representative of all its subnational groups, the third specification augments the full
model with additional controls for the total number and the total share of all AMAR groups in the
national population. Finally, in line with the methodology from earlier sections, all time-varying
controls for institutional factors and development outcomes enter the specifications in Panel A
as their respective temporal means over the 1985–2006 time period, whereas in Panel B, these
covariates assume their respective lagged annual values.
         The results in Table III indicate that regardless of the outcome variable examined, the set of
covariates considered, or the identification strategy employed, population diversity has contributed
substantially to the risk of intra-group conflicts during the 1985–2006 time period. This impact is
not only highly statistically significant but considerable in terms of economic significance as well.
For instance, the regression in Column 5 of Panel A suggests that conditional on the full set of
baseline controls, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the global cross-country distribution
of population diversity is associated with an increase of 38 percentage points in the likelihood that
an AMAR group of a country will have experienced an intra-group conflict at some point during
the 1985–2006 time horizon. Moreover, as estimated by the regression in Column 5 of Panel B,
a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity leads to an increase in the likelihood of an
intra-group conflict incidence in any given country-year during this time horizon by 10 percentage
points. Based on the regressions in Columns 2 and 5 of Panel B, the plots presented in Figure SA.3
in Section A.3 of the Supplemental Material illustrate the predicted annual likelihood of an intra-
  24
     These criteria are as follows: (1) Membership in the group is determined primarily by descent by both
members and non-members; (2) Membership in the group is recognized and viewed as important by members
and/or non-members, where importance may be psychological, normative, and/or strategic; (3) Members share some
distinguishing cultural features, such as common language, religion, occupational niche, and customs with respect to
other groups in the country; (4) One or more of these cultural features are either practiced by a majority of the group
or preserved and studied by a set of members who are broadly respected by the wider membership for so doing; and
(5) The group has at least 100,000 members or constitutes one percent of the national population.



                                                          23
                               Table III: Population Diversity and Intra-group Conflict

Cross-country sample:                                               Old World                                   Global
                                                       (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)                (6)
PANEL A                                                OLS             OLS          OLS          2SLS          2SLS               2SLS
                                                                 Share of AMAR group-years with intra-group conflict, 1985–2006
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)              4.456**        4.267**       3.580**      5.728***     5.606***         5.124***
                                                      (1.692)        (1.711)       (1.694)       (1.761)      (1.879)          (1.894)
Continent dummies                                       ×                ×           ×             ×             ×                 ×
Controls for geography                                  ×                ×           ×             ×             ×                 ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                            ×           ×                           ×                 ×
Controls for institutions                                                ×           ×                           ×                 ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                 ×           ×                           ×                 ×
Controls for number/share of AMAR groups                                             ×                                             ×
Observations                                             91             91            91          115           115               115
Partial R2 of population diversity                     0.079          0.068         0.051
Adjusted R2                                            0.092          0.187         0.231
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity           0.218***        0.209**       0.175**      0.392***     0.384***         0.351***
                                                      (0.083)        (0.084)       (0.083)       (0.121)      (0.129)          (0.130)
FIRST STAGE                                                                                     Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)
Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                                             −0.061***     −0.057***       −0.057***
                                                                                                (0.007)       (0.008)         (0.008)
First-stage F statistic                                                                          83.366       47.887           47.107
PANEL B                                               Probit          Probit       Probit      IV Probit     IV Probit       IV Probit
                                                                     Annual AMAR intra-group conflict incidence, 1985–2006
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)             25.350***      37.535***    31.687***     31.929***     40.579***       38.375***
                                                      (9.336)        (9.792)      (10.547)      (7.335)       (7.261)         (7.973)
Controls as in same column of Panel A                   ×                ×           ×             ×             ×                 ×
Time dummies                                            ×                ×           ×             ×             ×                 ×
Observations                                           1,658          1,658         1,658        2,179         2,179              2,179
Countries                                               90             90            90           114           114                114
Pseudo R2                                              0.207          0.338         0.390
Marginal effect of diversity                         7.378***        9.107***     7.067***      8.717***     10.318***        9.402***
                                                      (2.528)         (2.301)      (2.428)       (1.992)      (2.008)          (2.212)
FIRST STAGE                                                                                     Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)
Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                                             −0.061***     −0.060***       −0.060***
                                                                                                (0.007)       (0.007)         (0.007)
First-stage F statistic                                                                          74.527       66.911           66.939

Notes: This table exploits variations across countries and years to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on (i) the share of group-years of a country during the 1985–2006 time period in which
an “all minorities at risk” (AMAR) ethnic group of the country experienced an intra-group conflict (Panel A); and (ii) the
likelihood of observing the incidence of an intra-group conflict across a country’s AMAR ethnic groups in any given year during
the 1985–2006 time period (Panel B), conditional on ethnic diversity measures, the proximate geographical, institutional,
and development-related correlates of conflict, and measures capturing the number and total share of AMAR groups in the
national population. The controls for geography include absolute latitude, ruggedness, distance to the nearest waterway, the
mean and range of agricultural suitability, the mean and range of elevation, and an indicator for small island nations. The
controls for ethnic diversity include ethnic fractionalization and polarization. The controls for institutions include a set of
legal origin dummies, comprising two indicators for British and French legal origins, as well as six time-dependent covariates,
comprising the degree of executive constraints, two indicators for the type of political regime (democracy and autocracy), and
three indicators for experience as a colony of the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power. The control for oil
presence is a time-invariant indicator for the discovery of a petroleum (oil or gas) reserve by the year 2003. The controls for
population and income are the time-dependent log-transformed values of total population and GDP per capita. In Panel A, all
time-dependent covariates assume their average annual values over the entire 1985–2006 time period, whereas in Panel B, they
assume their annual values from the previous year. For regressions based on the global sample, the set of continent dummies
includes five indicators for Africa, Asia, North America, South America, and Oceania, whereas for regressions based on the
Old-World sample, the set includes two indicators for Africa and Asia. The 2SLS and IV probit regressions exploit prehistoric
migratory distance from East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the
country’s contemporary population diversity. In Panel A, the estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity
from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the share of group-years of
a country in which an intra-group conflict was experienced by an AMAR ethnic group. In Panel B, the estimated marginal
effect of a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity is the average marginal effect across the entire cross-section
of observed diversity values, and it reflects the percentage-point increase in the annual likelihood of an intra-group conflict
incidence. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors (clustered at the country level in Panel B) are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.


                                                                    24
group conflict incidence as a function of the percentile of the cross-country distribution of population
diversity in the relevant estimation sample. Specifically, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of this distribution is predicted to raise the annual likelihood of an intra-group conflict incidence
from about 13 to 55 percent amongst countries in the Old World, and from about 9 to 62 percent
in the global sample of countries.

3.2.5      Analysis of Historical Conflict Outcomes in Cross-Country Data
The analysis has thus far been confined to examining intrastate conflict events in the last half-
century. This restriction permitted it to focus on the post-independence time period of the former
European colonies, exploit better quality data and codings for intrastate conflict events, and employ
time-varying controls for institutional and development outcomes, as is standard in civil conflict
regressions. However, there is no a priori reason why the conflict-promoting role of population
diversity should not extend to the distant past.
        This section investigates whether population diversity predicts historical conflict events
in a cross-section of countries. Specifically, the analysis exploits information on the locations of
violent conflicts during the 1400–1799 time period, as compiled by Brecke (1999) and geocoded by
Dincecco et al. (2015), employing the geocoding of conflict locations to map these historical conflicts
to territories defined by contemporary national borders. The examined time period excludes the
colonial wars of the 19th and early 20th centuries, many of which were associated with the Scramble
for Africa. In particular, because these wars occurred as a consequence of local resistance to the
European colonizers or were triggered by the conflicting interests of the different colonial powers,
they are not expected to be related to local population diversity in a meaningful way.
        The definition of a violent conflict in Brecke’s data set is based on Cioffi-Revilla (1996):“An
occurrence of purposive and lethal violence among 2+ social groups pursuing conflicting political
goals that results in fatalities, with at least one belligerent group organized under the command
of authoritative leadership. The state does not have to be an actor. Data can include massacres
of unarmed civilians or territorial conflicts between warlords.” The list is comprised of conflicts
that resulted in at least 32 fatalities.25 Further, although the data set does not systematically
distinguish between intrastate and interstate conflicts, the latter appear to form the basis of the
recorded conflicts. Finally, while the recorded conflicts do not necessarily represent the universe of
conflict events during the sample period, the list contains almost all major conflicts that have been
documented by historians.
        In contrast to the analysis of modern conflicts, the explanatory variable of interest in the
current analysis is the precolonial population diversity (predicted by migratory distance from East
Africa) of a territory bounded by its contemporary national borders. By construction, this measure
does not account for the impact of post-1500 migrations on population diversity. In addition, it
is not clear at the outset if one should expect any systematic relationship between the native
population diversity of a given territory and the outbreak of interstate – as opposed to internal –
conflicts in that territory. However, given that the measure of precolonial population diversity is
collinear in migratory distance from East Africa, if a conflict’s location is relatively close to the
native territories of the warring parties in the conflict, the measure should possess some explanatory
power for the onset of such conflicts. Because the conflicts examined occurred during a time
period when long-distance campaigns were uncommon, due to the constraints imposed by historical
transportation and warfare technologies, precolonial population diversity could in principle explain
a considerable part of the variation in interstate conflicts across the globe, especially in earlier
periods of the 1400–1799 time horizon.
 25
      This fatality level corresponds to a magnitude of 1.5 or higher on Richardsons (1960) base-10 log conflict scale.


                                                           25
Table IV: Precolonial Population Diversity and the Occurrence of Historical Conflicts across
Countries
Historical period:                           1400–1799     1400–1499    1500–1599    1600–1699    1700–1799     1400–1799     1400–1499    1500–1599    1600–1699        1700–1799
                                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)       (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)             (10)
                                               OLS            OLS          OLS          OLS             OLS      Probit         Probit       Probit       Probit          Probit
                                                       Number of conflict onsets in historical period                       Onset of any conflict in historical period
Population diversity (precolonial)           16.336***      13.561***    10.919***    9.878***      6.456**     18.211***     35.761***    17.266***     17.622***       12.508**
                                              (4.264)        (3.425)      (3.603)      (3.127)      (2.801)      (5.799)       (6.754)      (6.241)       (5.745)         (5.297)
Region dummies                                  ×               ×            ×            ×              ×         ×              ×             ×            ×              ×
Controls for geography                          ×               ×            ×            ×              ×         ×              ×             ×            ×              ×
Observations                                    155            155          155          155             155      155            155           155          155            155
Partial R2 of population diversity             0.104          0.136        0.087        0.064           0.039
Adjusted R2                                    0.354          0.367        0.356        0.251           0.231
Pseudo R2                                                                                                         0.248          0.374        0.285        0.224           0.213
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   31.725***      8.352***     7.603***     5.911***      2.826**     0.541***       0.631***     0.515***     0.560***        0.430***
                                              (8.281)        (2.109)      (2.508)      (1.871)      (1.226)      (0.098)        (0.045)      (0.097)      (0.085)         (0.118)

Notes: This table exploits cross-country variations to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of indigenous
(precolonial) population diversity on (i) the number of conflict onsets (Columns 1–5); and (ii) the likelihood of observing one
or more conflict onsets (Columns 6–10), either during the entire 1400–1799 time period (Columns 1 and 6) or in each century
therein (Columns 2–5 and 7–10), conditional on the baseline geographical correlates of conflict. The controls for geography
include absolute latitude, ruggedness, distance to the nearest waterway, the mean and range of agricultural suitability, the
mean and range of elevation, and an indicator for small island nations. The set of region dummies includes four indicators for
Sub-Saharan Africa, Middle East and North Africa, Europe and Central Asia, and South Asia. The estimated effect associated
with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in
terms of either the number of conflict onsets (Columns 1–5) or the percentage-point increase in the likelihood of a conflict onset
(Columns 6–10) during the time period examined by the regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



         Table IV presents the analysis of historical conflicts. For the specifications in Columns 1–
5, the outcome variable captures the (log-transformed) total number of distinct conflict events
in different time intervals during the 1400–1799 time horizon.26 The specification in Column 1
examines conflicts during the entire time horizon of four centuries, whereas those in Columns 2–5
focus on the conflicts recorded for each individual century of the time horizon. Indeed, the data on
conflicts that occurred prior to the discovery of the New World is expected to be less contaminated
by information on interstate conflicts between warring parties whose combined population diversity
is not representative of the population diversity of the locations in which these conflict occurred.
The specifications in Columns 6–10 replicate the analysis from Columns 1–5, except that the
outcome variable is an indicator for conflict onset that captures whether there was any recorded
conflict event during the specified time interval. All specifications include the geographical controls
from the earlier analysis of modern conflicts. In addition, regional dummies are included in all
regressions to mitigate the concern that Brecke’s conflict data could suffer from a regional bias in
coverage, due to differences across world regions in the quality of primary sources and in the nature
and scale of historical conflict events.27
         The results indicate that pre-colonial population diversity had a statistically significant pos-
itive influence on both the number and the incidence of historical conflicts. This is true for conflicts
that occurred both in the century prior to the discovery of the New World and in the centuries
that followed. However, in line with the prior that the impact of native population diversity on
conflicts ought to dissipate in time periods marred by mostly international or interregional conflicts
(particularly, those involving ancestrally very distant warring populations like the European colonial
   26
     The log transformation is applied to one plus the total number of conflicts in order to retain observations without
any recorded conflict.
  27
     For example, primary sources on historical warfare in Sub-Saharan Africa are relatively scarce (Reid, 2014), and
unlike the large-scale campaigns common in European warfare, historical conflicts in Africa more often took the form
raiding wars.



                                                                                      26
powers versus the natives), the association between population diversity and conflicts is noticeably
weaker in the centuries following the advent of the colonial era.
        The OLS estimate in Column 2 implies that a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile in
the cross-country distribution of population diversity is associated with 8.4 more conflicts during the
15th century. This impact is somewhat larger than those implied by the comparable specifications
for modern civil conflicts.28 This could potentially reflect a waning, albeit significant, influence of
population diversity in more contemporary time periods. However, it could also be a mechanical
consequence of measurement issues associated with the fact that in contrast to the earlier analyses of
modern civil conflicts, the current analysis of historical conflicts does not distinguish between purely
intrastate conflicts and interstate conflicts involving ancestrally proximate warring populations. As
for the economic significance of population diversity for historical conflict incidence, the probit
regression in Column 7 implies that a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile in the cross-
country distribution of population diversity is associated with a 63 percent increase in the likelihood
of observing a conflict during the 15th century.
        In sum, beyond providing temporal external validity to the main findings from the earlier
analyses of civil conflict in the contemporary era, the findings in this section attest to a deep-rooted
and persistent influence of population diversity on the risk of conflict in society – an impact that
is indeed apparent across many centuries.


4        Population Diversity and Conflict at the Ethnicity Level
This section explores the contribution of interpersonal population diversity to the existing variation
in the prevalence and severity of conflicts within ethnic homelands. The focus on ethnic homelands
permits the analysis to disentangle the impact of population diversity within an ethnic group, rather
than across groups, on conflict. The ethnic-level analysis mitigates potential concerns about the
confounding effects of population diversity as well as conflict on national borders.

4.1      Data
The ethnic-level analysis is conducted using two novel geo-referenced datasets of ethnic homelands
across the globe. The first dataset consists of homelands of indigenous ethnic groups (largely
isolated and shielded from genetic admixture) whose levels of diversity is provided by the most
comprehensive source on observed genetic diversity (Pemberton et al., 2013).29 The geo-referenced
dataset maps the genetic diversity of individuals within each ethnic homeland, as reported in
Pemberton et al. (2013), to the geographical characteristics of this homeland.30 The data consists
of 207 ethnic homelands for which genetic diversity is observed.31 The distribution of these ethnic
groups across the globe is depicted in Figure 3. The level of observed genetic diversity ranges from
    28
     For instance, in Column 3 of Table I, the estimated impact of the same move in the cross-country distribution of
population diversity is 0.02 additional civil conflict outbreaks per year – i.e., 2 additional conflicts per century.
  29
     Pemberton et al. (2013) combines eight human genetic diversity datasets based on the 645 loci that they share,
including the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel used by Ashraf and Galor (2013a). Since
ethnic groups have been largely native to their ethnic homelands, at least since the pre-colonial era, the measure of
population diversity within the ethnic groups properly captures the degree of population diversity within the ethnic
homelands.
  30
     Further details on the construction of the dataset are presented in Section B.1 of the Supplemental Material.
  31
     The analysis includes all ethnic groups in Pemberton et al. (2013) that can be mapped into an ethnic homeland,
excluding the Surui of South America. Population geneticists view the Surui as an extreme outlier in terms of genetic
diversity. In particular, Ramachandran et al. (2005) omit the Surui, as “an extreme outlier in a variety of previous
analyses”. Including this observation, nevertheless, does not affect the qualitative results.



                                                         27
                         Figure 3: The Spatial Distribution of Ethnic Homelands

Notes: This map depicts the global spatial distribution of ethnic homelands in the sample. Each point represents the centroid
of the historical homeland of an ethnic group. Red points depict homelands for which population diversity is observed, whereas
blue points depict homelands for which population diversity is predicted.



0.55 among ethnic groups in South America to 0.77 among those in Africa. Appendix A.6 presents
the summary statistics of the sample.
         The second geo-referenced dataset consists of all homelands of ethnic groups, whose geo-
graphical territories are delineated by the GREG (“Geo-Referencing of Ethnic Groups”), as drawn
from the classical Soviet Atlas Narodov Mira (Weidmann et al., 2010). Population diversity within
these ethnic homelands is predicted based on prehistoric migratory distance from Addis Ababa,
using the unconditional relationship between observed genetic diversity and prehistoric migratory
distance from Addis Ababa derived from the 207-ethnic homelands sample.
         While the historical homeland of each ethnic group captures the area of the globe in which
the group is predominantly residing, the vast majority of ethnic homelands tend to be fractionalized,
as indicated by the fact that they are inhabited by multiple linguistic groups. Hence, the analysis of
the impact of interpersonal population diversity on conflict accounts for the potentially confounding
effects of the degree of linguistic fractionalization and polarization within ethnic homelands on
conflict.32
         The main measure of conflict that is used at the ethnic-level analysis is derived from the
UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al., 2002). In particular, the analysis focuses
on the average yearly share of the area of each ethnic homeland, over the period 1989–2008, that
fell within the boundaries of internal armed conflict events (between the government of a state and
internal opposition groups).33 Furthermore, the analysis utilizes a second measure that accounts
for the number of conflict events, the number of deaths, and the number of deaths per event, as
recorded within each ethnic homeland in the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset (Sundberg et al.,
2012; Croicu and Sundberg, 2015).
  32
      As elaborated in Section B.2 of the Supplemental Material, the measures of the degree of ethnolinguistic
fractionalization and polarization in ethnic homelands is based on the proportional representation of each linguistic
group within the ethnic homeland.
   33
      This measure is calculated using the gridded PRIO data (PRIO-GRID version 1.01) as reported by Tollefsen
et al. (2012) based on the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset.




                                                             28
                                             .75



                                              .7



                         Genetic Diversity   .65



                                              .6



                                             .55

                                                   0                         1                         2                        3

                                                                Migratory Distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)

                                                       Africa       Europe       Asia    Oceania           N. America   S. America


                        Relationship in the global sample
                        Slope coefficient = -0.059; (robust) standard error = 0.002; t-statistic = -33.612;
                        partial R-squared = 0.846; observations = 207


Figure 4: Migratory Distance from East Africa and Observed Genetic Diversity across Ethnic
Homelands

Notes: This figure depicts the relationship between prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa and observed population
diversity in a sample of 207 ethnic homelands. The negative relationship reflects the serial founder effect associated with
expansion of humans from East Africa to the rest of the world.



4.2     Empirical Strategy
The analysis implements several empirical strategies to mitigate concerns about the potential role of
reverse causality, omitted cultural, geographical and human characteristics, as well as sorting in the
observed association between population diversity and civil conflicts within ethnic homelands. In
particular, the positive associations between the extent of the observed population diversity within
an ethnic homeland and civil conflict may reflect reverse causality from conflict to population
diversity. It is not inconceivable that in the course of human history, conflicts within ethnic groups
have operated towards homogenization of the population, reducing its observed levels of diversity.
Hence, in order to mitigate concerns about reverse causality, as well as concerns about sample
limitations, the ethnic-level analysis further exploits predicted population diversity, rather than
observed diversity, to explore the effect of diversity on civil conflict. In particular, as caused by
the serial founder effect (e.g., Harpending and Rogers, 2000; Ramachandran et al., 2005; Ashraf
and Galor, 2013a) and depicted in Figure 4, observed population diversity within geographically
indigenous contemporary ethnic groups decreases with distance along ancient migratory paths from
East Africa. Hence, migratory distance from Africa is exploited to predict population diversity for
all ethnic groups in the GREG.
        Furthermore, the associations between ethnic-level population diversity and civil conflicts
may be governed by omitted cultural, geographical and human characteristics. Thus, in order to
mitigate these concerns, the empirical analysis exploits two related strategies. In light of the serial


                                                                                    29
founder effect, the analysis exploits the migratory distance from Africa to each ethnic group as an
instrumental variable for the observed level of population diversity, and as a predictor for its level
of diversity. Nevertheless, there are several plausible scenarios that would weaken this identification
strategy. First, selective migration out of Africa, or natural selection operating in different ways
along the migratory paths, could have affected human traits and therefore conflict independently
of the effect of migratory distance from Africa on the degree of diversity in human traits. Second,
migratory distance from Africa could be correlated with distances from focal historical locations
(e.g., technological frontiers) and could therefore capture the effect of these distances on the process
of development and the emergence of conflicts, rather than the effect of these migratory distances
via population diversity.
         These potential concerns are mitigated, however, by the following observations. First, while
migratory distance from Africa has a significant negative association with the degree of genetic
diversity, it has no apparent association with the mean level of human traits (Ashraf and Galor,
2013a), conditional on the distance from the equator. Second, conditional on migratory distance
from East Africa, migratory distances from historical technological frontiers in the years 1, 1000,
and 1500 do not affect the impact of population diversity on conflict, reinforcing the justification
for the reliance on the “out of Africa” hypothesis and the serial founder effect.
         Moreover, an unlikely threat to the identification strategy would emerge if the actual
migration path out of Africa would have been correlated with geographical characteristics that are
directly conducive to conflicts (e.g., soil quality, ruggedness, climatic conditions, and propensity to
trade). This, however, would have implausibly involved that the conduciveness of these geographical
characteristics to conflict would be aligned along the main root of the migratory path out of Africa,
as well as along each of the main forks that emerge from this primary path. In particular, in
several important forks in the course of this migratory path (e.g., the Fertile Crescent and the
associated eastward migration towards East Asia and western migration towards Europe), the
geographical characteristics that are conducive to conflicts would have to diminish symmetrically
along these diverging migratory routes. Nevertheless, in order to further mitigate this unlikely
concern, the analysis establishes that the results are unaffected qualitatively if it accounts for the
potentially confounding effects of a wide range of geographical factors in the homeland of each ethnic
group. In addition, in order to further mitigate concerns regarding the role of omitted variables,
the analysis accounts for spatial auto-correlation as well as regional fixed effects, capturing time-
invariant unobserved heterogeneity in each region and hence identifying the association between
interpersonal diversity and conflict, within, rather than across, regions. Furthermore, it establishes
that selection on unobservables is not a concern.
         The observed associations between population diversity and the extent of conflicts may
further reflect the sorting of less diverse populations into geographical niches characterized by
lower conflict. While this sorting would not affect the existence of a positive association between
population diversity and the extent of conflict, it could weaken the proposed mechanism. However,
in view of the serial founder effect and the tight negative association between migratory distance
from Africa and population diversity, sorting would necessitate that the ex-ante spatial distribution
of conflict would have to be negatively correlated with migratory distance from Africa. As argued
above, this would have implausibly involved that the conduciveness of geographical characteristics
to conflict would be negatively aligned with the primary migratory path out of Africa, as well as
with each of its diverging forks, diminishing symmetrically along these diverging migratory routes.
Nevertheless, to further mitigate this unlikely scenario, the empirical analysis accounts for the
potentially confounding effects of a wide range of geographical characteristics, as well as regional
fixed effects.



                                                  30
4.3    Empirical Results
This subsection establishes a highly significant and robust reduced-form impact of observed and
predicted diversity within an ethnic homeland on intra-societal conflicts within this homeland.
The analyzes explores the effect of population diversity within ethnic groups on the prevalence of
conflict, as well as on its intensity at the ethnic level. The empirical specifications in the ethnic-
level analysis follows rather closely the specifications in the country-level analysis, assuring the
comparability of the findings.
         Tables V and VI present the results of the baseline analysis of the influence of interpersonal
population diversity within an ethnic homeland on log conflict prevalence over the period 1989–2008.
Table V conducts the analysis for the observed-diversity sample. In particular, Column 1 establishes
a highly significant association between observed diversity across the 207 ethnic homelands and
conflict prevalence, conditional on world-region fixed effects.34 Column 2 demonstrates that — as
depicted in Figure 5 — the association remains highly significant and even increases slightly in
magnitude if one accounts for the potentially confounding effects of some exogenous geographical
factors (i.e., absolute latitude, ruggedness, mean and range of elevation, mean and range of land
suitability, distance from waterway, and an island dummy). Column 3 establishes that accounting
for additional exogenous climatic factors which have been shown to be relevant for conflict (i.e.,
temperature and precipitation), the association between observed diversity and conflict remains
highly significant. The coefficient estimate suggests that an increase in population diversity from
the 10th percentile (e.g., the Mamusi people of Oceania) to the 90th percentile (e.g., the Pare
people of Eastern Africa) corresponds to an average increase of 0.43 in the prevalence of conflicts
within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008 (compared to a sample mean of 0.14
and a standard deviation of 0.27).35 Columns 4 and 5 establishe that the qualitative results are
unaffected by accounting for the potentially confounding effects of linguistic fractionalization and
polarization. Finally, Columns 6 and 7 demonstrate that the estimates remain highly significant
and stable if one accounts for a set of potentially endogenous confounders (i.e., log luminosity,
malaria endemicity, and time since settlement).
         In light of the potential endogeneity of observed population diversity, Table VI presents the
effect of predicted population diversity, based on prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa, on
the prevalence of conflict in a sample of 901 ethnic homelands.36 In particular, Column 1 establishes
a highly significant effect of predicted diversity on log conflict prevalence, conditional on world-
region fixed effects. Column 2 demonstrates that, as depicted in Figure 6, the effect remains highly
significant and stable if one accounts for the potentially confounding effects of some exogenous
geographical factors (i.e., absolute latitude, ruggedness, mean and range of elevation, mean and
range of land suitability, distance from waterway, and an island dummy) as well as additional
exogenous climatic factors which have been shown to be relevant for conflict (i.e., temperature and
precipitation). In particular, the coefficient estimate suggests that an increase in predicted diversity
from the 10th percentile (e.g., the Boruca people of Central America) to the 90th percentile (e.g.,
  34
     The observed sample of 207 ethnic homelands disproportionately represents sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, while
the prevalence of conflict in ethnic homelands in Africa is significantly above the worldwide average, in the observed
sample the prevalence of conflict is below the world average, introducing undesirable biases in the estimation and
necessitating the use of regional-fixed effects, and in particular a Sub-Saharan dummy variable, to account for these
regional anomalies. In contrast, in the representative predicted sample, considered in Table VI, the positive association
between population diversity and conflict, within as well as between continents, can be identified.
  35
     See Appendix A.6.
  36
     The larger coefficient estimates for the impact of diversity on conflict in the predicted sample (relative to the
observed sample) plausibly reflects the more representative spatial coverage of conflicts across the globe. Further,
these larger estimates for predicted diversity are in line with the fact that the 2SLS estimates of instrumented observed
diversity are also larger than their OLS counterparts.


                                                           31
           Table V: Observed Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands

                                                                            Log conflict prevalence
                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                 OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS
  Observed population diversity                28.740∗∗∗   33.896∗∗∗   27.559∗∗∗   27.998∗∗∗   27.619∗∗∗   29.020∗∗∗   28.550∗∗∗
                                                (9.638)    (10.161)     (9.634)     (9.455)     (9.511)    (10.662)    (10.727)
  Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                                 1.291∗∗                 1.088∗
                                                                                    (0.626)                 (0.642)
  Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                   0.811                   0.733
                                                                                                (0.523)                 (0.527)
  Regional dummies                                Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Geographical controls                           No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Climatic controls                               No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Development outcomes                            No          No          No          No          No          Yes         Yes
  Disease environment controls                    No          No          No          No          No          Yes         Yes
  Sample                                       Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed
  Observations                                    207         207         207         207         207         207         207
  Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity   0.449***    0.530***    0.431***    0.438***    0.432***    0.454***    0.446***
                                                (0.151)     (0.159)     (0.151)     (0.148)     (0.149)     (0.167)     (0.168)
  Adjusted R2                                    0.107       0.168       0.298       0.310       0.303       0.316       0.312
  β∗                                                        37.750      26.984      27.645      27.080      29.149      28.462
 Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive impact of observed population
 diversity on the log prevalence of conflict during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on the potentially confounding effects
 of geographic, climatic, and development-related characteristics, as well as the disease environment. World-region fixed
 effects include Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Geographical
 controls are absolute latitude, ruggedness, mean and range of elevation, and mean and range of land suitability, distance
 from waterway, and an island dummy. Climatic controls are the mean levels of temperature and precipitation. Development
 outcomes are time since settlement, presence of oil and gas, and log luminosity. The disease environment control is malaria
 endemicity. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of
 its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the
 years 1989–2008. The β ∗ statistic is the estimated effect of population diversity, if selection on observables and unobservables
 are of equal proportions, and the maximal R2 is equal to 1.3 times the observed R2 (Oster, 2019). Heteroskedasticity-robust
 standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent
 level, and * at the 10 percent level.



the Wafipa people of East Africa) corresponds to an average increase of 1.71 in the prevalence of
conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008 (compared to a sample mean
of 0.19 and a standard deviation of 0.32).
        Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 establish that the qualitative results are unaffected by the
potentially confounding effects of linguistic fractionalization and polarization, accounting for a set
of potentially endogenous confounders (i.e., log luminosity, malaria endemicity, and time since
settlement). Importantly, restricting the analysis to a sample of 697 ethnic homelands in the Old
World, that are arguably less sensitive to the mass-migration in the post-1500 period, Columns 5
and 6 suggest that the effect of predicted diversity on conflict remains highly significant and larger,
plausibly due to smaller measurement errors.
        Finally, using prehistoric migratory distance from Africa as an instrumental variable for
observed population diversity, the 2SLS regression analysis reported in Column 7, suggests that
there exists a highly significant reduced-form impact of population diversity on conflict, accounting
for world-region fixed effects, geographical, and climatic characteristics.37 Furthermore, the results
  37
     The first-stage F -statistic indicates that prehistoric migratory distance is a strong instrument for the level of
observed population diversity. The large 2SLS coefficient on observed diversity, relative to its OLS counterpart from
Column 3 of Table V, may be explained by the following two reasons. First, the OLS estimates may be afflicted by
attenuation bias due to the possibility that observed diversity in neutral genetic markers is merely a noisy proxy of
interpersonal diversity in unobserved traits that are relevant for socioeconomic interactions. Second, in line with the
interpretation of a local average treatment effect (LATE), there could be certain ethnic groups in the observed sample


                                                               32
                                                                       6




                                                                       4




                               Log conflict prevalence
                                                                       2




                                                         (Residuals)
                                                                       0




                                                                       -2




                                                                       -4


                                                                            -.1                   -.05                                                0                      .05

                                                                                                                        (Residuals)
                                                                                                          Genetic diversity (observed)

                                                                                  Africa     Europe            Asia           Oceania            N. America     S. America


                              Relationship in the global sample; conditional on baseline geographical and climatic controls as well as regional dummies
                              Slope coefficient = 27.559; (robust) standard error = 9.250; t-statistic = 2.979; partial R-squared = 0.039; observations = 207




          Figure 5: Observed Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands

Notes: This figure depicts the relationship between observed population diversity and conflict prevalence during the period 1989–
2008 across 207 ethnic homelands, conditional on world-region fixed effects, and potential geographic and climatic confounders,
as reported in Column 3 of Table V.



remain highly significant if one accounts for the potentially confounding effects of linguistic frac-
tionalization and polarization in the ethnic homelands as well as development outcomes and the
disease environment (results available upon request). In line with the results based on predicted
diversity, once the potential change in diversity of ethnic groups due to conflict is accounted for,
the estimated coefficient of interest in Column 7 suggests that an increase in population diversity
from the 10th percentile (e.g., the Mamusi people of Oceania) to the 90th percentile (e.g., the Pare
people of Eastern Africa) corresponds to an average increase of 2.03 in the prevalence of conflicts
within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008 (compared to a sample mean of 0.14
and a standard deviation of 0.27).
        Table A.VIII in Appendix A.5 establishes that population diversity is a significant contrib-
utor to the total number of conflict events within an ethnic homeland during the 1989–2008 time
period. Table A.IX establishes the significant impact of both observed population diversity and
predicted population diversity on the number of conflicts, the number of deaths, and the number of
deaths per conflict, accounting for world-region fixed effects, geographic and climatic characteristics,
as well as linguistic fractionalization and polarization. Further, the baseline results with respect
to the prevalence of conflicts across ethnic homelands are shown to be robust to accounting for:
(i) spatial dependence across observations (Tables A.X and A.XI), and (ii) the use of predicted
population diversity as a generated regressor (Table A.XII).
        Finally, as established in Section B.3 of the Supplemental Material, the baseline results
are qualitatively insensitive to accounting for: (i) migratory distances from historical technological
frontiers (Table SB.I), and (ii) ecological diversity and ecological polarization (Tables SB.II and
SB.III).
that are not perfect compliers of the ”migratory distance” treatment, in the sense that their population diversities
improperly reflect the legacy of the serial founder effect (due to some degree of admixture from non-native populations
in the era of European colonization).




                                                                                                                33
             Table VI: Predicted Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands

                                                                                         Log conflict prevalence
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                           OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS         2SLS
    Predicted population diversity                       77.710∗∗∗   77.031∗∗∗   74.010∗∗∗    73.581∗∗∗    81.354∗∗∗   80.889∗∗∗
                                                          (6.279)     (7.282)     (7.396)      (7.418)      (9.623)     (9.735)
    Observed population diversity                                                                                                  129.610∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                    (32.407)
    Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                              0.347                     0.200
                                                                                  (0.299)                   (0.356)
    Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                0.457∗                  0.629∗∗
                                                                                               (0.263)                  (0.311)
    Regional dummies                                       Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
    Geographical controls                                  No          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
    Climatic controls                                      No          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
    Development outcomes                                   No          No          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         No
    Disease environment controls                           No          No          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         No
    Sample                                               Predicted   Predicted   Predicted    Predicted   Old World    Old World   Observed
    Observations                                            901         901         901          901          697          697        207
    Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity           1.725***    1.710***    1.643***     1.633***     1.019***     1.013***   2.027***
                                                          (0.139)     (0.162)     (0.164)      (0.165)      (0.120)      (0.122)    (0.507)
    Adjusted R2                                            0.211       0.362       0.378        0.379        0.401        0.404
    β∗                                                                76.546      71.535       70.829       73.903       73.187
    Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                                                                             -0.044∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                    (0.009)
    First-stage F -statistic                                                                                                        26.185
 Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive impact of predicted population
 diversity, based on prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa, on the log prevalence of conflict during the 1989–2008
 period, conditional on the potentially confounding effects of geographic, climatic, and development-related characteristics, as
 well as the disease environment. World-region fixed effects include Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania,
 North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Geographical controls are absolute latitude, ruggedness, mean and range of elevation,
 and mean and range of land suitability, distance from waterway, and an island dummy. Climatic controls are the mean
 levels of temperature and precipitation. Development outcomes are time since settlement, presence of oil and gas, and log
 luminosity. The disease environment control is malaria endemicity. The estimated effect associated with increasing population
 diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the prevalence
 of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008. The 2SLS regression exploits prehistoric migratory
 distance from East Africa to each ethnic homeland as an excluded instrument for the observed population diversity of the
 ethnic group. The β ∗ statistic is the estimated effect of population diversity, if selection on observables and unobservables
 are of equal proportions, and the maximal R2 is equal to 1.3 times the observed R2 (Oster, 2019). Heteroskedasticity-robust
 standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent
 level, and * at the 10 percent level.



5        Potential Mediating Channels
What are the proximate factors that could explain the adverse reduced-form influence of inter-
personal population diversity on different forms and dimensions of social conflict? This section
explores some potential mediating channels at the national and subnational levels.

5.1        Ethnic Diversity, Interpersonal Trust, and Dispersion in Political Prefer-
           ences at the Country Level
This subsection examines some hypothesized proximate mechanisms that can potentially mediate
the positive reduced-form cross-country relationship between population diversity and the risk of
intrastate conflict, as reflected by the annual frequency of new PRIO25 civil conflict outbreaks
during the 1960–2017 time period. Specifically, it provides evidence that the main cross-country
empirical finding may partly be a ramification of (i) the contribution of interpersonal population
diversity to the degree of ethnolinguistic fragmentation at the country level, measured by the total




                                                                      34
                                                                     5




                             Log conflict prevalence
                                                       (Residuals)
                                                                     0




                                                                     -5


                                                                          -.06            -.04                    -.02                         0                   .02       .04

                                                                                                                         (Residuals)
                                                                                                          Genetic diversity (predicted)

                                                                                 Africa          Europe       Asia             Oceania          N. America      S. America


                             Relationship in the global sample; baseline geographical and climatic controls as well as regional dummies
                             Slope coefficient = 77.031; (robust) standard error = 7.217; t-statistic = 10.673; partial R-squared = 0.125; observations = 901




          Figure 6: Predicted Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands

Notes: This figure depicts the relationship between predicted population diversity and conflict prevalence during the period
1989–2008 across 901 ethnic homelands, conditional on world-region fixed effects, and potential geographic and climatic
confounders, as reported Column 2 of Table VI.



number of ethnic groups in a national population Fearon (2003);38 (ii) the adverse influence of
population diversity on social capital, based on data from the World Values Survey (2006, 2009)
(henceforth, WVS) on the prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust in a country’s population;39
and (iii) the association between population diversity and heterogeneity in preferences for public
goods and redistributive policies at the national level, as captured by the intra-country dispersion
in self-reported individual political positions on a politically “left”–“right” categorical scale, based
on data from the WVS.40
         Table VII reports the findings from an empirical examination of the aforementioned three
potential mechanisms through which population diversity could partly contribute to the risk of
intrastate conflict in society. For each posited channel, the analysis presents the results from
estimating three different OLS regressions, exploiting worldwide variations in a common sample of
countries, conditioned primarily by the availability of data on the mediating variable in question. In
addition, all examined specifications partial out the influence of only the baseline set of geographical
covariates (including continent or regional fixed effects). Specifically, the analysis does not include
potentially endogenous control variables, many of which (like GDP per capita) may well be afflicted
   38
      Unlike measures of ethnolinguistic fragmentation that are based on fractionalization or polarization indices, the
number of ethnic groups in the national population is potentially less endogenous in an empirical model of the risk
of civil conflict, in light of the fact that this measure is not additionally tainted by the incorporation of information
on the endogenous shares of the different subnational groups.
   39
      In particular, this well-known measure of social capital reflects the proportion in a given country of all respondents
(from across five different waves of the WVS, conducted over the 1981–2009 time horizon) that opted for the answer
“Most people can be trusted” (as opposed to “Can’t be too careful”) when responding to the survey question
“Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing
with people?”
   40
      Specifically, this country-level measure of heterogeneity in political attitudes reflects the intra-country standard
deviation across all respondents (sampled over five different waves of the WVS during the 1981–2009 time horizon)
of their self-reported positions on a categorical scale from 1 (politically “left”) to 10 (politically “right”) when
answering the survey question “In political matters, people talk of ‘the left’ and ‘the right.’ How would you place your
views on this scale, generally speaking?” Given that this variable’s unit of measurement does not possess a natural
interpretation, the cross-country distribution of this variable is standardized prior to conducting the regressions.



                                                                                                               35
Table VII: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Mediating Channels

Mediating channel:                                Cultural fragmentation                     Interpersonal trust                  Preference heterogeneity
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                OLS         OLS         OLS             OLS           OLS           OLS         OLS          OLS         OLS
                                             Log number    Annual frequency         Prevalence of    Annual frequency         Variation      Annual frequency
                                              of ethnic   of new civil conflict     interpersonal   of new civil conflict    in political   of new civil conflict
                                               groups      onsets, 1960–2017            trust        onsets, 1960–2017        attitudes      onsets, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)      5.187***    0.316***    0.294***       −1.817**       0.488**        0.447*     14.344**      0.451**      0.375
                                               (1.887)     (0.114)     (0.109)        (0.848)       (0.221)        (0.236)     (6.675)      (0.219)     (0.254)
Log number of ethnic groups                                             0.004
                                                                       (0.005)
Prevalence of interpersonal trust                                                                                  −0.023
                                                                                                                   (0.026)
Variation in political attitudes                                                                                                                         0.005
                                                                                                                                                        (0.006)
Continent/region dummies                         ×           ×             ×             ×             ×             ×            ×           ×            ×
Controls for geography                           ×           ×             ×             ×             ×             ×            ×           ×            ×
Observations                                    147          147        147              84            84            84           81           81          81
Partial R2 of population diversity             0.049        0.047      0.039           0.075         0.062         0.049        0.082        0.050       0.033
Adjusted R2                                    0.342        0.203      0.201           0.441         0.232         0.226        0.397        0.247       0.249
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity    2.136***    0.021***    0.020***       −0.104**       0.029**        0.026*     0.824**       0.027**      0.022
                                               (0.777)     (0.008)     (0.007)        (0.049)       (0.013)        (0.014)    (0.383)       (0.013)     (0.015)

Notes: This table exploits cross-country variations to demonstrate that the significant positive reduced-form influence of
contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets during the 1960–2017 time
period, conditional on the baseline geographical correlates of conflict, is at least partly mediated by each of three potentially
conflict-augmenting proximate channels that capture the contribution of population diversity to (i) the degree of cultural
fragmentation, as reflected by the number of ethnic groups in the national population (Columns 1–3); (ii) the diminished
prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust at the country level (Columns 4–6); and (iii) the extent of heterogeneity in
preferences for redistribution and public-goods provision, as reflected by the intra-country dispersion in individual political
attitudes on a politically “left”–“right” categorical scale (Columns 7–9). For each of the three mediating channels examined,
the first regression documents the impact of population diversity on the proximate variable in the channel, the second presents
the reduced-form influence of population diversity on conflict, and the third runs a “horse race” between population diversity
and the proximate variable to establish reductions in the magnitude and explanatory power of the reduced-form influence of
population diversity on conflict. All three regressions for each channel are conducted using a common cross-country sample,
conditioned by the availability of data on the relevant variables employed by the analysis of the channel in question. The controls
for geography include absolute latitude, ruggedness, distance to the nearest waterway, the mean and range of agricultural
suitability, the mean and range of elevation, and an indicator for small island nations. The regressions for the “cultural
fragmentation” channel control for the full set of continent dummies (i.e., five indicators for Africa, Asia, North America, South
America, and Oceania), whereas for the “trust” and “preference heterogeneity” channels, given the smaller degrees of freedom
afforded by the more limited sample of countries, the regressions control for a more modest set of region dummies, including
an indicator for Sub-Saharan Africa and another for Latin America and the Caribbean. Given that the unit of measurement
for the variable reflecting the degree of intra-country dispersion in political attitudes has no natural interpretation, its cross-
country distribution is standardized prior to conducting the relevant regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing
diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of (i) the actual number
of ethnic groups in the national population in Column 1; (ii) the fraction of individuals in a country who “think that most
people can be trusted” in Column 4; (iii) the number of standard deviations of the cross-country distribution of the national-
level dispersion in political attitudes in Column 7; and (iv) the number of new conflict onsets per year in all the remaining
columns. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1
percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



by reverse causality from the temporal frequency of civil conflict onsets and may also be partly
determined by both population diversity and the mediating variable.
        The analysis of each mechanism proceeds by first regressing the mediating variable on
population diversity. These regressions are presented in Columns 1, 4, and 7. All coefficients on
the mediating variables are statistically significant at the 5 percent level or below. They suggest
that conditional on exogenous geographical factors, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of the cross-country diversity distribution in the relevant sample is associated with (i) an increase
in the total number of ethnic groups in a national population by 2.1 groups; (ii) a decrease in
the prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust at the country level by 10.4 percent; and (iii) an




                                                                               36
increase in the intra-country dispersion in individual political attitudes by 82.4 percent of a standard
deviation from the cross-country distribution of this particular measure.41
        The latter two regressions in the analysis of each hypothesized channel establish that the
quantitative importance of population diversity as a predictor of the risk of civil conflict becomes
diminished in both magnitude and explanatory power once the reduced-form influence of population
diversity on the temporal frequency of civil conflict outbreaks is conditioned on the mediating
variable of interest. Specifically, a comparison of the regressions in Columns 2 versus 3 indicates
that, when conditioned on the total number of ethnic groups in the national population, the
influence of population diversity on conflict frequency, in terms of the response associated with
a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the cross-country diversity distribution, is reduced
in magnitude by about 5 percent (from 0.021 to 0.020 new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year).
Moreover, the explanatory power of population diversity for conflict frequency, as reflected by the
partial R2 statistic, diminishes by 17 percent. The corresponding results obtained for each of the
other two posited mechanisms are qualitatively similar, and if anything, even more pronounced.
In particular, when conditioned on either the prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust in the
national population or the intra-country dispersion in political attitudes, the magnitude of the
response in conflict frequency that is associated with a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of the cross-country diversity distribution decreases by either 10.3 percent (Columns 5 versus 6) or
18.5 percent (Columns 8 versus 9), with the explanatory power of population diversity for conflict
frequency declining by either 21 percent or 34 percent. Further, as shown in Column 9, the reduced-
form influence of population diversity on the frequency of conflict outbreaks becomes statistically
indistinguishable from zero when conditioned on the intra-country dispersion in political attitudes.
        One important caveat regarding the interpretation of the findings in Table VII is that the
mediating variables considered here may themselves be endogenous in a model of conflict risk
(Rohner et al., 2013a). Indeed, as corroborated by empirical evidence from recent studies (e.g.,
Fletcher and Iyigun, 2010; Rohner et al., 2013b; Cassar et al., 2013; Besley and Reynal-Querol,
2014), the unobserved historical cross-regional pattern of conflict risk may have partly contributed
to the contemporary variations observed across countries in the degree of ethnolinguistic fragmen-
tation, the prevalence of interpersonal trust, and the intra-country dispersion in revealed political
preferences. In particular, past conflicts plausibly triggered movements of ethnic groups across
space and reinforced extant inter-ethnic cleavages along with the social, political, and economic
grievances associated with such divisions. Thus, one ought to be cautious when interpreting the
findings from the current analysis as conclusive evidence of the role of these factors as mediators.
In order to assess these hypothesized mechanisms more conclusively, one would need to exploit an
independent exogenous source of variation for each of these proximate factors, a task that remains
open for future exploration.

5.2    Interpersonal Trust at the Individual Level
The proposed hypothesis suggests that interpersonal population diversity is conducive to conflict
partly due to its adverse effect on trust and social cohesiveness. This section sheds light on
this suggested mechanism, exploring the relationship between interpersonal population diversity
  41
    The three scatter plots presented in Figure A.1 of Appendix A.3 depict these statistically significant cross-country
relationships, conditional on the baseline set of geographical covariates (including continent or region fixed effects).
Specifically, they show the relationship between population diversity and (i) the total number of ethnic groups in a
national population (Panel (a)); (ii) the prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust at the country level (Panel (b));
and (iii) the intra-country dispersion in political attitudes (Panel (c)).




                                                           37
and interpersonal trust, using individual data.42 The analysis establishes that a higher degree of
population diversity is indeed associated with a lower level of interpersonal trust, suggesting that
the impact of diversity on the prevalence of conflict could plausibly operate through the adverse
effect of diversity on trust.

5.2.1    Population Diversity and Trust: Individuals in Africa
The analysis establishes a negative association between observed population diversity in ethnic
homelands in Africa and the level of trust of individuals (surveyed by the Afrobarometer) who
are originated from these homelands and are either residing in their ethnic homelands or in other
regions of Africa. This negative association is robust if one accounts for (i) host-country fixed effects,
(ii) individual-level characteristics (i.e., age, gender, education, occupation, living condition, and
religion), (iii) exposure to slave exports, (iv) indicators of host district characteristics (i.e., presence
of school, electricity, piped water, sewage, health clinic, and urban status), and (v) ancestral
country fixed effects.43 Moreover, the analysis accounts for the degree of fragmentation in the
ethnic homeland as well as in the host district. Fragmentation in ethnic homelands is captured by
linguistic fractionalization and polarization in these ethnic homelands, whereas fragmentation in
the host district is captured by ethnic fractionalization in the district as well as the proportion of
the respondent’s group in the district population.
         Table VIII presents the regression analysis of trust towards other individuals within the eth-
nic group on the level of interpersonal population diversity in the group.44 The coefficient suggests
that an increase in observed population diversity within an ethnic group from the 10th percentile
of the distribution (e.g., individuals belonging to the Ashanti people) to the 90th percentile (e.g.,
individuals belonging to the Sukuma people) corresponds to a 0.29–0.59 point decrease in intra-
group trust (compared to a sample mean of 1.52 and a standard deviation of 1.00). The analysis
further suggests that ethnolinguistic fractionalization and polarization in the ethnic homeland has
an adverse effect on intra-group trust.

5.2.2    Population Diversity and Trust: Second-Generation Migrants (U.S.)
This subsection explores the effect of population diversity in the ancestral country of second-
generation migrants in the United States on their level of trust (as reported in the General
Social Survey, GSS). The focus on a single country permits the analysis to account for time-
invariant unobserved heterogeneity in the host country (e.g., geographical, cultural, and institu-
tional characteristics).45 Moreover, the analysis accounts for a range of individual controls, as well as
geographical characteristics, regional fixed effects, and the degree of ethnolinguistic fractionalization
and polarization, all in the ancestral country of origin.46
  42
      Summary statistics for the trust analysis samples can be found in Section B.4 of the Supplemental Material.
  43
      Since a third of the observations in the sample are individuals who are currently residing in Nigeria, and since
Nigeria has the lowest level of trust among the 9 countries in the sample, possibly due to omitted variables (e.g.,
corruption), and since the level of genetic diversity in Nigeria is not among the highest in the sample, the actual
relationship between diversity and trust may be masked in the absence of country dummies. Thus, all columns of
the table account for host country fixed effects.
   44
      The classification of individuals and their association with various ethnic homelands is based on Nunn and
Wantchekon (2011).
   45
      In addition, the focus on second-generation rather than first-generation migrants allows the analysis to exploit
the individual-level variation in trust that plausibly mostly reflects the trust attitudes transmitted intergenerationally
from parents rather than from society at large.
   46
      Since the sample of second-generation migrants consists of 76% immigrants from Europe, 3% immigrants from
Asia and 21% immigrants from the Americas, and since individuals from Europe has the highest level of trust among



                                                           38
     Table VIII: Ethnic-Homeland Population Diversity and Individual-Level Trust in Africa

                                                                                                     Intra-group trust
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
 Observed population diversity (ancestral)       -39.496∗∗   -38.335∗∗   -45.303∗∗∗    -34.849∗∗   -37.840∗∗   -38.467∗∗   -45.567∗∗∗   -35.190∗∗   -64.122∗∗∗   -70.334∗∗∗
                                                  (17.304)    (15.859)    (12.489)      (17.698)    (17.240)    (15.572)    (10.702)     (15.368)    (16.540)     (20.333)
 Ethnolinguistic fractionalization (ancestral)                              -0.443                                            -0.447                 -0.934∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.314)                                           (0.306)                  (0.228)
 Ethnolinguistic polarization (ancestral)                                              -0.973∗∗∗                                        -0.959∗∗∗                -1.264∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.160)                                          (0.211)                  (0.415)
 District-level ethnic fractionalization                                                             -0.057                  0.006        0.019       0.030        0.027
                                                                                                    (0.052)                 (0.185)      (0.201)     (0.213)      (0.225)
 Proportion of ethnic group in district                                                                          0.076       0.087        0.071       0.037        0.029
                                                                                                                (0.108)     (0.264)      (0.258)     (0.213)      (0.210)
 Host country dummies                               ×           ×            ×             ×          ×            ×           ×            ×           ×            ×
 Baseline individual controls                                   ×            ×             ×          ×            ×           ×            ×           ×            ×
 Education dummies                                                                                                                                      ×            ×
 Occupation dummies                                                                                                                                     ×            ×
 Living conditions dummies                                                                                                                              ×            ×
 Religion dummies                                                                                                                                       ×            ×
 Slave export control                                                                                                                                   ×            ×
 Host district characteristics dummies                                                                                                                  ×            ×
 Ancestral country dummies                                                                                                                              ×            ×
 Urban dummy                                                                                                                                            ×            ×
 Number of Observations                            3212        3212         3212         3212        3212        3212         3212        3212         2916         2916
 Adjusted R2                                       0.218       0.225       0.230         0.234       0.225       0.226       0.230        0.234       0.289        0.287
 Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity      -0.331**    -0.321**    -0.379***     -0.292**    -0.317**    -0.322**    -0.382***    -0.295**    -0.537***    -0.589***
                                                  (0.145)     (0.133)     (0.105)       (0.148)     (0.144)     (0.130)     (0.090)      (0.129)     (0.138)      (0.170)
 Notes: This table presents the results of an individual-level OLS regression analysis of interpersonal trust towards individuals
 of the same ethnicity (as reported in Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)) on observed population diversity in the ancestral ethnicity
 of these individuals, controlling for a range of individual characteristics (i.e., age, gender, living conditions, education,
 religion), the presence of a school, electricity, piped water, sewage, a health clinic, in the local area, whether the local area is
 urban, and the intensity of Atlantic and Indian slave exports. In addition, the analysis accounts for host country fixed effects
 as well as fixed effects associated with the ancestral country. The estimated effect associated with increasing population
 diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the trust variable.
 Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered multi-dimensionally at both the ancestral ethnic group and the host
 country, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and
 * at the 10 percent level.



        Table IX explores the association between the trust of second-generation migrants and the
degree of population diversity in their parental country of origin. Column 1 establishes a negative
and highly significant association between population diversity in the parental country of origin
and trust of second-generation migrants, accounting for regional fixed effects associated with the
parental country of origin.47 This highly significant negative association remains largely stable
if one accounts for interview-year fixed effects (Column 2), and the fixed effects associated with
the respondent’s age, sex, income, education, religion, and region within the United States (i.e.,
where the interview was conducted) in addition to the ethnic fractionalization or polarization of
the homeland (Columns 3 and 4). Moreover, the results are robust to controlling for geographical
characteristics of the parental country of origin (Columns 5 and 6).48 The coefficient of interest in
Column 4 suggests that an increase in population diversity in the parental country of origin from

these three groups, possibly due to omitted variables (e.g., income), and since the level of genetic diversity in Europe
is highest among the three groups, an artificially positive relationship between trust and population diversity in the
sample as a whole may appear in the absence of ancestral regional dummies. Thus, all columns of the table account
for ancestral regional fixed effects. Since migrants from the Americas in the sample are originated from either Canada
or Mexico, where Canada is significantly more diverse, due to a larger European population and significantly more
trustful, possibly due to higher income, the use of a North America dummy only will affect the significance of the
results. Hence, all columns of the table account for Latin American regional fixed effects.
   47
      Since the sample is composed of individuals from European countries, Asian countries, and three countries in the
Americas: Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico, the regional dummies distinguish between European, Asian, and Latin
American countries.
   48
      The inclusion of geographical characteristics of the ancestral homeland reduces the sample due to the absence of
some of the relevant data for Puerto Rico.


                                                                                      39
Table IX: Country-of-Origin Population Diversity and Individual-Level Trust among Second-
Generation U.S. Immigrants

                                                                                       Trust
                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
    Population diversity (ancestral)               -14.670∗∗∗   -15.036∗∗∗    -10.175∗∗    -9.820∗∗   -12.343∗∗∗    -12.358∗∗∗
                                                     (4.234)      (3.736)      (4.483)      (4.546)     (2.368)       (1.714)
    Ethnic fractionalization (ancestral)                                        0.014                    0.004
                                                                               (0.182)                  (0.202)
    Ethnolinguistic polarization (ancestral)                                                -0.028                     -0.012
                                                                                           (0.094)                    (0.122)
    Regional dummies (ancestral)                       ×             ×            ×           ×            ×             ×
    GSS year                                                         ×            ×           ×            ×             ×
    Baseline individual controls                                                  ×           ×            ×             ×
    Income dummies                                                                ×           ×            ×             ×
    Education dummies                                                             ×           ×            ×             ×
    Religion dummies                                                              ×           ×            ×             ×
    Region of interview dummies                                                   ×           ×            ×             ×
    Geographical controls (ancestral)                                                                      ×             ×
    Number of Observations                            2294          2294        1785         1785         1785         1785
    Adjusted R2                                      0.029         0.036        0.096        0.096       0.096        0.096
    Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity     -1.032***     -1.058***    -0.716**     -0.691**    -0.868***    -0.869***
                                                    (0.298)       (0.263)      (0.315)      (0.320)     (0.167)      (0.121)
 Notes: This table presents the results of an individual-level OLS regression analysis of interpersonal trust among second-
 generation migrants in the US on population diversity in their parental country of origin (as captured by ancestry-adjusted
 predicted diversity; Ashraf and Galor (2013a)), accounting for a range of individual-level socioeconomic characteristics (i.e.,
 age, gender, income, religion, education), as well as time period fixed effects, parental region fixed effects, and the US host
 region fixed-effect. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth
 percentile of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the trust variable. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
 errors, clustered multi-dimensionally at both the ancestral country and the US region of interview, are reported in parentheses.
 *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



the 10th percentile of the predicted contemporary level of diversity (e.g., individuals of Mexican
descent) to the 90th percentile (e.g., individuals of Austrian descent) corresponds to a decrease
in trust by 0.69 points (compared to a sample mean of 1.88 and standard deviation of 0.97).
The analysis further suggests that ethnolinguistic fractionalization and polarization in the parental
country of origin have no significant association with trust.


6      Concluding Remarks
This research explores one of the deepest roots of the prevailing variations in the emergence,
prevalence, recurrence, and severity of intrasocietal conflicts, molded during the dawn of the
dispersion of anatomically modern humans across the globe. It advances the hypothesis and
establishes empirically that interpersonal population diversity, as determined predominantly during
the exodus of humans from Africa tens of thousands of years ago, has been pivotal to historical and
contemporary civil conflicts. The findings arguably reflect the contribution of population diversity
to the non-cohesiveness of society, as reflected partly in the prevalence of mistrust, the divergence
in preferences for public goods and redistributive policies, and the degree of fractionalization and
polarization across ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups. Future research ought to focus on a
deeper exploration of these and other possible mechanisms in order to better inform policies geared
towards the implementation of optimal educational and sociopolitical institutions that could address
the contribution of diversity to the non-cohesiveness of society.

                                                                40
Appendix
A.1     Analysis of Intrastate Conflict Severity in Repeated Cross-Country Data
The findings in Section 3.2 indicate that population diversity is a robust and significant reduced-
form contributor to the contemporary risk of conflict in society, as manifested by the frequency,
prevalence, and emergence of civil conflict events in the post-1960 time period. However, the
outcome variables employed by those regressions are based on binary measures that are subject
to a predefined threshold of annual battle-related casualties, which needs to be surpassed for
a civil conflict event to be identified as such. Therefore, broadly speaking, the earlier findings
reflect the influence of interpersonal population diversity on the extensive margin of conflict. This
appendix section explores the influence of population diversity on the intensive margin of conflict.
In particular, it employs both ordinal and continuous measures that capture the “severity” of
intrastate conflicts and of events related to general social unrest, including but not limited to
armed conflict.
         The first measure of conflict intensity exploits information on the apparent “magnitude
scores” associated with “major episodes” of intrastate armed conflict, as reported by the Major
Episodes of Political Violence (MEPV) data set (Marshall, 2017).49 According to this data set, a
“major episode” of armed conflict involves both (i) a minimum of 500 directly related fatalities in
total; and (ii) systematic violence at a sustained rate of at least 100 directly related casualties per
year. Importantly, for each such episode of conflict, the MEPV data set provides a “magnitude
score” —namely, an ordinal measure on a scale of 1 to 10 of the episode’s destructive impact on
the directly affected society, incorporating information on multiple dimensions of conflict severity,
including the capabilities of the state, the interactive intensity (means and goals) of the oppositional
actors, the area and scope of death and destruction, the extent of population displacement, and
the duration of the episode. The specific outcome variable from the MEPV data set employed
by the current analysis reflects the aggregated magnitude score across all conflict episodes that
are classified as one of four types of intrastate conflict —namely, civil war, civil violence, ethnic
war, and ethnic violence.50 In particular, this variable is reported by the MEPV data set at the
country-year level, with nonevent years for a country being coded as 0.
         The second measure of conflict intensity is based on annual time-series data on a continuous
index of social conflict at the country level, as reported by the Cross-National Time-Series (CNTS)
Data Archive (Banks and Wilson, 2018). Rather than adopting an ad hoc fatality-related threshold
for the identification of conflict events, this index provides an aggregate summary of the general
level of social dissonance in any given country-year, by way of measuring a weighted average across
all observed occurrences of eight different types of sociopolitical unrest, including assassinations,
general strikes, guerrilla warfare, major government crises, political purges, riots, revolutions, and
anti-government demonstrations.51
  49
     The version of the MEPV data set employed provides annual information for a total of 179 countries over the
1946–2017 time period. See http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/MEPVcodebook2016.pdf for further details on the
measure of conflict intensity from the MEPV data set.
  50
     Specifically, all episodes of intrastate conflict in the MEPV data set are categorized along two dimensions. With
respect to the first dimension, an episode may be considered either (i) one of “civil” conflict, involving rival political
groups; or (ii) one of “ethnic” conflict, involving the state agent and a distinct ethnic group. In terms of the second
dimension, however, an episode may be either (i) one of “violence,” involving the use of instrumental force, without
necessarily possessing any exclusive goals; or (ii) one of “war,” involving violent activities between distinct groups,
with the intent to impose a unilateral result to the contention.
  51
     The specific weights (reported in parentheses) assigned to the different types of sociopolitical unrest considered
by the index are as follows: assassinations (25), general strikes (20), guerrilla warfare (100), major government
crises (20), political purges (20), riots (25), revolutions (150), and anti-government demonstrations (10). This


                                                           41
Table A.I: Population Diversity and the Severity of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-Country
Data

Cross-country sample:                            Old World                  Global           Old World               Global
                                               (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)
                                               OLS        OLS          2SLS      2SLS      OLS       OLS        2SLS      2SLS
                                                Quinquennial MEPV civil conflict            Quinquennial CNTS social conflict
                                                      severity, 1960–2017                          index, 1960–2014
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     4.241***   4.089**   4.159***      3.981**   5.306**   5.619***   5.679**   6.106***
                                              (1.452)   (1.803)    (1.531)      (1.987)   (2.350)    (1.982)   (2.599)    (2.289)
Continent dummies                               ×          ×            ×            ×      ×          ×         ×            ×
Time dummies                                    ×          ×            ×            ×      ×          ×         ×            ×
Controls for temporal spillovers                ×          ×            ×            ×      ×          ×         ×            ×
Controls for geography                          ×          ×            ×            ×      ×          ×         ×            ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                              ×                         ×                 ×                      ×
Controls for institutions                                  ×                         ×                 ×                      ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                   ×                         ×                 ×                      ×
Observations                                  1,270      1,045         1,576     1,311     1,144      924       1,430     1,165
Countries                                      123        121           149       147       123       120        150       146
Partial R2 of population diversity            0.009      0.006                             0.006     0.005
Adjusted R2                                   0.630      0.614                             0.082     0.104
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   0.199***   0.183**   0.276***      0.264**   0.249**   0.264***   0.370**   0.405***
                                              (0.068)   (0.081)    (0.102)      (0.132)   (0.110)    (0.093)   (0.169)    (0.152)
First-stage F statistic                                               150.323   101.923                        147.137    93.983
Notes: This table exploits variations in repeated cross-country data to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the severity of conflict, as reflected by (i) the maximum value of an annual ordinal index
of conflict intensity (from the MEPV data set) across all years in any given 5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time period;
and (ii) the maximum value of an annual continuous index of the degree of social unrest (from the CNTS data set) across
all years in any given 5-year interval during the 1960–2014 time period, conditional on other well-known diversity measures
as well as the proximate geographical, institutional, and development-related correlates of conflict. Given that both measures
of conflict severity are expressed in units that have no natural interpretation, their intertemporal cross-country distributions
are standardized prior to conducting the regression analysis. The controls for geography include absolute latitude, ruggedness,
distance to the nearest waterway, the mean and range of agricultural suitability, the mean and range of elevation, and an
indicator for small island nations. The controls for ethnic diversity include ethnic fractionalization and polarization. The
controls for institutions include a set of legal origin dummies, comprising two indicators for British and French legal origins,
as well as six time-dependent covariates that capture the average annual values over the previous 5-year interval of the degree
of executive constraints, two indicators for the type of political regime (democracy and autocracy), and three indicators for
experience as a colony of the U.K., France, and any other major colonizing power. The control for oil presence is a time-invariant
indicator for the discovery of a petroleum (oil or gas) reserve by the year 2003. The controls for population and income are the
time-dependent log-transformed average annual values over the previous 5-year interval of total population and GDP per capita.
To account for temporal dependence in conflict outcomes, all regressions control for the value of the outcome variable from
the previous 5-year interval. For regressions based on the global sample, the set of continent dummies includes five indicators
for Africa, Asia, North America, South America, and Oceania, whereas for regressions based on the Old-World sample, the
set includes two indicators for Africa and Asia. The 2SLS regressions exploit prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa
to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population
diversity. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of
its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of standard deviations of the intertemporal cross-country
distribution of the outcome variable. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



        Given that the current analysis of conflict severity follows Esteban et al. (2012), in terms
of exploiting variations in quinquennially repeated cross-country data, for each country, the annual
data on either measure of conflict intensity is collapsed to a quinquennial time series, by assigning
to any given 5-year interval in the post-1960 sample period, the maximum level of conflict intensity
reflected by that measure across all years in the 5-year interval. As in earlier analyses of civil
conflict incidence and onset, the examination focuses on better-identified specifications that either
(i) exploit variations in a sample of countries belonging only to the Old World, or (ii) exploit
weighting methodology is based on Rummel (1963). For further details, the reader is referred to the codebook
of the CNTS data archive, available at http://www.cntsdata.com/.


                                                                 42
migratory distance from East Africa as an instrument for contemporary population diversity in a
global sample of countries. All regressions account for temporal dependence in conflict severity by
allowing both the lagged observation of the outcome variable and a full set of time-interval (5-year
period) dummies to enter the specification. Further, whenever time-varying covariates are allowed
to enter the specification, they do so with a one-period lag. Finally, because the units in which the
proxies of conflict intensity are measured in the data have no natural interpretation, the outcome
variables are standardized prior to running the regressions.
        Table A.I presents the results from the analysis of the influence of interpersonal diversity on
intrastate conflict severity, as reflected by either the MEPV aggregate magnitude score of conflict
intensity (Columns 1–4) or the CNTS index of social conflict (Columns 5–8).52 Regardless of
the measure for conflict intensity examined, the identification strategy exploited, or the set of
covariates considered by the specification, the results from the analysis of conflict severity in
Table A.I establish population diversity as a qualitatively robust and significant reduced-form
contributor to the intensive margin of intrastate conflict. Specifically, a move from the 10th to the
90th percentile of the cross-country distribution of population diversity in the relevant sample is
associated with an increase in conflict severity by 18 to 28 percent of a standard deviation from the
observed distribution of the MEPV magnitude score of conflict intensity, and with an an increase
in general social unrest by 25 to 41 percent of a standard deviation from the observed distribution
of the CNTS index of social conflict.

A.2     Robustness Checks for the Country-Level Analyses
Selection on Observables and Unobservables Following the methodology of Altonji et al.
(2005), the current analysis exploits the idea that the amount of selection bias due to the unobserved
variables in a model can be inferred from the reduction in selection bias from the inclusion of
additional observed variables, thus permitting an assessment of how much larger the bias from
unobserved heterogeneity needs to be, relative to the bias from observables, in order to fully explain
away the coefficient on the explanatory variable of interest.53 Specifically, the analysis compares
the estimated coefficient, β̂1R , on population diversity from a restricted model (conditioned on a
subset of controls) with its estimated coefficient, β̂1F , from an augmented model (conditioned on the
full set of controls), examining the Altonji et al. (2005) ratio, AET = β̂1F /(β̂1R − β̂1F ). Intuitively,
a higher absolute value for AET suggests that the additional control variables included in the
augmented model, relative to the restricted one, are not sufficient to explain away the estimated
coefficient on population diversity in the full specification, and as such, this coefficient cannot be
completely attributed to omitted-variable bias unless the amount of selection on unobservables is
much larger than that on observables.
         The analysis additionally considers the δ and β ∗ statistics suggested by Oster (2019). The
δ statistic reflects how strongly correlated the unobservables need to be with population diversity,
  52
     Despite the fact that the measure of conflict intensity from the MEPV data set is ordinal rather than continuous in
nature, the analysis pursues least-squares (as opposed to maximum-likelihood) estimation methods when examining
this particular outcome variable, primarily because this permits the implementation of both of the key identification
strategies. Specifically, although the main findings from Columns 1–2 can be qualitatively replicated using ordered
probit rather than OLS regressions (results not shown), the absence of a readily available IV counterpart of the ordered
probit regression model precludes conducting a similar robustness check on the main findings from Columns 3–4.
  53
     Altonji et al. (2005) develop this method for the case where the explanatory variable of interest is binary in
nature, while Bellows and Miguel (2009) consider the case of a continuous explanatory variable. Roughly speaking,
the assumption in assessments of this type is that the covariation of the outcome variable with observables, on the
one hand, and its covariation with unobservables, on the other, are identically related to the explanatory variable of
interest. Altonji et al. (2005) provide some sufficient conditions for such an assumption to hold.



                                                          43
       Table A.II: Population Diversity and the Count of Civil Conflict Onsets across Countries

Cross-country sample:                                                Global                                  Old World                   Global
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)             (9)
                                           Negative    Negative     Negative    Negative    Negative    Negative    Negative
                                           Binomial    Binomial     Binomial    Binomial    Binomial    Binomial    Binomial    Poisson      Poisson
                                                                   Total count of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   10.032***   19.339***    13.092**    14.180***   12.884***   17.968***   18.025***   13.592**    12.884***
                                            (3.878)     (3.559)      (5.238)     (5.232)     (4.674)     (6.045)     (5.358)     (5.512)     (4.674)
Continent dummies                                                      ×           ×           ×           ×           ×           ×              ×
Controls for geography                                    ×            ×           ×           ×           ×           ×           ×              ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                      ×           ×                       ×                          ×
Controls for institutions                                                                      ×                       ×                          ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                       ×                       ×                          ×
Observations                                  150         150         150          150         147         123         121        150          147
Pseudo R2                                    0.013       0.128       0.153        0.158       0.257       0.149       0.276      0.219        0.317
Marginal effect of diversity                0.114**    0.220***     0.149**      0.162**     0.147**    0.231***    0.231***    0.155**      0.147**
                                            (0.046)     (0.051)     (0.064)      (0.065)     (0.058)     (0.086)     (0.075)    (0.068)      (0.058)

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it establishes robustness
to considering the total count rather than the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets over the post-1960 time period as the
outcome variable. In line with the standard for analyzing over-dispersed count data, the regressions are estimated using
the negative-binomial as opposed to a least-squares estimator. Given the absence of a negative-binomial estimator that
permits instrumentation, however, the current analysis is unable to implement the strategy of exploiting prehistoric migratory
distance from East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s
contemporary population diversity. Thus, in lieu of implementing the instrument-based identification strategy in the global
sample of countries, Columns 8–9 examine robustness to employing the Poisson rather than the negative-binomial estimator for
estimating the specifications from Columns 6–7, respectively. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical
to corresponding OLS specifications reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding
table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis. The estimated marginal
effect of a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity is the average marginal effect across the entire cross-section of
observed diversity values, and it reflects the increase in the total number of new conflict onsets over the post-1960 time period.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level,
** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



relative to observables, in order to account for the full size of the coefficient on population diversity.
It differs from AET by accounting for the empirical relevance of the observables in explaining the
variation in the outcome variable, based on the idea that including observables that do not move the
R2 statistic of the regression very much leaves more room for unobservables that are correlated with
the variable of interest. The β ∗ statistic reflects the estimated value of the coefficient on population
diversity if unobservables were as correlated with population diversity as the observables. Oster
(2019) shows that if zero does not belong to the interval between the estimated coefficient on
population diversity and β ∗ , then one can reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient of interest
is exclusively driven by unobservables.
         The analysis treats the specification from Column 3 of Table I as the restricted model. This
specification includes, besides population diversity, the baseline geographical controls and continent
fixed effects. Coefficient stability is assessed relative to the augmented specification presented in
Column 8 that includes the full set of control variables. The resulting AET ratio is -10.3, and it
suggests that selection on unobservables would have to be at least ten times larger than the selection
on observables to account for the full size of the estimated coefficient for population diversity.54
On the other hand, Oster’s δ statistic is 1.93, indicating that the correlation of unobservables with
population diversity needs to be almost twice as large as the correlation of population diversity
with observables in order to drive the estimate down to zero. Assuming that the unobservables are
equally correlated with population diversity as are the observables, and that these correlations have
  54
    The negative sign indicates that selection on unobservables needs to move the coefficient estimate in the opposite
direction, compared to selection on observables.



                                                                           44
Table A.III: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Robustness to Accounting for Spatial Dependence

Cross-country sample:                                             Global                              Old World                 Global
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
                                             SARAR     SARAR      SARAR      SARAR      SARAR     SARAR      SARAR      SARAR       SARAR
                                              OLS       OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                          Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     0.253**   0.447***   0.320***   0.329***   0.288**   0.717***   0.643***   0.602***    0.457***
                                             (0.099)    (0.109)    (0.120)    (0.121)   (0.130)    (0.251)    (0.223)    (0.219)     (0.175)
Spatial lag AR(1) of conflict (λ)            −0.633    −0.164     −0.226     −0.214      0.362    −1.123     −0.199     −0.851       0.317
                                             (1.078)   (0.750)    (0.750)    (0.729)    (0.761)   (0.833)    (0.772)    (0.849)     (0.748)
Spatial lag AR(1) of error (ρ)                0.177     0.579      0.629      0.328      0.470     1.103      0.963      1.115       0.346
                                             (0.814)   (0.846)    (0.840)    (0.842)    (0.798)   (0.817)    (0.669)    (0.821)     (0.744)
Continent dummies                                                    ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                    ×          ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                   ×         ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                 ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                  150        150        150        150       147        123        121        150            147
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   0.017**   0.030***   0.021***   0.022***   0.020**   0.035***   0.028***   0.040***    0.031***
                                             (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.012)    (0.010)    (0.015)     (0.012)

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically,
it establishes robustness to accounting for spatial dependence across observations by estimating spatial-autoregressive models
with spatial-autoregressive disturbances (SARAR(1,1)) using a generalized spatial two-stage least-squares (GS2SLS) estimator
(e.g., Drukker et al., 2013). To perform this robustness check, which involves the estimation of the AR(1) coefficients, λ and ρ,
respectively associated with the spatial lags in the outcome variable and the error term, the estimator exploits an inverse-distance
spatial weighting matrix for the regression sample, based on the great-circle distances between the geodesic centroids of country
pairs. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The reader is
therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered
by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions in the last two columns. The
estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country
distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10
percent level.



the same sign, the estimated coefficient for diversity, if one were able to control for all unobservables,
would be β ∗ = 1.15. Thus, the interval between the actual coefficient estimate from the full
specification (0.309) and β ∗ excludes zero.55 It is therefore rather unlikely that the main results
could be explained away by omitted variables.
Robustness to Examining the Count of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries Given
that the baseline cross-country regressions employ least-squares estimation, a log transformation
is applied to the outcome variable in order to partly address the issue that its cross-country
distribution is positively skewed with excess zeros, arising from the fact that new civil conflict onsets
are generally rare events in cross-sectional data. An alternative approach to this issue, however, is
to employ an estimation method that is tailored to the analysis of over-dispersed count data. The
analysis in Table A.II considers the total count rather than the annual frequency of civil conflict
onsets over the 1960–2017 time period as the outcome variable. The regressions in Columns 1–7 are
estimated using the negative-binomial (as opposed to a least-squares) estimator to account for over-
dispersion. Given the absence of a negative-binomial estimator that permits instrumentation, in
lieu of implementing the instrument-based identification strategy in the global sample of countries,
Columns 8–9 examine robustness to employing the Poisson rather than the negative binomial-
  55                                                                                         2
     The reported Oster statistics are computed under the most conservative assumption that Rmax  = 1; i.e., that the
entire cross-country variation in conflict frequency would be explained by the estimated model if one could include
all unobservables correlated with population diversity to the model.


                                                                     45
Table A.IV: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Robustness to Accounting for Population Diversity as a Generated Regressor

Cross-country sample:                                              Global                              Old World                 Global
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                              OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                          Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     0.209***   0.439***   0.306***   0.318***   0.309**   0.548***   0.597***   0.537***    0.602***
                                              (0.066)    (0.103)    (0.118)    (0.123)   (0.138)    (0.189)    (0.227)    (0.184)     (0.223)
Continent dummies                                                     ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                     ×          ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                    ×         ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                   ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                   150        150        150        150        147       123        121        150            147
Adjusted R2                                   0.029      0.189      0.213      0.215      0.358     0.225      0.392
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   0.014***   0.029***   0.020**    0.021**    0.021**   0.026**    0.026**    0.036***    0.041**
                                              (0.005)    (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)   (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.013)    (0.016)

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it
establishes robustness of the standard-error estimates to accounting for the fact that the country-level measure of contemporary
population diversity is a generated regressor in the empirical specifications, because it is projected from implicit zeroth-stage
relationships (a) between prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa and expected heterozygosity in the HGDP-CEPH
sample of 53 ethnic groups, and (b) between pairwise migratory distance and pairwise FST genetic distance across all pairs of
ethnic groups in this sample. To perform this robustness check, the current analysis adopts the two-step bootstrapping technique
implemented by Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for computing the standard-error estimates, so the reader is referred to that work
for additional details on the technique. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones
reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the
baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions
in the last two columns. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth
percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Bootstrapped
standard errors, accounting for the use of a generated regressor, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance
at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



estimator in the global sample of countries. To interpret the influence of population diversity, the
estimate in Column 7 suggests that conditional on the full set of control variables, a 5 percentage
point increase in population diversity translates roughly into an additional civil conflict amongst
countries in the Old World during the 1960-2017 time period.
Robustness to Accounting for Spatial Dependence To account for spatial dependence
across country observations, the analysis in Table A.III replicates the key specifications from
Table I using spatial-autoregressive models with spatial-autoregressive disturbances (SARAR(1,1)),
estimated by a generalized spatial two-stage least-squares (GS2SLS) estimator (e.g., Drukker et al.,
2013). These spatial regressions involve the estimation of AR(1) coefficients, λ and ρ, that are
respectively associated with the spatial lags in the outcome variable and the error term. To perform
this robustness check, the estimator exploits an inverse-distance spatial weighting matrix for the
regression sample, based on the great-circle distances between the geodesic centroids of country
pairs. Reassuringly, all of the main cross-country findings remain qualitatively intact, indicating
that spatial dependence across country observations is not a confounding issue.
Robustness to Accounting for Population Diversity as a Generated Regressor The
measure of contemporary population diversity is a generated regressor in the main specifications,
because it is projected from implicit zeroth-stage relationships (i) between prehistoric migratory
distance from East Africa and expected heterozygosity in the HGDP-CEPH sample of 53 ethnic
groups, and (ii) between pairwise migratory distance and pairwise FST genetic distance across all
pairs of ethnic groups in this sample. Table A.IV therefore checks the robustness of the standard-
error estimates to accounting for potential bias due to the use of a generated regressor. To perform

                                                                     46
Table A.V: Population Diversity and the Incidence of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-Country
Data – Robustness to Examining Alternative Measures of Conflict Incidence

Cross-country sample:                          Old World                    Global                Old World                  Global
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
                                            Probit      Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit     Probit      Probit     IV Probit   IV Probit
                                                  Quinquennial PRIO1000 civil war               Quinquennial UCDP nonstate conflict
                                                       incidence, 1960–2017                            incidence, 1989–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   16.221***   11.251**   17.090***     16.327***    24.499***   25.186***   22.511***   24.662***
                                            (4.285)     (5.482)    (4.256)       (5.808)      (5.399)     (6.408)     (4.992)     (5.563)
Continent dummies                             ×            ×         ×                ×         ×           ×           ×             ×
Time dummies                                  ×            ×         ×                ×         ×           ×           ×             ×
Controls for temporal spillovers              ×            ×         ×                ×         ×           ×           ×             ×
Controls for geography                        ×            ×         ×                ×         ×           ×           ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                              ×                          ×                     ×                         ×
Controls for institutions                                  ×                          ×                     ×                         ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                   ×                          ×                     ×                         ×
Observations                                 1,270       1,026      1,551            1,262      717         670        879            824
Countries                                     123         121        147              144       123         121        150            147
Pseudo R2                                    0.392       0.390                                 0.436       0.459
Marginal effect of diversity               1.850***     1.212**   2.005***       1.786**     3.835***    3.568***    3.790***    3.839***
                                            (0.540)     (0.617)    (0.631)       (0.777)      (0.837)     (0.927)     (0.911)     (1.013)
First-stage F statistic                                            168.723       113.194                              148.632     120.800
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the quinquennial incidence of intrastate conflict in repeated cross-country data, as shown
in Columns 1–4 of Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to considering the temporal incidence of alternative forms
of intrastate conflict as the outcome variable, including the incidence of (i) a high-intensity PRIO1000 civil war in any given
5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time period (Columns 1–4); and (ii) a low-intensity conflict involving nonstate actors
in any given 5-year interval during the 1989–2017 time period (Columns 5–8). The specifications examined in this table are
otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Columns 1–4 of Table II. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and
the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the
identification strategy employed by the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of
population diversity on the incidence of conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10
percent level.



this robustness check, the analysis replicates the key specifications from Table I, adopting the two-
step bootstrapping technique implemented by Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for estimating the standard
errors. The reader is referred to that work for additional details on the technique. As expected,
the bootstrapped standard errors are indeed somewhat larger than their robust counterparts from
Table I, but reassuringly, the statistical significance of the coefficients on population diversity
remain unaffected.
Robustness to Examining Alternative Measures of Conflict Incidence As shown in
Columns 1–4 of Table II, population diversity is positively and significantly associated with the
quinquennial incidence of a PRIO25 civil conflict (with at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year) in
the post-1960 time period. The analysis in Table A.V examines whether the same result holds when
considering the temporal incidence of alternative forms of intrastate conflict as the outcome variable,
including the incidence in any given 5-year interval of (i) a high-intensity PRIO1000 civil war (with
at least 1000 battle-related deaths in a year) during the 1960–2017 time period (Columns 1–4); and
(ii) a low-intensity conflict (with at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year) involving only nonstate
actors during the 1989–2017 time period (Columns 5–8). The findings indicate that regardless
of the covariates included in the specification or the identification strategy exploited, population
diversity exerts a positive and significant influence on the quinquennial incidence of either of the
aforementioned types of intrastate conflict. To interpret the coefficient of interest, the IV probit


                                                                   47
Table A.VI: Population Diversity and the Incidence of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-Country
Data – Robustness to Examining the Annual Incidence or Quinquennial Prevalence of Conflict

Cross-country sample:                            Old World                     Global               Old World                Global
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                              Probit       Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit     OLS        OLS        2SLS       2SLS
                                                       Annual PRIO25 civil conflict                Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                          incidence, 1960–2017                          prevalence, 1960-2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     9.301***     9.763***   10.762***     12.848***    1.710***   1.737***   1.773***   1.988***
                                              (3.015)      (3.203)    (3.121)       (3.914)      (0.558)    (0.637)    (0.565)    (0.716)
Continent dummies                               ×            ×            ×              ×         ×          ×          ×            ×
Time dummies                                    ×            ×            ×              ×         ×          ×          ×            ×
Controls for temporal spillovers                ×            ×            ×              ×         ×          ×          ×            ×
Controls for geography                          ×            ×            ×              ×         ×          ×          ×            ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                ×                           ×                    ×                       ×
Controls for institutions                                    ×                           ×                    ×                       ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                     ×                           ×                    ×                       ×
Observations                                  6,280         5,221      7,801            6,569    1,270      1,045      1,583      1,311
Countries                                      123           121        150              147      123        121        150        147
Pseudo R2                                     0.597         0.602
Adjusted R2                                                                                      0.621      0.598
Marginal effect of diversity                 0.976***     0.973***   1.125***      1.297***
                                              (0.329)      (0.339)    (0.367)       (0.463)
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity                                                      0.080***   0.078***   0.115***   0.132***
                                                                                                 (0.026)    (0.028)    (0.037)    (0.047)
First-stage F statistic                                               155.509       103.745                           151.471    104.807
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the temporal incidence or prevalence of civil conflict in repeated cross-country data,
as shown in Columns 1–4 of Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to considering (i) the annual incidence of conflict, by
examining annual rather than quinquennial repetitions of the cross-section (Columns 1–4); and (ii) the quinquennial prevalence
of conflict, by examining the share of years with an active civil conflict in any given 5-year interval (Columns 5–8). The
specifications examined in this table are essentially identical to corresponding ones reported in Columns 1–4 of Table II, with
the exception that in Columns 1–4 of the current analysis, the time-dependent baseline controls for institutions (i.e., executive
constraints, indicators for the type of political regime, and indicators for colonial experience by identity of the colonizing power),
total population, GDP per capita, and temporal spillovers are all appropriately adjusted to assume their respective lagged annual
values, rather than their values corresponding to the previous 5-year interval. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and
the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis as well
as the identification strategy employed by the IV probit or 2SLS regressions. In Columns 1–4, the estimated marginal effect of
a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity is the average marginal effect across the entire cross-section of observed
diversity values, and it reflects the increase in the annual likelihood of a conflict incidence, expressed in percentage points. In
Columns 5–8, the estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of
its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the share of years with an active conflict in any given 5-year interval.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.



regressions presented in Columns 4 and 8 suggest that conditional on the full set of control variables,
a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity increases the quinquennial likelihoods of
conflict incidence by 1.8 percentage points for PRIO1000 civil wars and by 3.8 percentage points
for internal conflicts involving nonstate actors.
Robustness to Examining the Annual Incidence or Quinquennial Prevalence of Civil
Conflict The analysis in Table A.VI checks the robustness of the baseline results for the incidence
of civil conflict, as shown in Columns 1–4 of Table II, to considering alternative outcomes of
conflict incidence or prevalence, including (i) the annual incidence of conflict, by examining annual
rather than quinquennial repetitions of the cross-section (Columns 1–4); and (ii) the quinquennial
prevalence of conflict, by examining the share of years with an active civil conflict in any given
5-year interval (Columns 5–8). The specifications examined in this table are essentially identical
to corresponding ones reported in Columns 1–4 of Table II, with the exception that in Columns 1–


                                                                     48
4 of the current analysis, the time-dependent baseline controls for institutions (i.e., executive
constraints, indicators for the type of political regime, and indicators for colonial experience by
identity of the colonizing power), total population, GDP per capita, and temporal spillovers are
all appropriately adjusted to assume their respective lagged annual values, rather than their values
corresponding to the previous 5-year interval. As is evident from the results in Table A.VI,
regardless of the identification strategy exploited or the covariates included in the specification,
population diversity contributes positively and significantly to both the annual incidence and the
quinquennial prevalence of civil conflict during the 1960–2017 time period. Specifically, the global
average marginal effect estimated by the specification in Column 4 suggests that conditional on
the full set of control variables, a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity increases the
annual likelihood of a conflict incidence by 1.3 percentage points. Further, the specification in
Column 8 suggests that conditional on all covariates, a move from the 10th to the 90th percentile
of the global cross-country distribution of population diversity is associated with an increase of 13
percentage points in the fraction of years with an active conflict in any given 5-year interval.




                                                 49
A.3                                                                    Appendix Figures for the Country-Level Analyses




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Prevalence of interpersonal trust in the population


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                               1
 Log number of ethnic groups in the population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                                 ZAF                                                                              NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                        TGO                                                            UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IND           GEO           LBN                                                                                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                 NAM
                                                               .5




                                                                                                                                           EST     GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GAB YUG                                           URY
                                                                                                                            IDN                       MMR
                                                                                                                                                LVA LBR                                                           GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NPL MDA
                                                                                                                              GMB             SLE BFA                                                                                                  IRN                                                                                                                                                                                                                  THA                                                                 SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ERI                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN                                         NLD
                                                                                                                                                   LTU         HUN         CAN
                                                                                                                                BWA                                MDG MKD                                    KAZ                                              AUS
                                                                                                                        VNM      GNB                BLR              OMN                                                                                                           ETH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                    MLI                             TCD ZARKWT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                SLV                               BEL                                                                                                                             DOM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ETH
                                                 (Residuals)




                                                                                                                                                          TJK     AFG                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                                                                                     SVNARE BGR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Residuals)
                                                                                                        MNG                                           ESP
                                                                                                                                                       UZB      CRICZE                                                                                  JOR
                                                                            BOL                                                                 PAN           MOZ AUT COL                                                                                           SYR                                                                                                                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                                                      HND                                                    ROM AZE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IRQ
                                                                                                                                               KGZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GTM
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                   BIH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SLV                           USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KOR                                                                                           RWA
                                                                                              PER        PHL
                                                                                                          PRY                                                          MWICMR     ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                  GRC                                                                                                         ARG                                                                                                                                                                                         IRL
                                                                                                                                        CHL           CIV                                                                                                                                       GUY                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN                       NGA
                                                                                                                                   SEN                             SVK                                                                                                 TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        USA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ESP          ARM
                                                                                                                                      THA RUS
                                                                                                                                     NER                  BTN AGO   NGA PAK                                                                              IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SOM                                               HTI                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR                                     IRN
                                                                                                                                                                  TKM
                                                                                                                                                                   COG
                                                                                                                                                                    UKR       VEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                          MEX          ECU                                  DEU
                                                                                                                                                              FRAHRV                                                                                        ISR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DEU HUN                   UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                                                                   LSO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                   FIN      NIC     BEN                                                                                                                     CUB                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                                                 KHM                                    CAFALB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JPN                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                                 MYS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BGD                                    NZL
                                                                                                                                                  DNK     ZMB
                                                                                                                                                           LKA                                                                                          SDN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BFA                               UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT                       AUS
                                                                                                                                          GIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALB
                                                                                  GTM                                 LAO                     SWZ
                                                                                                                                                             POL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MLI                                             CZEHRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KGZ                                                COL YUG TZA       GRC
                                                               -.5




                                                                                                                 MRT                    IRLSWE BGD                                                                                                                           BRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LUX                              AZE      JOR
                                                                                                                                                 NLD      EGY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAF                      BLR                                                                             ARG
                                                                                                                                                        ZWE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZWE         GHA                  SVK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.1
                                                                                                              KOR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LTU               POL                              ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRA                                     EGY
                                                                                                                        PRK             NOR       TUN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PER                                                                                                         MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SVN                                         BRA
                                                                                                                                       MAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL                                                 GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MAR PAK   ROM
                                                                                                                                                             LBY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EST         PRT
                                                                                                  JPN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RWA                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MYS
                                                               -1




                                                                                                                                           DZA PRT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BDI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YEM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                                                                          PNG

                                                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DZA
                                                                     -.06                  -.04                               -.02                                                                                      0                               .02                                    .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.04                                        -.02                                                0                                       .02                       .04

                                                                                                                                              (Residuals)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Residuals)
                                                                                                              Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)
                                                                                  Africa                Europe                      Asia                                 Oceania                                                          N. America                        S. America                                                                                                                                                      Africa                        Europe                      Asia                 Oceania                    N. America              S. America


           Relationship in the global sample; conditional on baseline geographical controls and continent fixed eﬀects                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Relationship in the global sample; conditional on baseline geographical controls and region fixed eﬀects
           Slope coeﬃcient = 5.187; (robust) standard error = 1.801; t-statistic = 2.881; partial R-squared = 0.049; observations = 147                                                                                                                                                                                                             Slope coeﬃcient = -1.817; (robust) standard error = 0.795; t-statistic = -2.286; partial R-squared = 0.075; observations = 84




                                                                                  (a) Number of ethnic groups                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (b) Prevalence of interpersonal trust
                                                                                                                                                     Variation in political attitudes in the population


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TZA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IND



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MEX                                                                                                        MAR                        ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SWE                                                                                               GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YUG UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BGD                                                                                                         MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Residuals)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL                      NZL AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRN                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ZAF                        LTU                                               SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KOR                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KGZ                        PRT                                              CZEUKR                                     ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BLR                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOR                                                                                                       GRC                         URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN                   FIN                                                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHL          RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZWE        ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GBR    ESP            BIH                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IDN                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      USA      GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PER                                                                               LVA                                                                                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LUX          RWA HRVAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZMB           HUN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ETH



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAK


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.04                                        -.02                                                                             0                                                                .02                                               .04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Residuals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Africa                    Europe                       Asia                                     Oceania                                                        N. America                   S. America


                                                                                                                                                                Relationship in the global sample; conditional on baseline geographical controls and region fixed eﬀects
                                                                                                                                                                Slope coeﬃcient = 14.344; (robust) standard error = 6.238; t-statistic = 2.299; partial R-squared = 0.082; observations = 81




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (c) Variation in political attitudes

Figure A.1: Population Diversity and Proximate Determinants of the Frequency of Civil Conflict
Onset across Countries

Notes: This figure depicts the global cross-country relationship between contemporary population diversity and each of three
potentially conflict-augmenting proximate channels, including (i) the degree of cultural fragmentation, as reflected by the number
of ethnic groups in the national population (Panel (a)); (ii) the prevalence of generalized interpersonal trust at the country level
(Panel (b)); and (iii) the extent of heterogeneity in preferences for redistribution and public-goods provision, as reflected by the
intra-country dispersion in individual political attitudes on a politically “left”–“right” categorical scale (Panel (c)), conditional
on the baseline geographical correlates of conflict, as considered by the analysis in Table VII. Each of Panels (a), (b), and
(c) presents an added-variable plot with a partial regression line, corresponding to the estimated coefficient associated with
population diversity in Columns 1, 4, and 7, respectively, of Table VII.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
A.4   Descriptive Statistics at the Country Level

  Table A.VII: Summary Statistics of Variables from the Baseline Cross-Country Analysis

                                                                                     Percentile
                                                                  Mean       SD     10th     90th
             PANEL A                                               Old World sample (N = 121)
             New civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017         0.025   0.033    0.000    0.069
             Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)              0.735   0.018    0.712    0.754
             Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)    0.515   0.244    0.262    0.831
             Absolute latitude                                     0.029   0.017    0.007    0.052
             Ruggedness                                            0.124   0.134    0.016    0.286
             Mean elevation                                        0.610   0.584    0.106    1.265
             Range of elevation                                    1.550   1.322    0.281    3.043
             Mean land suitability                                 0.359   0.234    0.035    0.669
             Range of land suitability                             0.701   0.259    0.345    0.974
             Distance to nearest waterway                          0.383   0.483    0.039    1.036
             Island nation dummy                                   0.033   0.180    0.000    0.000
             Ethnic fractionalization                              0.476   0.264    0.115    0.812
             Ethnolinguistic polarization                          0.491   0.220    0.181    0.747
             Ever a U.K. colony dummy                              0.264   0.443    0.000    1.000
             Ever a French colony dummy                            0.207   0.407    0.000    1.000
             Ever a non-U.K./non-French colony dummy               0.198   0.400    0.000    1.000
             British legal origin dummy                            0.256   0.438    0.000    1.000
             French legal origin dummy                             0.405   0.493    0.000    1.000
             Executive constraints, 1960–2017 average              3.983   1.875    1.684    7.000
             Fraction of years under democracy, 1960–2017          0.367   0.381    0.000    1.000
             Fraction of years under autocracy, 1960–2017          0.390   0.327    0.000    0.900
             Oil or gas reserve discovery                          0.669   0.472    0.000    1.000
             Log population, 1960–2017 average                    16.072   1.459   14.385   17.873
             Log GDP per capita, 1960–2017 average                 7.638   1.567    5.649    9.940

             PANEL B                                                 Global sample (N = 147)
             New civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017         0.022   0.031    0.000    0.064
             Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)              0.728   0.027    0.685    0.752
             Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)    0.806   0.679    0.295    2.088
             Absolute latitude                                     0.027   0.017    0.006    0.051
             Ruggedness                                            0.125   0.126    0.018    0.278
             Mean elevation                                        0.594   0.552    0.104    1.250
             Range of elevation                                    1.701   1.389    0.283    3.752
             Mean land suitability                                 0.386   0.246    0.046    0.718
             Range of land suitability                             0.715   0.264    0.317    0.994
             Distance to nearest waterway                          0.353   0.458    0.036    1.010
             Island nation dummy                                   0.048   0.214    0.000    0.000
             Ethnic fractionalization                              0.467   0.254    0.115    0.792
             Ethnolinguistic polarization                          0.452   0.241    0.097    0.747
             Ever a U.K. colony dummy                              0.259   0.439    0.000    1.000
             Ever a French colony dummy                            0.190   0.394    0.000    1.000
             Ever a non-U.K./non-French colony dummy               0.320   0.468    0.000    1.000
             British legal origin dummy                            0.252   0.435    0.000    1.000
             French legal origin dummy                             0.463   0.500    0.000    1.000
             Executive constraints, 1960–2017 average              4.145   1.827    1.839    7.000
             Fraction of years under democracy, 1960–2017          0.408   0.377    0.000    1.000
             Fraction of years under autocracy, 1960–2017          0.352   0.323    0.000    0.879
             Oil or gas reserve discovery                          0.673   0.471    0.000    1.000
             Log population, 1960–2017 average                    16.087   1.431   14.423   17.877
             Log GDP per capita, 1960–2017 average                 7.703   1.489    5.705    9.937




                                                     51
A.5    Robustness Checks for the Ethnicity-Level Analyses

  Table A.VIII: Population Diversity and the Number of Conflicts across Ethnic Homelands
                                                                                           Number of conflict events
                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                        Poisson     Poisson     Poisson      Poisson      Poisson       Poisson     Poisson     Poisson
          Observed population diversity                58.949∗∗∗   54.959∗∗∗   63.413∗∗∗     61.608∗∗∗
                                                       (18.286)    (18.020)    (16.750)      (16.685)
          Predicted population diversity                                                                 53.230∗∗∗     43.748∗∗∗   49.242∗∗∗   51.593∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (9.061)       (6.670)      (7.403)    (7.799)
          Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                      0.236                                              -0.784∗∗
                                                                                (0.498)                                              (0.356)
          Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                         -0.190                                          -0.895∗∗
                                                                                              (0.430)                                           (0.441)
          Regional dummies                               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
          Geographical controls                          No          Yes         Yes           Yes         No            Yes         Yes         Yes
          Climatic controls                              No          No          Yes           Yes         No            No          Yes         Yes
          Development outcomes                           No          No          Yes           Yes         No            No          Yes         Yes
          Disease environment controls                   No          No          Yes           Yes         No            No          Yes         Yes
          Sample                                       Observed    Observed    Observed     Observed     Predicted     Predicted   Predicted   Predicted
          Observations                                     207         207         207          207         901            901         901         901
          PseudoR2                                        0.250       0.327       0.463        0.463       0.215          0.451       0.519       0.520
          Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity   61.225***   57.081***   65.859***    63.985***    60.379***     49.623***   55.855***   58.521***
                                                        (22.925)    (21.677)    (21.558)     (21.168)     (15.693)      (10.515)    (11.546)    (12.213)
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the number of conflict events during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on the baseline
control variables (i.e., proximate geographical and development-related correlates of conflict). The set of continent and
regional dummies includes indicators for Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-
Saharan Africa. Additional climatic covariates refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and
average temperature range in the homeland. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the
tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the number of conflict events.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent
level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                               52
Table A.IX: Population Diversity and Alternative Conflict Outcomes across Ethnic Homelands

                                                                                                                Log number of
                                                          Log number of             Log number of
                                                                                                                  deaths per
                                                             conflicts                 deaths
                                                                                                                   conflict
                                                         (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                         OLS        OLS          OLS           OLS           OLS           OLS
          Observed population diversity                6.037∗∗∗                26.119∗∗∗                    20.082∗∗
                                                       (2.284)                  (9.789)                      (7.792)
          Predicted population diversity                          9.173∗∗∗                   40.406∗∗∗                   31.233∗∗∗
                                                                  (1.918)                     (8.581)                     (6.932)
          Ethnolinguistic fractionalization            0.552∗      0.094        3.152∗∗        0.576         2.600∗∗       0.482
                                                       (0.317)    (0.113)       (1.421)       (0.492)        (1.162)      (0.398)
          Ethnolinguistic polarization                 -0.439∗    -0.171∗      -2.489∗∗       -0.758∗       -2.050∗∗      -0.587∗
                                                       (0.255)    (0.092)       (1.221)       (0.397)        (1.006)      (0.318)
          Regional dummies                               Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
          Geographical controls                          Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
          Climatic controls                              Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
          Sample                                       Observed   Predicted     Observed      Predicted     Observed     Predicted
          Observations                                    207        901          207            901           207          901
          Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity   1.319***   2.232***    9969.713***   10211.867***   948.445***   1008.051***
                                                        (0.499)    (0.467)     (3736.546)    (2168.784)     (368.027)    (223.744)
          Adjusted R2                                    0.201      0.300        0.241          0.275         0.241        0.253
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive impact of contemporary
population diversity, predicted by prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa on the log number of UCDP/GED conflicts,
the log number of UCDP/GED deaths, and the log number of UCDP/GED deaths per conflict, during the 1989–2008 period,
accounting for geographical and development-related correlates of conflict. The set of continent and regional dummies includes
indicators for Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Additional
climatic covariates refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average temperature range in the
homeland. The estimated effects associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of
its distribution are expressed in terms of the non-logged levels of the respective outcome variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent
level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                     53
Table A.X: Observed Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands – Robustness
to Accounting for Spatial Dependence
                                                                                              Log conflict prevalence
                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                                   OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS
             Observed population diversity                       31.788∗∗∗   41.070∗∗∗   37.111∗∗∗   37.333∗∗∗   37.148∗∗∗   41.745∗∗∗   41.403∗∗∗
                                                                  (8.819)     (8.392)     (8.261)     (8.203)     (8.222)     (8.428)     (8.439)
             Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                                        0.881∗                   0.804
                                                                                                      (0.504)                 (0.497)
             Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                          0.593                   0.562
                                                                                                                  (0.426)                 (0.417)
             Regional dummies                                      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
             Geographical controls                                 No          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
             Climatic controls                                     No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
             Development outcomes                                  No          No          No          No           No         Yes         Yes
             Disease environment controls                          No          No          No          No           No         Yes         Yes
             Sample                                              Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed
             Direct impact of genetic diversity                  32.803***   43.792***   38.509***   38.722***   38.550***   43.734***   43.391***
                                                                  (9.165)     (9.362)     (8.756)     (8.691)     (8.717)     (9.165)     (9.180)
             Direct effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity   0.513***    0.685***    0.602***    0.605***    0.603***    0.684***    0.678***
                                                                  (0.143)     (0.146)     (0.137)     (0.136)     (0.136)     (0.143)     (0.144)
             Observations                                           207         207         207         207         207         207         207
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the log conflict prevalence during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on the baseline
control variables (i.e., proximate geographical and development-related correlates of conflict) and accounting for spatial
dependence using a spatial autoregressive (SARAR(1,1)) model, with a spectral-normalized inverse-distance weighting matrix,
estimated with maximum-likelihood estimation, with a spatial lag of the dependent variable and a spatially lagged error.
The model treat errors as heteroskedastic. Variables relating to observations associated with the same homeland polygon are
averaged and a single observation is kept for each polygon. The set of continent and regional dummies includes indicators for
Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Additional climatic covariates
refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average temperature range in the homeland. The
estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its distribution
is expressed in terms of the change in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent
level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                              54
Table A.XI: Predicted Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands – Robustness
to Accounting for Spatial Dependence

                                                                                        Log conflict prevalence
                                                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                             OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS
              Predicted population diversity               57.609∗∗∗   87.327∗∗∗   88.759∗∗∗   88.623∗∗∗   86.281∗∗∗   83.671∗∗∗   84.245∗∗∗
                                                            (6.447)     (7.269)     (7.230)     (7.387)     (7.305)     (7.255)     (7.288)
              Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                                 0.517∗∗                  0.332
                                                                                                (0.216)                 (0.215)
              Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                   0.007                   -0.004
                                                                                                            (0.189)                 (0.188)
              Regional dummies                               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
              Geographical controls                          No          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
              Climatic controls                              No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
              Development outcomes                           No          No          No          No           No         Yes         Yes
              Disease environment controls                   No          No          No          No           No         Yes         Yes
              Sample                                       Predicted   Predicted   Predicted   Predicted   Predicted   Predicted   Predicted
              Direct Impact of Genetic Diversity           60.406***   87.543***   87.488***   79.433***   84.390***   81.962***   82.463***
                                                             (6.930)     (7.509)    (7.510)      (8.977)     (7.690)     (7.597)     (7.643)
              Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity    1.341***    1.943***   1.942***     1.763***    1.873***    1.819***    1.830***
                                                             (0.154)     (0.167)    (0.167)      (0.199)     (0.171)     (0.169)     (0.170)
              Observations                                     901         901        901          901         901         901         901
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive reduced-form impact of
predicted population diversity on the log conflict prevalence during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on the baseline control
variables (i.e., proximate geographical and development-related correlates of conflict) and accounting for spatial dependence
using a spatial autoregressive (SARAR(1,1)) model, with a spectral-normalized inverse-distance weighting matrix, estimated
with maximum-likelihood estimation, with a spatial lag of the dependent variable and a spatially lagged error. The model
treats errors as heteroskedastic. Variables relating to observations associated with the same homeland polygon are averaged
and a single observation is kept for each polygon. The set of continent and regional dummies includes indicators for Europe,
Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Additional climatic covariates refer to
the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average temperature range in the homeland. The estimated
effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its distribution is expressed
in terms of the change in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the years 1989–2008. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *
at the 10 percent level.




                                                                            55
Table A.XII: Predicted Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands – Robustness
to Accounting for Predicted Diversity as a Generated Regressor

                                                                               Log conflict prevalence
                                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                                 OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS
  Predicted population diversity                              77.710∗∗∗        77.031∗∗∗         74.010∗∗∗        73.581∗∗∗
                                                               (6.279)          (7.282)           (7.396)          (7.418)
  Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                                                0.347
                                                                                                  (0.299)
  Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                                     0.457∗
                                                                                                                   (0.263)
  Regional dummies                                                Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
  Geographical controls                                           No               Yes              Yes               Yes
  Climatic controls                                               No               Yes              Yes               Yes
  Development outcomes                                            No               No               Yes               Yes
  Disease environment controls                                    No               No               Yes               Yes
  Sample                                                     Predicted        Predicted         Predicted        Predicted
  Observations                                                   901              901               901              901
  Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity                  1.725***         1.710***          1.643***         1.633***
                                                               (0.139)          (0.162)           (0.164)          (0.165)
  Adjusted R2                                                   0.211            0.362             0.378            0.379
  Bootstrapped standard error                                (7.128)***       (8.196)***        (8.244)***       (8.266)***
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive impact of predicted population
diversity on the log conflict prevalence during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on ecological diversity and ecological
polarization as well as the baseline control variables. The set of continent and regional dummies includes indicators for
Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Additional climatic covariates
refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average temperature range in the homeland. To
perform this robustness check, the current analysis adopts the two-step bootstrapping technique implemented by Ashraf and
Galor (2013a) for computing the standard-error estimates, so the reader is referred to that work for additional details on
the technique. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table VI.
The reader is therefore referred to Table VI and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of
covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions in the last
two columns. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile
of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory of a homeland over the
years 1989–2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance
at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                               56
A.6   Descriptive Statistics at the Ethnicity Level

                               Table A.XIII: Summary Statistics

                                                                                 Percentile
                                                             Mean      SD      10th    90th
           PANEL A                                                Observed population
                                                               diversity sample (N = 207)
           Population diversity (observed)                    0.72      0.05    0.65     0.76
           Population diversity (predicted)                   0.72     0.04    0.65     0.76
           Conflict prevalence                                0.14      0.27    0.00     0.63
           Number of conflicts                                1.04     2.78    0.00     3.00
           Number of deaths (in thousands)                    3.56     39.32    0.00     1.49
           Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                  0.26      0.30   0.00     0.74
           Ethnolinguistic polarization                       0.33      0.36    0.00     0.85
           Absolute latitude                                  15.15    15.09    1.85    38.02
           Ruggedness                                        133.37   144.14   14.69   299.79
           Elevation                                          0.75      0.75    0.07    1.67
           Range of elevation                                 1.60     1.25    0.31     3.36
           Mean land suitability                               8.50     3.50    3.69    12.38
           Range of land suitability                           5.09     4.42    0.36    11.76
           Small island dummy                                 0.01      0.10    0.00     0.00
           Distance to nearest waterway                      56.45    60.96    0.00    140.47
           Temperature                                        21.08    7.79    8.94     27.20
           Precipitation                                     123.06   100.31   31.34   285.66
           Years since settlement (centuries from present)   104.94    31.86   40.19   120.19
           Malaria                                            0.16      0.19    0.00    0.49
           Oil or gas discovery                               0.27     0.45    0.00     1.00
           Luminosity                                         1.20     2.95    0.00     3.70

           PANEL B                                                Predicted population
                                                               diversity sample (N = 901)
           Population diversity (predicted)                   0.71     0.04    0.64     0.75
           Conflict prevalence                                0.19      0.32    0.00    0.76
           Number of conflicts                                1.13     4.30    0.00     3.00
           Number of deaths (in thousands)                    2.22     20.67    0.00    1.62
           Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                  0.49      0.28   0.02     0.83
           Ethnolinguistic polarization                       0.55      0.28    0.04    0.87
           Absolute latitude                                  21.69    17.08    2.92    48.23
           Ruggedness                                        172.23   176.69   16.32   403.90
           Elevation                                          0.73      0.86    0.07    1.75
           Range of elevation                                 1.84     1.37    0.34     3.69
           Mean land suitability                               8.24     3.61    2.09    12.21
           Range of land suitability                           5.56     4.64    0.55    13.25
           Small island dummy                                 0.03      0.16    0.00    0.00
           Distance to nearest waterway                      43.72    56.33    0.00    94.88
           Temperature                                        18.82    9.36    3.83    26.67
           Precipitation                                     118.85    75.53   32.58   225.72
           Years since settlement (centuries from present)   112.52    23.61   90.19   120.19
           Malaria                                            0.10      0.15    0.00    0.37
           Oil or gas discovery                               0.35     0.48    0.00     1.00
           Luminosity                                         1.47     3.69    0.00     3.76


                                                  57
References
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003): “Fraction-
  alization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 155–194.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005): “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 43, 762–800.
Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2016): “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 124, 428–488.
Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2003): The Size of Nations, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
  Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 151–184.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013a): “The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and
  Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103, 1–48.
——— (2013b): “Genetic Diversity and the Origins of Cultural Fragmentation,” American Economic Review:
  Papers & Proceedings, 103, 528–533.
Ashraf, Q. H. and O. Galor (2018): “The Macrogenoeconomics of Comparative Development,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 56, 1119–1155.
Banks, A. S. and K. A. Wilson (2018): “Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive [Data file],” Databanks
  International, Jerusalem, Israel. https://www.cntsdata.com/.
Bates, R. H. (1983): “Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics in Contemporary
  Africa,” in State versus Ethnic Claims: African Policy Dilemmas, ed. by D. Rothchild and V. A.
  Olorunsola, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 152–171.
Bazzi, S. and C. Blattman (2014): “Economic Shocks and Conflict: Evidence from Commodity Prices,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6, 1–38.
Beck, N., J. N. Katz, and R. Tucker (1998): “Taking Time Seriously: Time-Series–Cross-Section
  Analysis with a Binary Dependent Variable,” American Journal of Political Science, 42, 1260–1288.
Bellows, J. and E. Miguel (2009): “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 93, 1144–1157.
Besley, T. and M. Reynal-Querol (2014): “The Legacy of Historical Conflict: Evidence from Africa,”
  American Political Science Review, 108, 319–336.
Birnir, J. K., D. D. Laitin, J. Wilkenfeld, D. M. Waguespack, A. S. Hultquist, and T. R.
  Gurr (2018): “Introducing the AMAR (All Minorities at Risk) Data,” Journal of Conflict Resolution,
  62, 203–226.
Birnir, J. K., J. Wilkenfeld, J. D. Fearon, D. D. Laitin, T. R. Gurr, D. Brancati, S. M.
  Saideman, A. Pate, and A. S. Hultquist (2015): “Socially Relevant Ethnic Groups, Ethnic Structure,
  and AMAR,” Journal of Peace Research, 52, 110–115.
Blattman, C. and E. Miguel (2010): “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 3–57.
Brecke, P. (1999): “Violent Conflicts 1400 A.D. to the Present in Different Regions of the World,” Paper
  presented at the 1999 Annual Meeting of the Peace Science Society, October 8–10.
Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman, II (2013): “On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 11, 161–192.
Cassar, A., P. Grosjean, and S. Whitt (2013): “Legacies of Violence: Trust and Market Development,”
  Journal of Economic Growth, 18, 285–318.
Cioffi-Revilla, C. (1996): “Origins and Evolution of War and Politics,” International Studies Quarterly,
  40, 1–22.
Collier, P. and A. Hoeffler (2004): “Greed and Grievance in Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers,
  56, 563–595.
——— (2007): “Civil War,” in Handbook of Defense Economics, Vol. 2: Defense in a Globalized World, ed.
  by T. Sandler and K. Hartley, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, North-Holland, 711–740.
Croicu, M. and R. Sundberg (2015): “UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset Codebook version 4.0,”
  Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University. http://ucdp.uu.se/downloads/ged/
  ucdp-ged-40-codebook.pdf.
Desmet, K., M. L. Breton, I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and S. Weber (2011): “The Stability and Breakup of
  Nations: A Quantitative Analysis,” Journal of Economic Growth, 16, 183–213.


                                                  58
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and R. Wacziarg (2012): “The Political Economy of Linguistic
  Cleavages,” Journal of Development Economics, 97, 322–338.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and S. Weber (2009): “Linguistic Diversity and Redistribution,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 7, 1291–1318.
Dincecco, M., J. Fenske, and M. G. Onorato (2015): “Is Africa Different? Historical Conflict and
  State Development,” IMT Lucca EIC Working Paper No. 08/2015, IMT Institute for Advance Studies
  Lucca.
Drukker, D. M., I. R. Prucha, and R. Raciborski (2013): “Maximum Likelihood and Generalized Spa-
  tial Two-Stage Least-Squares Estimators for a Spatial-Autoregressive Model with Spatial-Autoregressive
  Disturbances,” Stata Journal, 13, 221–241.
Dube, O. and J. F. Vargas (2013): “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from
  Colombia,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 1384–1421.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (1997): “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 112, 1203–1250.
Eifert, B., E. Miguel, and D. N. Posner (2010): “Political Competition and Ethnic Identification in
  Africa,” American Journal of Political Science, 54, 494–510.
Esteban, J., L. Mayoral, and D. Ray (2012): “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,” American
  Economic Review, 102, 1310–1342.
Esteban, J. and D. Ray (2011a): “A Model of Ethnic Conflict,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 9, 496–521.
Fearon, J. D. (2003): “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8,
  195–222.
Fearon, J. D. and D. D. Laitin (2003): “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political
  Science Review, 97, 75–90.
Fletcher, E. and M. Iyigun (2010): “The Clash of Civilizations: A Cliometric Investigation,” http:
  //www.colorado.edu/economics/courses/iyigun/fractionalization013109.pdf.
Gellner, E. (1983): Nations and Nationalism, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Gleditsch, N. P., P. Wallensteen, M. Eriksson, M. Sollenberg, and H. Strand (2002): “Armed
  Conflict 1946-2001: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 39, 615–637.
Grossman, H. I. (1991): “A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrections,” American Economic Review,
  81, 912–921.
——— (1999): “Kleptocracy and Revolutions,” Oxford Economic Papers, 51, 267–283.
Harpending, H. and A. Rogers (2000): “Genetic Perspectives on Human Origins and Differentiation,”
  Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 1, 361–385.
Hirshleifer, J. (1991): “The Technology of Conflict as an Economic Activity,” American Economic Review:
  Papers & Proceedings, 81, 130–134.
——— (1995): “Anarchy and its Breakdown,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 26–52.
Humphreys, M. (2005): “Natural Resources, Conflict, and Conflict Resolution: Uncovering the Mecha-
  nisms,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49, 508–537.
King, G. and L. Zeng (2001): “Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data,” Political Analysis, 9, 137–163.
König, M. D., D. Rohner, M. Thoenig, and F. Zilibotti (2017): “Networks in Conflict: Theory and
  Evidence From the Great War of Africa,” Econometrica, 85, 1093–1132.
Marshall, M. G. (2017): “Major Episodes of Political Violence (MEPV) and Conflict Regions, 1946–2017,”
  Center for Systemic Peace, Vienna, VA. Data retrieved at http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic Review, 102,
  1508–1539.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004): “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
  Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 725–753.
Montalvo, J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil
  Wars,” American Economic Review, 95, 796–816.
Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
  Economic Review, 101, 3221–3252.
Oster, E. (2019): “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics, 37, 187–204.


                                                  59
Pemberton, T. J., M. DeGiorgio, and N. A. Rosenberg (2013): “Population Structure in a
  Comprehensive Genomic Data Set on Human Microsatellite Variation,” G3: Genes, Genomes, and
  Genetics, 3, 891–907.
Pettersson, T. and K. Eck (2018): “Organized Violence, 1989–2017,” Journal of Peace Research, 55,
  535–547.
Posner, D. N. (2003): “The Colonial Origins of Ethnic Cleavages: The Case of Linguistic Divisions in
  Zambia,” Comparative Politics, 35, 127–146.
Putterman, L. and D. N. Weil (2010): “Post-1500 Population Flows and The Long-Run Determinants
  of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1627–1682.
Ramachandran, S., O. Deshpande, C. C. Roseman, N. A. Rosenberg, M. W. Feldman, and L. L.
  Cavalli-Sforza (2005): “Support from the Relationship of Genetic and Geographic Distance in Human
  Populations for a Serial Founder Effect Originating in Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 102, 15942–15947.
Reid, R. (2014): “The Fragile Revolution: Rethinking War and Development in Africa’s Violent Nineteenth
  Century,” in Africa’s Development in Historical Perspective, ed. by E. Akyeampong, R. H. Bates, N. Nunn,
  and J. A. Robinson, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 393–423.
Rohner, D., M. Thoenig, and F. Zilibotti (2013a): “War Signals: A Theory of Trade, Trust, and
  Conflict,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 1114–1147.
——— (2013b): “Seeds of Distrust: Conflict in Uganda,” Journal of Economic Growth, 18, 217–252.
Ross, M. (2006): “A Closer Look at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,” Annual Review of Political Science,
  9, 265–300.
Rummel, R. J. (1963): “Dimensions of Conflict Behavior Within and Between Nations,” General Systems
  Yearbook, 8, 1–50.
Sambanis, N. (2002): “A Review of Recent Advances and Future Directions in the Quantitative Literature
  on Civil War,” Defence and Peace Economics, 13, 215–243.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2013): “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 51, 325–369.
——— (2016): “War and Relatedness,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98, 925–939.
Sundberg, R., K. Eck, and J. Kreutz (2012): “Introducing the UCDP Non-State Conflict Dataset,”
  Journal of Peace Research, 49, 351–362.
Tollefsen, A. F., H. Strand, and H. Buhaug (2012): “PRIO-GRID: A Unified Spatial Data Structure,”
  Journal of Peace Research, 49, 363–374.
Weidmann, N. B., J. K. Rød, and L.-E. Cederman (2010): “Representing Ethnic Groups in Space: A
  New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 47, 491–499.
Wimmer, A. (2002): Nationalist Exclusion and Ethnic Conflict: Shadows of Modernity, Cambridge, UK:
  Cambridge University Press.
World Values Survey (2006): “European and World Values Surveys, Four-Wave Integrated Data File,
  1981–2004, version 20060423,” The World Values Survey Association, Stockholm, Sweden. Data retrieved
  at http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org.
——— (2009): “World Values Survey, 1981–2008 Official Aggregate, version 20090914,” The World Values
  Survey Association, Stockholm, Sweden. Data retrieved at http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org.




                                                   60
Supplement to Diversity and Conflict
Supplement A              Supplement to the Country-Level Analyses
A.1    Robustness Checks for the Analysis of Civil Conflict in Cross-Country Data
In this appendix section, we present several robustness checks for our cross-country analysis of the
influence of contemporary population diversity on the temporal frequency of civil conflict outbreaks
in the post-1960 time horizon.
Robustness to Accounting for Ecological/Climatic Covariates                      A nascent interdisci-
plinary literature (e.g., Burke et al., 2009; Hsiang et al., 2013; Burke et al., 2015) has emphasized
the role of climatic factors, like temperature and precipitation, as important correlates of the risk of
civil conflict. Further, Fenske (2014) shows that ecological diversity facilitated state centralization
in pre-colonial Africa. To prevent our main specifications from becoming too unwieldy, we chose
to exclude the aforementioned climatic and ecological variables from our baseline set of covariates,
especially because this set already included a sizable vector of geographical factors that are known
to be correlated with the former. In Table SA.I, however, we establish that population diversity
remains a significant predictor of civil conflicts when we augment our baseline set of covariates
in Table I with controls for (i) time-invariant fractionalization and polarization measures of the
ecological diversity of land (e.g., Fenske, 2014); and (ii) the temporal mean and volatility of climatic
experience (e.g., Burke et al., 2015) with respect to annual temperature and annual precipitation
over the post-1960 time period.
Robustness to Accounting for Deep-Rooted Determinants of Economic Development
In Table SA.II, we establish the robustness of our baseline cross-country analysis of civil conflict to
additionally accounting for the potentially confounding influence of other deep-rooted determinants
of comparative economic development. Specifically, we augment the analysis in Table I with controls
for (i) the time elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a);
(ii) an index of experience with institutionalized statehood since antiquity (e.g., Bockstette et al.,
2002); (iii) the time elapsed since initial human settlement in prehistory (e.g., Ahlerup and Olsson,
2012); and (iv) the great-circle distance to the closest regional technological frontier in the year
1500 (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). The results indicate that regardless of the estimation sample
or the specification, contemporary population diversity remains a significant predictor of the annual
frequency of civil conflict onsets.
Robustness to Accounting for Ethnic and Spatial Inequality In Table SA.III, we check
the robustness of our findings from Table I to additionally accounting for intra-country economic
inequality (e.g., Alesina et al., 2016), as captured by the subnational spatial distribution of per-
capita adjusted nighttime luminosity in the year 2000 across either (i) the georeferenced homelands
of ethnic groups (ethnic inequality); or (ii) 2.5×2.5-degree geospatial grid cells (spatial inequality).
The two inequality measures enter these regressions with a positive coefficient, and in at least one
case, the coefficient on ethnic inequality is statistically significant. Nonetheless, our results indicate
that the positive and significant influence of population diversity on the annual frequency of civil
conflicts cannot be attributed to the potentially confounding influence of these inequality measures.
Robustness to Using Alternative Measures of Ethnolinguistic Fragmentation Due to
the sizable cross-country correlation between the ethnic and linguistic fractionalization measures
of Alesina et al. (2003), rather than exploiting both variables simultaneously, we chose to employ
the more widely used of the two indices – namely, ethnic fractionalization – as one of the many


                                                   A.1
covariates in our baseline analysis of the influence of population diversity on civil conflict frequency.
In Table SA.IV, we examine the sensitivity of our baseline findings from Table I to employing the
linguistic fractionalization index of Alesina et al. (2003) in lieu of our baseline control for the
ethnic fractionalization index from the same source. Furthermore, in Table SA.V, we examine the
robustness of our baseline findings to employing the country-level counterparts of our measures of
linguistic fractionalization and polarization from our analysis of conflicts at the ethnic homelands
level. Specifically, these measures are constructed using georeferenced information on the spatial
distribution of language homelands (from the World Language Mapping System [WLMS]) in
combination with gridded population data, and they enter our regressions in Table SA.V in liue
of our baseline controls for ethnic fractionalization from Alesina et al. (2003) and ethnolinguistic
polarization from Desmet et al. (2012). Reassuringly, the results in Tables SA.IV–SA.V confirm that
all our baseline findings regarding the significant influence of population diversity on the temporal
frequency of civil conflict onsets remain qualitatively intact under these alternative controls for
ethnolinguistic fragmentation.
Robustness to Using Initial Values of Time-Varying Covariates In Table SA.VI, we
exploit the initial or year-1960 values of the time-dependent baseline controls employed by our
analysis in Table I (i.e., the degree of executive constraints, indicators for democracy and autocracy,
total population, and GDP per capita), rather than their respective temporal averages over the
1960–2017 time period. This robustness check is intended to examine whether our baseline estimates
of the influence of population diversity in Table I could be explained away by the fact that the
temporal averages of our time-varying controls over the entire sample period are likely to be more
endogenous to the frequency of civil conflict onsets over the same period. Reassuringly, population
diversity continues to remain a significant predictor of conflict frequency in these alternative
specifications.
Robustness to Accounting for Spatial Autocorrelation in Errors As with any analy-
sis that exploits spatial variations in cross-sectional data, autocorrelation in disturbance terms
across observations could be biasing our estimates of the standard errors in our baseline cross-
country regressions of conflict frequency. Table SA.VII therefore reports, for our key specifications
from Table I, standard errors that are corrected for cross-sectional spatial dependence, using the
methodology proposed by Conley (1999). To perform this robustness check, the spatial distribution
of observations is specified on the Euclidean plane using the full set of pairwise geodesic distances
between country centroids, and the spatial autoregressive process across residuals is modeled as
varying inversely with distance from each observation up to a maximum threshold of 25,000 kilome-
ters, thus admitting the possibility of spatial dependence at a global scale. The GMM specifications
in this table correspond to the 2SLS specifications from Table I. Reassuringly, depending on the
specification, the corrected standard errors of the estimated coefficient on population diversity are
either similar in magnitude or noticeably smaller when compared to their heteroskedasticity robust
counterparts from our baseline analysis.
Robustness to the Elimination of Regions from the Estimation Sample Following the
norm in cross-country empirical studies of civil conflict, we investigate whether our main findings are
driven by potentially influential world regions. The analysis in Table SA.VIII checks the qualitative
robustness of the results associated with our fully specified empirical models in Columns 8 and 12 of
Table I, eliminating one-at-a-time the following world regions from our global sample of countries:
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), Middle East and North Africa (MENA), East Asia and Pacific (EAP),
and Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). Due to the lower degrees of freedom afforded by
the regression samples with eliminated regions, the analysis omits continent dummies from the
empirical models in order to preserve as much of the cross-country variation in conflict frequency

                                                  A.2
as possible. The findings reassuringly reveal that the significant influence of population diversity
on conflict frequency is not qualitatively sensitive to the exclusion of any one of these potentially
influential world region from our full estimation sample.

Table SA.I: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Robustness to Accounting for Ecological/Climatic Covariates

Cross-country sample:                                                 Global                           Old World                Global
                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                 OLS        OLS         OLS      OLS       OLS       OLS       OLS       2SLS        2SLS
                                                           Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)        0.209***   0.409***   0.306**   0.313**   0.290**   0.558**   0.636**   0.577***    0.703***
                                                 (0.066)    (0.104)   (0.119)   (0.126)   (0.132)   (0.247)   (0.248)    (0.206)     (0.217)
Ecological fractionalization                                −0.004    −0.001    −0.003    −0.003     0.001     0.003     −0.004      −0.010
                                                            (0.016)   (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.020)   (0.021)   (0.024)    (0.016)     (0.018)
Ecological polarization                                      0.028     0.027     0.028     0.005     0.028    −0.002     0.030*       0.007
                                                            (0.017)   (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.020)   (0.021)   (0.023)    (0.017)     (0.017)
Annual temperature, 1960–2016 average                       0.002*     0.001     0.001     0.000     0.002    −0.001     0.002*       0.000
                                                            (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)
Annual precipitation, 1960–2016 average                      0.010     0.006     0.005    −0.001    0.018**    0.006     0.011*       0.004
                                                            (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.006)     (0.006)
Volatility of annual temperature, 1960–2016                  0.029     0.016     0.010    −0.003     0.007    −0.019      0.012      −0.013
                                                            (0.024)   (0.024)   (0.022)   (0.023)   (0.029)   (0.026)    (0.023)     (0.021)
Volatility of annual precipitation, 1960–2016              −0.081*    −0.057    −0.054    −0.021    −0.143*   −0.067     −0.053      −0.011
                                                            (0.043)   (0.042)   (0.041)   (0.046)   (0.085)   (0.089)    (0.045)     (0.052)
Continent dummies                                                        ×        ×         ×         ×         ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                        ×          ×        ×         ×         ×         ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                     ×         ×                   ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                   ×                   ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                    ×                   ×                        ×
Observations                                      150        150        150       150       147       123       121       150            147
Partial R2 of population diversity                          0.090      0.038     0.039     0.038     0.049     0.062
Adjusted R2                                      0.029      0.208      0.213     0.210     0.327     0.221     0.360
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity      0.014***   0.027***   0.020**   0.021**   0.020**   0.027**   0.027**   0.038***    0.048***
                                                 (0.004)    (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.012)   (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.015)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                  93.172      63.364
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it
establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially confounding influence of (i) time-invariant fractionalization
and polarization measures of the ecological diversity of land (e.g., Fenske, 2014); and (ii) the temporal mean and volatility of
climatic experience (e.g., Burke et al., 2015) with respect to annual temperature and annual precipitation over the post-1960
time period. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The
reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates
considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect
associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is
expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                      A.3
Table SA.II: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Robustness to Accounting for Deep-Rooted Determinants of Economic Development

Cross-country sample:                                               Global                             Old World                Global
                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)
                                               OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS       OLS       2SLS        2SLS
                                                          Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)      0.228***   0.378***   0.315***   0.316***   0.325**   0.547**   0.664**   0.498***    0.603***
                                               (0.070)    (0.103)    (0.112)    (0.116)   (0.140)   (0.266)   (0.275)    (0.192)     (0.203)
Log years since Neolithic Revolution                       0.008*    0.011**     0.010*    0.008      0.004   −0.001     0.010*       0.008
                                                          (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.006)   (0.010)   (0.011)    (0.005)     (0.006)
Log index of state antiquity                              0.007**    0.008**    0.008**    0.004     0.008*     0.001    0.008**      0.005
                                                          (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.006)    (0.003)     (0.005)
Log duration of human settlement                          0.005**     0.001      0.001     0.003     0.003     0.009*     0.000       0.002
                                                          (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Log distance from regional frontier in 1500                0.002      0.002      0.002     0.001     0.003     0.002      0.002       0.001
                                                          (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)
Continent dummies                                                      ×          ×         ×         ×         ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                      ×          ×          ×         ×         ×         ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                     ×         ×                   ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                   ×                   ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                    ×                   ×                        ×
Observations                                    136        136        136        136        135       110       109       136            135
Partial R2 of population diversity                        0.085      0.046      0.044      0.054     0.044     0.077
Adjusted R2                                    0.034      0.228      0.220      0.218      0.350     0.215     0.401
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity    0.016***   0.026***   0.022***   0.022***   0.022**   0.026**   0.033**   0.034***    0.041***
                                               (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.010)   (0.013)   (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.014)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                  69.283      52.108
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it
establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially confounding influence of other deep-rooted determinants of
comparative economic development, including (i) the time elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution (e.g., Ashraf and
Galor, 2013a); (ii) an index of experience with institutionalized statehood since antiquity (e.g., Bockstette et al., 2002); (iii) the
time elapsed since initial human settlement in prehistory (e.g., Ahlerup and Olsson, 2012); and (iv) the great-circle distance
to the closest regional technological frontier in the year 1500 (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). The specifications examined in
this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the
corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the
identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity
from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict
onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                    A.4
Table SA.III: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
Robustness to Accounting for Ethnic and Spatial Inequality

Cross-country sample:                                              Global                              Old World                 Global
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                              OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                          Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     0.214***   0.443***   0.338***   0.353***   0.337**   0.665***   0.760***   0.674***    0.747***
                                              (0.066)    (0.108)    (0.123)    (0.127)   (0.132)    (0.211)    (0.213)    (0.197)     (0.188)
Ethnic inequality in luminosity                           0.021      0.020      0.018     0.013      0.023      0.022     0.024*       0.018
                                                         (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.015)   (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.018)    (0.014)     (0.015)
Spatial inequality in luminosity                          0.004      0.014      0.015     0.013      0.021      0.019      0.018       0.014
                                                         (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.018)   (0.015)    (0.021)    (0.018)    (0.016)     (0.014)
Continent dummies                                                     ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                     ×          ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                    ×         ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                   ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                   147        147        147        147        145       120        119        147            145
Partial R2 of population diversity                       0.132      0.054      0.056      0.062     0.094      0.139
Adjusted R2                                   0.032      0.181      0.211      0.209      0.359     0.235      0.424
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   0.015***   0.030***   0.023***   0.024***   0.023**   0.028***   0.033***   0.046***    0.051***
                                              (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.013)     (0.013)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                  133.897      80.495

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically,
it establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially confounding influence of measures of intra-country
economic inequality (e.g., Alesina et al., 2016), as captured by the subnational spatial distribution of per-capita adjusted
nighttime luminosity in the year 2000 across either (i) the georeferenced homelands of ethnic groups (ethnic inequality); or
(ii) 2.5×2.5-degree geospatial grid cells (spatial inequality). The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical
to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for
additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy
employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to
the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level,
** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                     A.5
Table SA.IV: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
The Analysis under Linguistic Fractionalization

Cross-country sample:                                              Global                              Old World                 Global
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                              OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                          Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     0.218***   0.470***   0.338***   0.357***   0.332**   0.545***   0.605***   0.554***    0.603***
                                              (0.069)    (0.109)    (0.125)    (0.125)   (0.136)    (0.193)    (0.211)    (0.182)     (0.190)
Linguistic fractionalization                                                    0.011     0.005                 0.010                  0.005
                                                                               (0.012)   (0.009)               (0.011)                (0.009)
Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                    0.014     0.012                 0.013                  0.016
                                                                               (0.013)   (0.012)               (0.014)                (0.012)
Continent dummies                                                     ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                     ×          ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for institutions                                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                   ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                   146        146        146        146        143       122        120        146            143
Partial R2 of population diversity                       0.138      0.049      0.056      0.057     0.068      0.092
Adjusted R2                                   0.031      0.196      0.217      0.227      0.372     0.226      0.407
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity   0.014***   0.031***   0.022***   0.023***   0.022**   0.025***   0.027***   0.036***    0.039***
                                              (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.012)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                  163.933     100.133

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it
establishes robustness to accounting for the potentially confounding influence of linguistic rather than ethnic fractionalization
(e.g., Alesina et al., 2003), as a baseline control for subnational intergroup cultural fragmentation. The specifications examined
in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the
corresponding table notes for additional details on the other baseline covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the
identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity
from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict
onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                     A.6
Table SA.V: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
The Analysis under Georeferenced Linguistic Fractionalization and Polarization

Cross-country sample:                                                Global                              Old World                 Global
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                            Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)       0.212***   0.443***   0.315***   0.326***   0.285**   0.556***   0.578***   0.543***    0.556***
                                                (0.066)    (0.103)    (0.115)    (0.118)   (0.123)    (0.191)    (0.210)    (0.176)     (0.182)
Linguistic fractionalization (georeferenced)                                      0.002    −0.006                −0.008                 −0.002
                                                                                 (0.011)   (0.010)               (0.012)                (0.010)
Linguistic polarization (georeferenced)                                           0.006     0.008                 0.010                  0.009
                                                                                 (0.012)   (0.010)               (0.010)                (0.009)
Continent dummies                                                       ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                       ×          ×          ×         ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for institutions                                                                    ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                     ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                     151        151        151        151        148       124        122        151            148
Partial R2 of population diversity                         0.129      0.047      0.049      0.046     0.070      0.083
Adjusted R2                                     0.030      0.188      0.214      0.206      0.359     0.226      0.389
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity     0.014***   0.029***   0.021***   0.021***   0.019**   0.027***   0.025***   0.035***    0.038***
                                                (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.012)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                    157.089      98.473

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically,
it establishes robustness to accounting for the potentially confounding influence of linguistic fractionalization and polarization,
constructed using georeferenced information on the spatial distribution of language homelands (from the World Language
Mapping System [WLMS]) in combination with gridded population data, rather than ethnic fractionalization (e.g., Alesina
et al., 2003) and ethnolinguistic polarization (e.g., Desmet et al., 2012), as baseline controls for subnational intergroup cultural
fragmentation. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The
reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the other baseline covariates
considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect
associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is
expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                      A.7
Table SA.VI: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries –
The Analysis under Initial Values of Time-Varying Covariates

Cross-country sample:                                                  Global                               Old World                 Global
                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                  OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        2SLS        2SLS
                                                               Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)         0.209***   0.439***   0.306***   0.318***   0.366***   0.548***   0.734***   0.537***   0.693***
                                                  (0.066)    (0.104)    (0.115)    (0.119)    (0.136)    (0.191)    (0.215)    (0.176)    (0.192)
Executive constraints in initial year                                                          0.004                 0.003               0.005**
                                                                                              (0.002)               (0.003)               (0.002)
Democracy score in initial year                                                               −0.002                −0.002               −0.003**
                                                                                              (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.002)
Autocracy score in initial year                                                               −0.001                −0.000                −0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)               (0.002)               (0.001)
Log population in initial year                                                                0.005*                0.007**               0.004*
                                                                                              (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.002)
Log GDP per capita in initial year                                                           −0.004*               −0.004*               −0.005**
                                                                                              (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.002)
Continent dummies                                                         ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                         ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                        ×          ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for legal origin and colonial history                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Control for oil or gas reserve discovery                                                        ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                       150        150        150        150        145        123        119        150            145
Partial R2 of population diversity                           0.128      0.044      0.046      0.063      0.068      0.118
Adjusted R2                                       0.029      0.189      0.213      0.215      0.276      0.225      0.339
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity       0.014***   0.029***   0.020***   0.021***   0.025***   0.026***   0.031***   0.036***    0.047***
                                                  (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.013)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                       153.543      81.221

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically, it
establishes robustness to considering the initial or year-1960 values of the time-dependent baseline controls for institutions (i.e.,
the degree of executive constraints and indicators for democracy and autocracy), total population, and GDP per capita, rather
than their respective temporal averages over the 1960–2017 time period. The methodology exploited by the current analysis
aims to reduce any ex ante bias in the baseline estimates of the influence of population diversity, arising from the fact that
the temporal averages of the aforementioned time-varying controls may well vary more endogenously across countries with the
contemporaneous measure of civil conflict onsets. In order to maintain a cross-country sample that as consistent as possible with
the baseline analysis, observations of the time-dependent covariates from the earliest available year after 1960 are used for the
subset of countries with missing 1960 data. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding
ones reported in Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details
on the other baseline covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the identification strategy employed by the 2SLS
regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of
its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level,
and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                        A.8
Table SA.VII: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries
– Robustness to Accounting for Spatial Autocorrelation in Errors

Cross-country sample:                                            Global                               Old World                 Global
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
                                           Conley     Conley     Conley     Conley     Conley     Conley     Conley     Conley      Conley
                                            OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS        OLS       GMM         GMM
                                                         Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   0.209***   0.439***   0.306***   0.318***   0.309***   0.548***   0.597***   0.537***    0.602***
                                            (0.036)    (0.068)    (0.117)    (0.110)    (0.111)    (0.076)    (0.076)    (0.084)     (0.085)
Continent dummies                                                   ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for geography                                   ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×          ×             ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                                  ×          ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for institutions                                                                 ×                     ×                        ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                                  ×                     ×                        ×
Observations                                 150        150        150        150        147        123        121        150            147
Adjusted R2                                 0.364      0.468      0.484      0.485      0.582      0.512      0.619
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline cross-country analysis of the reduced-form
impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict onsets, as shown in Table I. Specifically,
it establishes robustness of the standard-error estimates to accounting for spatial dependence across observations, following
the methodology of Conley (1999). To perform this robustness check, the spatial distribution of observations is specified on
the Euclidean plane using the full set of pairwise geodesic distances between country centroids, and the spatial autoregressive
process across residuals is modeled as varying inversely with distance from each observation up to a maximum threshold of
25,000 kilometers, thus admitting the possibility of spatial dependence at a global scale. The GMM specifications in this table
correspond to the 2SLS specifications from Table I, exploiting prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to the indigenous
(precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population diversity. The
specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table I. The reader is therefore
referred to Table I and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the
current analysis. Standard errors, corrected for spatial autocorrelation, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                    A.9
Table SA.VIII: Population Diversity and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset across Countries
– Robustness to the Elimination of Regions from the Global Sample

Omitted region:                                           None                      SSA                   MENA                     EAP                     LAC
                                                  (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)      (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)      (9)           (10)
                                                  OLS            2SLS        OLS          2SLS      OLS        2SLS        OLS           2SLS      OLS           2SLS
                                                                        Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)         0.344***    0.587***      0.411***   1.243***     0.368***   0.604***   0.310**    0.561***      0.385**   0.558***
                                                  (0.115)     (0.178)       (0.139)    (0.379)      (0.128)    (0.187)   (0.124)     (0.193)      (0.161)    (0.204)
Controls   for   geography                           ×            ×           ×             ×         ×          ×          ×             ×           ×           ×
Controls   for   ethnic diversity                    ×            ×           ×             ×         ×          ×          ×             ×           ×           ×
Controls   for   institutions                        ×            ×           ×             ×         ×          ×          ×             ×           ×           ×
Controls   for   oil, population, and income         ×            ×           ×             ×         ×          ×          ×             ×           ×           ×
Observations                                       147           147         105           105       131         131        132          132        126          126
Partial R2 of population diversity                0.051                     0.058                   0.039                  0.011                   0.087
Adjusted R2                                       0.342                     0.343                   0.359                  0.334                   0.357
Effect of 10th–90th %ile move in diversity       0.023***    0.040***      0.026***   0.077***     0.025***   0.041***   0.018**    0.033***      0.019**   0.027***
                                                  (0.008)     (0.012)       (0.009)    (0.024)      (0.009)    (0.013)   (0.007)     (0.011)      (0.008)    (0.010)
First-stage F statistic                                       59.534                      17.579               57.894                50.576                  73.441

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results associated with the fully specified empirical models in the baseline
cross-country analysis of the reduced-form impact of contemporary population diversity on the annual frequency of civil conflict
onsets, as shown in Columns 8 and 12 of Table I. Specifically, it establishes robustness to the one-at-a-time elimination of
world regions from the global sample, including Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), Middle East and North Africa (MENA), East
Asia and Pacific (EAP), and Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). Due to the lower degrees of freedom afforded by the
regression samples with eliminated regions, the current analysis omits continent dummies from the empirical models in order
to preserve as much of the cross-country variation in conflict as possible. The regressions in Columns 1–2 should therefore be
viewed as the relevant baselines for assessing the robustness results presented in the remaining columns. The set of covariates,
however, is otherwise identical to those reported in Columns 8 and 12 of Table I. The reader is therefore referred to Table I and
the corresponding table notes for additional details on the set of covariates considered by the current analysis as well as the
identification strategy employed by the 2SLS regressions. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity
from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms of the number of new conflict
onsets per year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




Table SA.IX: Ethnic Fractionalization, Polarization, and the Frequency of Civil Conflict Onset
across Countries

                                               (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)            (7)             (8)         (9)
                                               OLS           OLS           OLS            OLS        OLS          OLS            OLS             OLS         OLS
                                                         Log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year, 1960–2017
Ethnic fractionalization                   0.024***         0.021*         0.016                                             0.022***            0.015       0.012
                                            (0.007)         (0.012)       (0.012)                                             (0.007)           (0.012)     (0.012)
Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                           0.014        0.019*        0.012        0.007             0.014       0.008
                                                                                      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)           (0.010)     (0.010)
Continent dummies                                                            ×                                       ×                                           ×
Controls for geography                                        ×              ×                         ×             ×                            ×              ×
Observations                                    154          154            154            154        154         154            154             154          154
Adjusted R2                                    0.037        0.095          0.182          0.006      0.096       0.180          0.034           0.098        0.179
Notes: This table examines the sensitivity of the association between ethnic fractionalization and ethnolinguistic polarization,
on the one hand, and the annual frequency of new civil conflict onsets during the 1960–2017 time period, on the other, to
controls for potentially confounding geographical characteristics and continent fixed effects. The controls for geography include
absolute latitude, ruggedness, distance to the nearest waterway, the mean and range of agricultural suitability, the mean and
range of elevation, and an indicator for small island nations. The set of continent dummies includes five indicators for Africa,
Asia, North America, South America, and Oceania. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                  A.10
A.2    Robustness Checks for the Analysis of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-
       Country Data
In this appendix section, we present several robustness checks for our analysis of the influence of
contemporary population diversity on the quinquennial incidence or annual onset of civil conflict
in repeated cross-country data for the post-1960 time horizon.
Robustness to Accounting for Ecological/Climatic Covariates                      A nascent interdisci-
plinary literature (e.g., Burke et al., 2009; Hsiang et al., 2013; Burke et al., 2015) has emphasized
the role of climatic factors, like temperature and precipitation, as important correlates of the risk of
civil conflict. Further, Fenske (2014) shows that ecological diversity facilitated state centralization
in pre-colonial Africa. To prevent our main specifications from becoming too unwieldy, we chose
to exclude the aforementioned climatic and ecological variables from our baseline set of covariates,
especially because this set already included a sizable vector of geographical factors that are known
to be correlated with the former. In Table SA.X, however, we establish that population diversity
remains a significant predictor of both the quinquennial incidence (Columns 1–4) and the annual
onset (Columns 5–8) of civil conflict when we augment our baseline set of covariates in Table II
with controls for (i) time-invariant fractionalization and polarization measures of the ecological
diversity of land (e.g., Fenske, 2014); and (ii) climatic experience in the recent past (e.g., Burke
et al., 2015), as captured by either (a) the temporal mean and volatility of annual temperature and
annual precipitation over the previous 5-year interval for the quinquennial incidence regressions;
or (b) the lagged values of annual temperature and annual precipitation as well as their temporal
volatility over the previous 5 years for the annual onset regressions.
Robustness to Accounting for Deep-Rooted Determinants of Economic Development
The analysis in Table SA.XI establishes the robustness of our baseline results for the quinquennial
incidence and annual onset of civil conflict in repeated cross-country data to additionally account-
ing for the potentially confounding influence of other deep-rooted determinants of comparative
economic development. Specifically, we augment the analysis in Table II with controls for (i) the
time elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a); (ii) an
index of experience with institutionalized statehood since antiquity (e.g., Bockstette et al., 2002);
(iii) the time elapsed since initial human settlement in prehistory (e.g., Ahlerup and Olsson, 2012);
and (iv) the great-circle distance to the closest regional technological frontier in the year 1500
(e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). The results indicate that regardless of the estimation sample
or the specification, contemporary population diversity remains a significant predictor of both the
quinquennial likelihood of a conflict incidence (Columns 1–4) and the annual likelihood of a conflict
onset (Columns 5–8).
Robustness to Accounting for Ethnic and Spatial Inequality In Table SA.XII, we check
the robustness of our findings from Table II to additionally accounting for intra-country economic
inequality (e.g., Alesina et al., 2016), as captured by the subnational spatial distribution of per-
capita adjusted nighttime luminosity in the year 2000 across either (i) the georeferenced homelands
of ethnic groups (ethnic inequality); or (ii) 2.5×2.5-degree geospatial grid cells (spatial inequality).
The two inequality measures enter these regressions with mostly positive but invariably insignificant
coefficients. Thus, unsurprisingly, the positive and significant influence of population diversity
on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict remains qualitatively
unaffected.
Robustness to Accounting for Alternative Correlates of Conflict Incidence The analy-
sis in Table SA.XIII checks the robustness of our baseline results for conflict incidence to controlling
for the potentially confounding influence of alternative distributional indices of intergroup diversity

                                                 A.11
(e.g., Fearon, 2003; Alesina et al., 2003; Esteban et al., 2012) as well as additional geographical
correlates of conflict (e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Cervellati et al., 2017). The specifications
examined by this robustness analysis are identical to the fully specified baseline models reported
in Columns 2 and 4 of Table II, with the exception that in Columns 1–3 and 6–8 of the current
analysis, each of the reported control variables is employed in lieu of the baseline control for
ethnic fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003), whereas in Columns 4 and 9, the set of reported
control variables replaces the baseline controls for both ethnic fractionalization and ethnolinguistic
polarization (Desmet et al., 2012), in the interest of mitigating multicollinearity. Further, in
Columns 5 and 10, the set of reported geographical controls augment our fully specified baseline
models of conflict incidence. Among the additional controls considered, ethnolinguistic polarization
(Esteban et al., 2012) and the geographical variables that capture the percentage of mountainous
terrain and the presence of noncontiguous territories (Fearon and Laitin, 2003) enter the IV Probit
regressions in the global sample of countries with positive and significant coefficients. Nevertheless,
our baseline findings regarding the significant impact of population diversity on the quinquennial
incidence of civil conflict remain qualitatively unaltered across all specifications.
Robustness to Employing the Classical Logit and Rare-Events Logit Estimators The
analysis in Table SA.XIV establishes the robustness of our baseline results for the quinquennial
incidence and annual onset of civil conflict in repeated cross-sectional data on countries from the
Old World, as shown in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II, to employing the classical logit and
rare-events logit (King and Zeng, 2001) estimators, rather than the standard probit estimator.
Given the absence of readily available ordinary logit and rare-events logit estimators that permit
instrumentation, the current analysis is unable to implement our global-sample identification strat-
egy of exploiting prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial)
population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population
diversity. As expected, the rare-events logit estimates in Table SA.XIV are somewhat smaller in
absolute value than their counterparts under the classical logit estimator, due to bias arising in the
latter estimates from ignoring the fact that civil conflict events (involving at least 25 battle-related
deaths in a year) are generally rare occurrences in repeated cross-country data. Nonetheless, the
findings attest to the robustness of the reduced-form influence of population diversity on either the
quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict under these alternative estimators.
Robustness to Accounting for Spatiotemporal Dependence using Two-Way Clustering
of Standard Errors In Table SA.XV, we check the robustness of the results from our baseline
probit and logit analyses of the quinquennial incidence or annual onset of civil conflict in repeated
cross-sectional data on countries from the Old World, as shown in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II
and in odd-numbered columns of Table SA.XIV, to accounting for spatiotemporal dependence across
country-time observations. Specifically, we probe the statistical precision of our coefficient estimates
by implementing multi-dimensional clustering of standard errors, following the methodology of
Cameron et al. (2011). To implement this robustness check, the standard errors across country-
time observations are clustered in two dimensions: (i) the country level, which allows for temporal
dependence within a country over time (i.e., across either 5-year intervals or years); and (ii) the time
level, which allows for spatial dependence across countries within a given time period (i.e., either a
5-year interval or a year). Given the absence of readily available probit and logit estimators that
not only allow for multi-dimensional clustering of standard errors but also permit instrumentation,
the current analysis is unable to implement the global-sample identification strategy of exploiting
prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a
country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population diversity. Reassur-
ingly, the bi-dimensionally clustered standard errors of our coefficient of interest are either similar to

                                                  A.12
or, in the specifications for conflict incidence, noticeably smaller in magnitude than their classically
estimated counterparts in Tables II and SA.XIV that do not admit spatiotemporal dependence
across country-time observations.
Robustness to Accounting for Alternative Correlates of Conflict Onset In Table SA.XVI,
we check the robustness of the results from our baseline analysis of the annual onset of civil conflict in
repeated cross-country data, as shown in Columns 5–8 of Table II, to accounting for the potentially
confounding influence of an additional time-invariant distributional index of intergroup diversity,
capturing the degree of “ethnic dominance” (e.g., Collier and Hoeffler, 2004), and additional time-
varying institutional correlates of conflict onset, capturing the lagged annual values of an index of
political instability and an indicator for the emergence of a newly independent state from colonial
powers (e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003). In light of constraints imposed by the availability of data
on these additional control variables, the analysis is restricted to a smaller sample of countries
and to the 1960–1999 (as opposed to the 1960–2017) time period. Therefore, the specification
presented in each odd-numbered column of the table is intended to provide a relevant baseline for
the robustness check in the subsequent even-numbered column (i.e., by holding fixed the regression
sample). Turning to the results in Table SA.XVI, the lagged index of political instability does
appear to enter some of our specifications with a positive and statistically significant coefficient,
although the other additional controls considered by the analysis do not seem to be significantly
correlated with conflict onset. However, despite the substantial reduction in both the sample
time-frame and the number of countries in the cross-section, our coefficient of interest reassuringly
remains positive and precisely estimated, regardless of the inclusion of these additional controls to
the specifications.
Robustness to Accounting for Commodity Export Price Shocks The analysis in Ta-
ble SA.XVII checks the robustness of our baseline results for the annual onset of civil conflict in
repeated cross-country data, as shown in Columns 5–8 of Table II, to additionally accounting for
the potentially confounding “income effect” of commodity export price shocks (e.g., Bazzi and
Blattman, 2014), as captured by the contemporaneous, lagged, and twice lagged values of either an
annual price shock that has been aggregated across commodity export types (Columns 1–2 and 5–6)
or annual price shocks disaggregated by type of commodity export, including export price shocks
associated with annual crops, perennial crops, and extractive crops (Columns 3–4 and 7–8). These
export price shock variables are all obtained from the data set of Bazzi and Blattman (2014), so
the reader is referred to that work for additional details on these variables. In light of constraints
imposed by the availability of data on these additional covariates, the analysis is restricted to a
smaller sample of countries and to the 1960–2007 (as opposed to the 1960–2017) time period. As is
evident from the results in Table SA.XVII, there is indeed a significant mitigating “income effect”
on the annual likelihood of a conflict onset associated with the contemporaneous and twice lagged
values of commodity export price shocks (for both aggregated and disaggregated variants of these
shocks). Nonetheless, despite the reduction in both the number of countries in the cross-section
and the sample time-frame, our coefficient of interest reassuringly remains positive and statistically
significant when subjected to these additional covariates in the specifications.




                                                  A.13
Table SA.X: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-
Country Data – Robustness to Accounting for Ecological/Climatic Covariates

Cross-country sample:                          Old World                     Global              Old World                  Global
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)           (8)
                                            Probit      Probit     IV Probit     IV Probit    Probit    Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit
                                               Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict                   Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                     incidence, 1960–2017                                onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   14.367***   10.178**    17.325***     15.651***    6.172*    6.001*     7.063**       9.482**
                                             (4.264)    (4.488)      (4.387)      (5.167)     (3.306)   (3.538)    (3.425)       (4.282)
Ecological fractionalization                 −0.368     −0.080       −0.503       −0.394       0.018    −0.401     −0.027        −0.432
                                             (0.456)    (0.524)      (0.432)      (0.494)     (0.274)   (0.371)    (0.275)       (0.376)
Ecological polarization                     0.865**      0.327      1.086***      0.927**      0.238     0.330      0.406         0.529
                                             (0.417)    (0.504)      (0.398)      (0.471)     (0.301)   (0.419)    (0.303)       (0.420)
Lagged temperature                          0.078***     0.002      0.067***       0.023      0.033*    −0.004      0.032*        0.009
                                             (0.027)    (0.034)      (0.021)      (0.025)     (0.019)   (0.024)    (0.016)       (0.020)
Lagged precipitation                          0.177     −0.042        0.248        0.148       0.096    −0.002       0.110        0.086
                                             (0.178)    (0.166)      (0.167)      (0.176)     (0.124)   (0.138)    (0.122)       (0.140)
Lagged temperature volatility               −0.576*     −0.416       −0.356       −0.274       0.307     0.249      0.218         0.239
                                             (0.342)    (0.382)      (0.307)      (0.332)     (0.287)   (0.281)    (0.272)       (0.263)
Lagged precipitation volatility              −1.326     −1.363       −0.504       −0.439      −0.282    −0.152     −0.566        −0.221
                                             (0.814)    (1.096)      (0.603)      (0.742)     (0.592)   (0.708)    (0.595)       (0.647)
Continent dummies                             ×            ×             ×             ×        ×         ×          ×                ×
Time dummies                                  ×            ×             ×             ×        ×         ×          ×                ×
Controls for temporal spillovers              ×            ×             ×             ×        ×         ×          ×                ×
Controls for geography                        ×            ×             ×             ×        ×         ×          ×                ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                              ×                           ×                  ×                           ×
Controls for institutions                                  ×                           ×                  ×                           ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                   ×                           ×                  ×                           ×
Observations                                 1,270      1,045        1,583            1,311   5,452     4,377       6,996            5,757
Countries                                     123        121          150              147     123       121         150              147
Pseudo R2                                    0.431      0.443                                 0.135     0.163
Marginal effect of diversity               2.675***    1.873**     3.364***      2.981***     0.322*    0.312*     0.333*        0.454*
                                            (0.796)    (0.833)      (0.908)       (1.046)     (0.177)   (0.186)    (0.173)       (0.233)
First-stage F statistic                                             83.318        70.585                           94.679        77.102
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated
cross-country data, as shown in Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially
confounding influence of (i) time-invariant fractionalization and polarization measures of the ecological diversity of land (e.g.,
Fenske, 2014); and (ii) climatic experience in the recent past (e.g., Burke et al., 2015), as captured by either (a) the temporal
mean and volatility of annual temperature and annual precipitation over the previous 5-year interval for the quinquennial
incidence regressions; or (b) the lagged values of annual temperature and annual precipitation as well as their temporal volatility
over the previous 5 years for the annual onset regressions. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical
to corresponding ones reported in Table II. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes for
additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the identification strategy employed by
the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of population diversity on the incidence
or onset of conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                  A.14
Table SA.XI: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated
Cross-Country Data – Robustness to Accounting for Deep-Rooted Determinants of Economic
Development

Cross-country sample:                             Old World                   Global              Old World                    Global
                                                (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
                                               Probit     Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit    Probit      Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit
                                                  Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict                    Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                        incidence, 1960–2017                                 onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)      15.404***   9.821**   19.297***     15.653**      5.222*     4.777*     8.565**      11.664***
                                                (4.670)   (4.781)     (5.404)      (6.386)     (2.939)     (2.784)    (3.657)       (4.255)
Log years since Neolithic Revolution             0.085     0.187      −0.290       −0.243      0.333**     0.324*      0.029        −0.160
                                                (0.270)   (0.296)     (0.285)      (0.334)     (0.147)     (0.174)    (0.194)       (0.232)
Log index of state antiquity                   0.244***    0.076     0.286***       0.143      0.093**      0.035     0.125**        0.096
                                                (0.088)   (0.103)     (0.101)      (0.116)     (0.041)     (0.057)    (0.051)       (0.070)
Log duration of human settlement                 0.000     0.070      −0.024       −0.009       0.039       0.044      0.004         0.019
                                                (0.131)   (0.131)     (0.097)      (0.118)     (0.066)     (0.071)    (0.059)       (0.069)
Log distance from regional frontier in 1500     −0.031     0.001      −0.057       −0.025       0.049       0.050     −0.004        −0.018
                                                (0.052)   (0.051)     (0.040)      (0.047)     (0.032)     (0.038)    (0.026)       (0.031)
Continent dummies                                ×            ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Time dummies                                     ×            ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for temporal spillovers                 ×            ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for geography                           ×            ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                 ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Controls for institutions                                     ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                      ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Observations                                    1,141       953       1,447            1,219    4,810       4,481      6,280            5,886
Countries                                        110        109        136              135      110         109        136              135
Pseudo R2                                       0.425      0.432                                0.143       0.151
Marginal effect of diversity                  2.992***    1.901**    3.885***      3.105**     0.293*      0.263*     0.437**       0.604**
                                               (0.896)    (0.936)     (1.140)      (1.333)     (0.165)     (0.154)    (0.203)       (0.257)
First-stage F statistic                                               41.126       39.893                             48.227        44.985
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated
cross-country data, as shown in Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially
confounding influence of other deep-rooted determinants of comparative economic development, including (i) the time elapsed
since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a); (ii) an index of experience with institutionalized
statehood since antiquity (e.g., Bockstette et al., 2002); (iii) the time elapsed since initial human settlement in prehistory
(e.g., Ahlerup and Olsson, 2012); and (iv) the great-circle distance to the closest regional technological frontier in the year
1500 (e.g., Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones
reported in Table II. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the
baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the identification strategy employed by the IV probit regressions,
and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of population diversity on the incidence or onset of conflict.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                   A.15
Table SA.XII: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated
Cross-Country Data – Robustness to Accounting for Ethnic and Spatial Inequality

Cross-country sample:                             Old World                   Global              Old World                    Global
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
                                            Probit       Probit     IV Probit     IV Probit    Probit      Probit    IV Probit     IV Probit
                                                  Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict                    Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                        incidence, 1960–2017                                 onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   14.732***    14.259***   16.367***     16.080***    6.687**     6.812**   7.892***      9.098***
                                            (3.867)      (3.801)     (3.782)       (4.046)     (2.862)     (2.952)    (2.971)       (3.367)
Ethnic inequality in luminosity              0.593        0.675       0.331         0.277       0.330       0.330      0.263         0.142
                                            (0.372)      (0.451)     (0.376)       (0.445)     (0.261)     (0.262)    (0.257)       (0.255)
Spatial inequality in luminosity            −0.035        0.150       0.294         0.519      −0.053      −0.017      0.070         0.086
                                            (0.409)      (0.425)     (0.392)       (0.410)     (0.256)     (0.259)    (0.247)       (0.279)
Continent dummies                             ×               ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Time dummies                                  ×               ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for temporal spillovers              ×               ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for geography                        ×               ×           ×             ×        ×            ×         ×                ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                 ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Controls for institutions                                     ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                      ×                         ×                     ×                          ×
Observations                                 1,234        1,038       1,547            1,304    5,206       4,342      6,840            5,722
Countries                                     120          119         147              145      120         119        147              145
Pseudo R2                                    0.408        0.442                                 0.133       0.172
Marginal effect of diversity               2.838***     2.626***    3.272***      3.094***     0.348**     0.347**    0.370**       0.431**
                                            (0.717)      (0.702)     (0.787)       (0.843)     (0.154)     (0.153)    (0.153)       (0.182)
First-stage F statistic                                              125.548       93.701                             133.266       99.940
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated
cross-country data, as shown in Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially
confounding influence of measures of intrastate economic inequality (e.g., Alesina et al., 2016), as captured by the subnational
spatial distribution of per-capita adjusted nighttime luminosity in the year 2000 across either (i) the georeferenced homelands
of ethnic groups (ethnic inequality); or (ii) 2.5×2.5-degree geospatial grid cells (spatial inequality). The specifications examined
in this table are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Table II. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and
the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the
identification strategy employed by the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of
population diversity on the incidence or onset of conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country
level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at
the 10 percent level.




                                                                   A.16
Table SA.XIII: Population Diversity and the Incidence of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-
Country Data – Robustness to Accounting for Alternative Correlates of Conflict Incidence
Cross-country sample:                                                                    Old World                                                    Global
                                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                                  Probit      Probit       Probit      Probit     Probit     IV Probit   IV Probit   IV Probit   IV Probit   IV Probit
                                                                                                 Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict incidence, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)                         12.439***   12.412***    13.672***   9.587**    13.200***   13.115***   13.929***   14.428***   10.985**    14.758***
                                                                  (3.718)     (3.745)      (4.027)    (4.202)     (4.052)     (4.107)     (4.149)     (4.427)     (4.442)     (4.774)
Ethnic fractionalization (Fearon, 2003)                           −0.266                                                      −0.147
                                                                  (0.332)                                                     (0.329)
Linguistic fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003)                            0.348                                                       0.276
                                                                              (0.354)                                                     (0.317)
Religious fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003)                                         −0.463*                                                   −0.705**
                                                                                           (0.280)                                                    (0.276)
Ethnolinguistic fractionalization (Esteban et al., 2012)                                                0.106                                                      0.179
                                                                                                       (0.365)                                                    (0.346)
Ethnolinguistic polarization (Esteban et al., 2012)                                                     0.717                                                     3.225**
                                                                                                       (1.488)                                                    (1.374)
Gini index of ethnolinguistic diversity (Esteban et al., 2012)                                         −0.519                                                     −1.358
                                                                                                       (0.716)                                                    (1.053)
Log percentage mountainous terrain                                                                                 0.099                                                      0.112*
                                                                                                                  (0.063)                                                     (0.062)
Noncontiguous state dummy                                                                                         0.371*                                                     0.560***
                                                                                                                  (0.214)                                                     (0.182)
Disease richness                                                                                                   0.000                                                      −0.007
                                                                                                                  (0.010)                                                     (0.010)
Controls for all baseline covariates                                ×           ×            ×           ×          ×           ×           ×              ×        ×           ×
Observations                                                       1,020       1,035        1,046        950       1,015       1,286       1,278       1,312       1,177       1,281
Countries                                                           119         120          121         106        118         145         143         147         128         144
Pseudo R2                                                          0.429       0.436        0.438       0.451      0.436
Marginal effect of diversity                                     2.387***    2.309***     2.547***    1.779**    2.499***    2.577***    2.664***    2.759***     2.124**    2.853***
                                                                  (0.722)     (0.700)      (0.762)    (0.789)     (0.784)     (0.852)     (0.833)     (0.894)     (0.891)     (0.978)
First-stage F statistic                                                                                                       100.578     104.976     98.705      68.499      70.482

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the quinquennial incidence of civil conflict in repeated cross-country data, as shown
in Columns 2 and 4 of Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to accounting for the potentially confounding influence
of alternative distributional indices of intergroup diversity (e.g., Fearon, 2003; Alesina et al., 2003; Esteban et al., 2012) and
additional geographical correlates of conflict (e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Cervellati et al., 2017). The specifications examined
in this table are identical to the fully specified baseline models of conflict incidence, as reported in Columns 2 and 4 of Table II,
with the exception that in Columns 1–3 and 6–8 of the current analysis, each of the reported control variables is employed in
lieu of the baseline control for ethnic fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003), whereas in Columns 4 and 9, the set of reported
control variables replaces the baseline controls for both ethnic fractionalization and ethnolinguistic polarization (Desmet et al.,
2012), in the interest of mitigating multicollinearity. Further, in Columns 5 and 10 of the current analysis, the set of reported
geographical controls augment the fully specified baseline models from Columns 2 and 4 of Table II. The reader is therefore
referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the
current analysis, the identification strategy employed by the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the
marginal effect of population diversity on the incidence of conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the
country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level,
and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                          A.17
Table SA.XIV: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated
Cross-Country Data – Robustness to Employing the Classical Logit and Rare-Events Logit
Estimators

                                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
                                           Classical    Rare-Events    Classical   Rare-Events   Classical   Rare-Events    Classical   Rare-Events
                                            Logit          Logit        Logit         Logit       Logit         Logit        Logit         Logit
                                                     Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict                      Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                           incidence, 1960–2017                                   onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   24.420***      23.755***    22.262***    20.941***    13.857**      13.409**     13.175**        12.442*
                                            (6.653)        (6.529)      (6.703)      (6.479)      (6.266)       (6.177)      (6.584)        (6.517)
Continent dummies                             ×              ×             ×              ×         ×             ×            ×              ×
Time dummies                                  ×              ×             ×              ×         ×             ×            ×              ×
Controls for temporal spillovers              ×              ×             ×              ×         ×             ×            ×              ×
Controls for geography                        ×              ×             ×              ×         ×             ×            ×              ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                              ×              ×                                    ×              ×
Controls for institutions                                                  ×              ×                                    ×              ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                   ×              ×                                    ×              ×
Observations                                 1,270          1,270        1,045        1,045       5,452          6,280       4,377           5,221
Countries                                     123            123          121          121         123            123         121             121
Pseudo R2                                    0.414                       0.441                    0.133                      0.164
Marginal effect of diversity               3.733***       3.964***     2.992***     3.230***     0.191**        0.194**      0.156*         0.171*
                                            (1.009)        (1.128)      (0.937)      (1.088)     (0.086)        (0.097)      (0.081)        (0.095)

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated cross-
sectional data for the Old World sample of countries, as shown in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II. Specifically, it establishes
robustness to employing the ordinary logit and rare-events logit (King and Zeng, 2001) estimators, rather than the probit
estimator, for estimating the relevant empirical models of conflict incidence and onset. The specifications examined in this table
are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II. The reader is therefore referred
to Table II and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current
analysis. Given the absence of readily available ordinary logit and rare-events logit estimators that permit instrumentation, the
current analysis is unable to implement the global-sample identification strategy of exploiting prehistoric migratory distance from
East Africa to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary
population diversity. The estimated marginal effect of a 1 percentage point increase in population diversity is the marginal
effect at the mean value of diversity in the cross-section, and it reflects the increase in either the quinquennial likelihood of a
conflict incidence (Columns 1–4) or the annual likelihood of a conflict onset (Columns 5–8), both expressed in percentage points.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                        A.18
Table SA.XV: Population Diversity and the Incidence or Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated
Cross-Country Data – Robustness to Accounting for Spatiotemporal Dependence using Two-Way
Clustering of Standard Errors

                                             (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
                                            Probit       Logit      Probit        Logit     Probit     Logit     Probit     Logit
                                                Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict              Annual PRIO25 civil conflict
                                                      incidence, 1960–2017                           onset, 1960–2017
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   13.366***   24.420***   12.203***    22.262***   6.172**   13.857**   6.356*    13.175*
                                            (2.616)     (4.261)     (3.381)      (6.025)    (2.906)    (6.528)   (3.478)   (7.368)
Continent dummies                             ×           ×              ×         ×          ×          ×         ×         ×
Time dummies                                  ×           ×              ×         ×          ×          ×         ×         ×
Controls for temporal spillovers              ×           ×              ×         ×          ×          ×         ×         ×
Controls for geography                        ×           ×              ×         ×          ×          ×         ×         ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                            ×         ×                               ×         ×
Controls for institutions                                                ×         ×                               ×         ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                                 ×         ×                               ×         ×
Observations                                 1,270       1,270          1,045     1,045      5,452     5,452     4,377      4,377
Countries                                     123         123            121       121        123       123       121        121
Pseudo R2                                    0.416       0.414          0.440     0.441      0.131     0.133     0.161      0.164
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline probit and logit analyses of the reduced-
form impact of contemporary population diversity on either the quinquennial incidence or the annual onset of civil conflict
in repeated cross-sectional data for the Old World sample of countries, as shown in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II and in
odd-numbered columns of Table SA.XIV. Specifically, it establishes robustness of the standard-error estimates to accounting
for spatiotemporal dependence across country-time observations by implementing multi-dimensional clustering of standard
errors, following the methodology of Cameron et al. (2011). To implement this robustness check, the standard errors across
country-time observations are clustered in two dimensions: (i) the country level, which allows for temporal dependence within
a country over time (i.e., across either 5-year intervals or years); and (ii) the time level, which allows for spatial dependence
across countries within a given time period (i.e., either a 5-year interval or a year). The specifications examined in this table
are otherwise identical to corresponding ones reported in Columns 1–2 and 5–6 of Table II and in odd-numbered columns of
Table SA.XIV. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes for additional details on the
baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis. Given the absence of readily available probit and logit estimators
that not only allow for multi-dimensional clustering of standard errors but also permit instrumentation, the current analysis
is unable to implement the global-sample identification strategy of exploiting prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa
to the indigenous (precolonial) population of a country as an excluded instrument for the country’s contemporary population
diversity. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered multi-dimensionally at both the country and time levels, are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10
percent level.




                                                                 A.19
Table SA.XVI: Population Diversity and the Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-Country
Data – Robustness to Accounting for Alternative Correlates of Conflict Onset

Cross-country sample:                                   Old World                                        Global
                                            (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
                                           Probit    Probit    Probit    Probit    IV Probit   IV Probit     IV Probit    IV Probit
                                                               Annual PRIO25 civil conflict onset, 1960–1999
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)   7.791**   6.872**   8.267**   8.330*     8.808**     8.111**      11.955**     11.507**
                                           (3.657)   (3.469)   (4.181)   (4.342)    (3.516)     (3.417)       (4.838)      (4.975)
Ethnic dominance                                      0.147              −0.002                  0.147                      0.040
                                                     (0.115)             (0.135)                (0.103)                    (0.129)
Political instability, lagged                        0.264**              0.165                 0.245**                     0.056
                                                     (0.106)             (0.136)                (0.098)                    (0.128)
New state dummy, lagged                               0.125                                     −0.149
                                                     (0.527)                                    (0.494)
Continent dummies                            ×          ×         ×         ×          ×           ×               ×         ×
Time dummies                                 ×          ×         ×         ×          ×           ×               ×         ×
Controls for temporal spillovers             ×          ×         ×         ×          ×           ×               ×         ×
Controls for geography                       ×          ×         ×         ×          ×           ×               ×         ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                                     ×         ×                                      ×         ×
Controls for institutions                                         ×         ×                                      ×         ×
Controls for oil, population, and income                          ×         ×                                      ×         ×
Observations                                2,761     2,761     2,139     2,139      3,728       3,728            3,031     3,031
Countries                                    96        96        94        94         121         121              119       119
Pseudo R2                                   0.137     0.145     0.155     0.157
Marginal effect of diversity               0.472**   0.413*    0.516*    0.519*     0.495**     0.448**       0.706**      0.672*
                                           (0.231)   (0.216)   (0.267)   (0.277)    (0.224)     (0.210)       (0.349)      (0.350)
First-stage F statistic                                                             132.831     132.602       78.279       73.849
Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated cross-country data, as shown in Columns 5–
8 of Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to accounting for the potentially confounding influence of an additional
distributional index of intergroup diversity (e.g., Collier and Hoeffler, 2004) and additional time-varying institutional correlates
of conflict (e.g., Fearon and Laitin, 2003). The lagged indicator for the emergence of a newly independent state from colonial
powers is dropped from the specifications in Columns 4 and 8 due to multicollinearity. In light of constraints imposed by the
availability of data on the additional control variables in this table, the analysis is restricted to the 1960–1999 as opposed
to the 1960–2017 time period. Therefore, the specification presented in each odd-numbered column of the table is intended
to provide a relevant baseline for the robustness check in the subsequent even-numbered column (i.e., by holding fixed the
regression sample). The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to the baseline models of conflict onset,
as reported in Columns 5–8 of Table II. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes for
additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the identification strategy employed by
the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of population diversity on the onset of
conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                               A.20
Table SA.XVII: Population Diversity and the Onset of Civil Conflict in Repeated Cross-Country
Data – Robustness to Accounting for Commodity Export Price Shocks

Cross-country sample:                                          Old World                                            Global
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)
                                             Probit      Probit       Probit      Probit     IV Probit   IV Probit      IV Probit    IV Probit
                                                                     Annual PRIO25 civil conflict onset, 1960–2007
Population diversity (ancestry adjusted)     8.596**     8.946**     8.632**     8.734**     9.007***    10.656**       9.086***     10.592**
                                             (3.665)     (3.894)     (3.622)     (3.899)      (3.401)     (4.537)        (3.388)      (4.570)
Aggregate price shock                       −0.128**    −0.159***                           −0.137***    −0.190***
                                             (0.052)     (0.059)                              (0.053)     (0.056)
Aggregate price shock, lagged                 0.026       0.021                                0.014       0.017
                                             (0.060)     (0.069)                              (0.058)     (0.062)
Aggregate price shock, twice lagged         −0.172***   −0.179***                            −0.113*      −0.121*
                                             (0.060)     (0.066)                              (0.058)     (0.064)
Annual crop price shock                                             −0.161**    −0.191**                                −0.156**     −0.223***
                                                                      (0.071)    (0.083)                                 (0.071)      (0.075)
Annual crop price shock, lagged                                       −0.039     −0.048                                  −0.049       −0.045
                                                                      (0.083)    (0.093)                                 (0.082)      (0.088)
Annual crop price shock, twice lagged                               −0.176**     −0.178*                                 −0.101       −0.112
                                                                      (0.084)    (0.094)                                 (0.084)      (0.095)
Perennial crop price shock                                           −0.127*    −0.144**                                −0.127**     −0.154***
                                                                      (0.066)    (0.070)                                 (0.058)      (0.059)
Perennial crop price shock, lagged                                   0.116***    0.120**                                 0.094**       0.089*
                                                                      (0.045)    (0.054)                                 (0.046)      (0.051)
Perennial crop price shock, twice lagged                            −0.130***   −0.145***                                −0.076       −0.083*
                                                                      (0.050)    (0.053)                                 (0.046)      (0.049)
Extractive crop price shock                                         −0.187**    −0.247***                               −0.185**     −0.275***
                                                                      (0.081)    (0.092)                                 (0.081)      (0.086)
Extractive crop price shock, lagged                                    0.051      0.055                                   0.031        0.041
                                                                      (0.088)    (0.098)                                 (0.088)      (0.094)
Extractive crop price shock, twice lagged                           −0.330***   −0.332***                               −0.256***    −0.264**
                                                                      (0.103)    (0.111)                                 (0.096)      (0.104)
Continent dummies                              ×           ×               ×        ×           ×            ×                ×         ×
Time dummies                                   ×           ×               ×        ×           ×            ×                ×         ×
Controls for temporal spillovers               ×           ×               ×        ×           ×            ×                ×         ×
Controls for geography                         ×           ×               ×        ×           ×            ×                ×         ×
Controls for ethnic diversity                              ×                        ×                        ×                          ×
Controls for institutions                                  ×                        ×                        ×                          ×
Observations                                  2,876       2,626       2,876       2,626        3,906       3,599             3,906     3,599
Countries                                      82          81          82          81           105         103               105       103
Pseudo R2                                     0.122       0.150       0.133       0.162
Marginal effect of diversity                 0.531**     0.535**     0.528**     0.516**      0.501**     0.577**        0.500**      0.568**
                                             (0.237)     (0.242)     (0.232)     (0.240)      (0.213)     (0.281)        (0.211)      (0.280)
First-stage F statistic                                                                       102.975      51.265        102.702      51.169

Notes: This table conducts a robustness check on the results from the baseline analysis of the reduced-form impact of
contemporary population diversity on the annual onset of civil conflict in repeated cross-country data, as shown in Columns 5–8
of Table II. Specifically, it establishes robustness to additionally accounting for the potentially confounding “income effect”
of commodity export price shocks (e.g., Bazzi and Blattman, 2014), as captured by the contemporaneous, lagged, and twice
lagged values of either an annual price shock that has been aggregated across commodity export types (Columns 1–2 and 5–6)
or annual price shocks disaggregated by type of commodity export, including export price shocks associated with annual crops,
perennial crops, and extractive crops (Columns 3–4 and 7–8). These export price shock variables are all obtained from the
data set of Bazzi and Blattman (2014), so the reader is referred to that work for additional details on these variables. In
light of constraints imposed by the availability of data on these export price shock variables, the analysis is restricted to the
1960–2007 as opposed to the 1960–2017 time period. The specifications examined in this table are otherwise identical to those
reported in Columns 5–8 of Table II, with the exception that the fully specified models in the current analysis omit the controls
for oil presence, total population, and GDP per capita, in the interest of minimizing endogeneity with the export price shock
variables and maximizing degrees of freedom. The reader is therefore referred to Table II and the corresponding table notes
for additional details on the baseline set of covariates considered by the current analysis, the identification strategy employed
by the IV probit regressions, and the estimation and interpretation of the marginal effect of population diversity on the onset
of conflict. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                    A.21
A.3                                                     Supplementary Figures
                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
 Predicted quinquennial likelihood of civil




                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted quinquennial likelihood of civil

                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                              .4
       conflict incidence, 1960-2017




                                                                                                                                                                       conflict incidence, 1960-2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                              .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                              .1




                                                    0    5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100                                                         0   5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100

                                                                       Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution                                                                                                  Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution

      Predicted likelihoods based on a probit regression of conflict incidence on diversity; conditional on all baseline controls                                     Predicted likelihoods based on an IV probit regression of conflict incidence on instrumented diversity; conditional on all baseline controls
      Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 2.261 percent; standard error = 0.709; p-value = 0.001                                                 Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 2.595 percent; standard error = 0.850; p-value = 0.002




                                                                       (a) Old-World sample                                                                                                                                                 (b) Global sample

                                                                       Figure SA.1: Population Diversity and the Incidence of Civil Conflict

Notes: This figure depicts the influence of contemporary population diversity on the predicted likelihood of observing the
incidence of a PRIO25 civil conflict in any given 5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time period, conditional on the full set
of control variables, as considered by the specifications in Columns 2 and 4 of Table II. In each panel, the predicted likelihood
of civil conflict incidence is illustrated as a function of the percentile of the cross-country diversity distribution in the relevant
estimation sample, and the shaded area reflects the 95-percent confidence-interval region of the depicted relationship.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .08
                                              .05
 Predicted annual likelihood of new civil




                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted annual likelihood of new civil

                                                                                                                                                                                                              .06
        conflict onset, 1960-2017




                                                                                                                                                                        conflict onset, 1960-2017
                                              .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .04
                                              .03
                                              .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .02
                                              .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                    0    5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100                                                         0   5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100

                                                                       Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution                                                                                                  Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution

      Predicted likelihoods based on a probit regression of conflict onset on diversity; conditional on all baseline controls                                         Predicted likelihoods based on an IV probit regression of conflict onset on instrumented diversity; conditional on all baseline controls
      Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 0.332 percent; standard error = 0.140; p-value = 0.018                                                 Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 0.421 percent; standard error = 0.170; p-value = 0.013




                                                                       (a) Old-World sample                                                                                                                                                 (b) Global sample

                                                                         Figure SA.2: Population Diversity and the Onset of Civil Conflict

Notes: This figure depicts the influence of contemporary population diversity on the predicted likelihood of observing the onset
of a new PRIO25 civil conflict in any given year during the 1960–2017 time period, conditional on the full set of control variables,
as considered by the specifications in Columns 6 and 8 of Table II. In each panel, the predicted likelihood of civil conflict onset
is illustrated as a function of the percentile of the cross-country diversity distribution in the relevant estimation sample, and
the shaded area reflects the 95-percent confidence-interval region of the depicted relationship.




                                                                                                                                                              A.22
                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
 Predicted annual likelihood of intragroup




                                                                                                                                                              Predicted annual likelihood of intragroup
                                             .6
       conflict incidence, 1985-2006




                                                                                                                                                                    conflict incidence, 1985-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                             0




                                                  0   5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100                                                       0   5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100

                                                                    Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution                                                                                                Percentile of cross-country population diversity distribution

      Predicted likelihoods based on a probit regression of conflict incidence on diversity; conditional on all baseline controls                                  Predicted likelihoods based on an IV probit regression of conflict incidence on instrumented diversity; conditional on all baseline controls
      Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 9.107 percent; standard error = 2.301; p-value = 0.000                                              Average marginal eﬀect of a 0.01-increase in diversity = 10.318 percent; standard error = 2.008; p-value = 0.000




                                                                    (a) Old-World sample                                                                                                                                               (b) Global sample

                                                          Figure SA.3: Population Diversity and the Incidence of Intragroup Conflict

Notes: This figure depicts the influence of contemporary population diversity on the predicted likelihood of observing the
incidence of one or more intragroup conflicts in any given year during the 1985–2006 time period, conditional on the full
set of control variables, as considered by the specifications in Columns 2 and 5 in Panel B of Table III. In each panel, the
predicted likelihood of intragroup conflict incidence is illustrated as a function of the percentile of the cross-country diversity
distribution in the estimation relevant sample, and the shaded area reflects the 95-percent confidence-interval region of the
depicted relationship.




                                                                                                                                                           A.23
A.4   Variable Definitions for the Country-level Analyses
Migratory Distance and Population Diversity

  1. Migratory distance from East Africa: The great circle distance from Addis Ababa,
     Ethiopia to a country’s capital city along a land-restricted path forced through one or more
     of five intercontinental waypoints, including Cairo, Egypt; Istanbul, Turkey; Phnom Penh,
     Cambodia; Anadyr, Russia; and Prince Rupert, Canada. Distances are calculated using the
     Haversine formula and are measured in units of ten thousand kilometers. The methodology
     underlying the construction of this measure is adopted from Ramachandran et al. (2005). The
     geographical coordinates of the waypoints are obtained from Ramachandran et al. (2005) and
     those of the capital cities are obtained from the Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) World
     Factbook. See Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for additional details.

  2. Population diversity (precolonial): The expected heterozygosity (neutral genetic diver-
     sity) of a country’s precolonial population as predicted by migratory distance from East
     Africa (i.e., Addis Ababa, Ethiopia) to the country’s capital city. This measure is calculated
     by applying the regression coefficients obtained from regressing expected heterozygosity on
     migratory distance at the ethnic group level, using a worldwide sample of 53 ethnic groups
     from the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel. The expected heterozy-
     gosities and geographical coordinates of the ethnic groups are from Ramachandran et al.
     (2005). See Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for additional details.

  3. Population diversity (ancestry adjusted): The expected heterozygosity (neutral genetic
     diversity) of a country’s contemporary national population, as developed by Ashraf and Galor
     (2013a). This measure is based on migratory distances from East Africa to the year 1500
     locations of the ancestral populations of the country’s component ethnic groups in 2000 and
     on the pairwise migratory distances among these ancestral populations. The source countries
     of the ancestral populations are identified from the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000
     (Putterman and Weil, 2010), and the capital cities of these countries are used to compute the
     aforementioned migratory distances. The measure of population diversity is then computed
     by applying (i) the coefficients obtained from regressing expected heterozygosity on migratory
     distance from East Africa at the ethnic group level, using a worldwide sample of 53 ethnic
     groups from the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel; (ii) the coefficients
     obtained from regressing pairwise genetic distance on pairwise migratory distance in a sample
     of 1,378 HGDP-CEPH ethnic group pairs, and (iii) the ancestry weights representing the
     fractions of the year 2000 national population (i.e., of the country for which the measure is
     being computed) that can trace their ancestral origins to different source countries in the
     year 1500. The data at the ethnic-group (or group-pair) level on expected heterozygosities,
     geographical coordinates, and pairwise genetic distances are obtained from Ramachandran
     et al. (2005), and the country-level data on ancestry weights are obtained from the World
     Migration Matrix, 1500–2000. See Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for a detailed discussion of the
     methodology underlying the construction of this measure.

Conflict outcomes

  1. PRIO civil conflict and civil war outcomes: Our primary measures of civil conflict are
     based on Version 18.1 of the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset (ACD), covering the 1946–
     2017 time period (Gleditsch et al., 2002; Pettersson and Eck, 2018). In this dataset, an armed


                                              A.24
  conflict is defined as “a contested incompatibility that concerns government and/or territory
  where the use of armed force between two parties, of which at least one is the government
  of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a calendar year.” In our study, the
  term PRIO25 civil conflict indicates an internal armed conflict between the government of
  a state and one or more internal opposition group(s), without any intervention from other
  states as independent actors or intervention from other states to support either side of the
  conflict. Thus, the measures of civil conflict in our study exclude internationalized internal
  armed conflicts. In addition, extrasytemic and interstate conflicts are also excluded from the
  analysis, following the standard definition of civil conflict. For further information on the
  data underlying our various civil conflict measures (discussed below), the interested reader is
  referred to the codebook for Version 18.1 of the UCDP/PRIO ACD.
  The main conflict variable examined in our cross-sectional analyses of civil conflict is the
  log number of new PRIO25 civil conflict onsets per year during the 1960–2017 time
  period. This measure is obtained by first computing the total count of new civil conflicts
  that took place on the territory of a country in our sample during this period. Then, this
  count is divided by the number of years over the same time period in which the territory
  was home to one or more entities included in the Gleditsch and Ward list of independent
  states, as employed by the UCDP/PRIO ACD. Finally, the resulting average annual conflict
  frequency is scaled up by 1 and log-transformed. Each new conflict is identified by a unique
  conflict identifier provided by the UCDP/PRIO ACD. In this definition, two or more conflict
  episodes involving the same actors fighting over the same incompatibility are not treated as
  separate (new) conflicts. Instead, they are assigned the same conflict identifier.
  The main outcome examined by our regressions using annually repeated cross-country data
  is annual PRIO25 civil conflict onset. It is equal to 1 for each year when at least one
  new PRIO25 conflict broke out and zero otherwise. The date of a new conflict outbreak
  (or onset) is the starting year of the first conflict episode for a given conflict, and it reflects
  the first year in which the conflict reached or surpassed the annual fatality threshold of 25
  battle-related deaths. Subsequent years of a given conflict episode or outbreaks of subsequent
  conflict episodes of the same conflict are not considered new conflict onsets.
  Quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict incidence is the main outcome examined by our
  regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country data over the 1960–2017 time period.
  It is equal to 1 for a given 5-year interval for a country if there was an active (ongoing)
  PRIO25 civil conflict in at least one year during that time interval and zero otherwise. A
  conflict is deemed active in a given calendar year if it resulted in at least 25 battle-related
  deaths during that year. Annual PRIO25 civil conflict incidence is defined in a similar
  manner except that the incidence is coded for each country-year observation instead of a
  5-year time interval for a country.
  Quinquennial PRIO1000 civil war incidence is an alternative outcome examined by
  our robustness checks in regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country data. This
  variable is constructed in a manner similar to quinquennial PRIO25 civil conflict inci-
  dence. The only difference is that for civil wars, a conflict is deemed as active (ongoing) in
  a given year only if a much higher fatality threshold of 1,000 (instead of 25) battle-related
  deaths is exceeded in that year.

2. Intragroup (intracommunal) factional conflict: The outcome variables employed by
   the analysis of intragroup conflict are based on the All Minorities At Risk (AMAR) Sample


                                             A.25
   Data of the AMAR Phase I Project (Birnir et al., 2018). The AMAR sample contains
   longitudinal data on 365 AMAR ethnic groups. Of these groups, 291 were included in the
   original Minorities At Risk (MAR) Project (Phases I–V), and the remaining 74 were selected
   randomly from the sample frame of socially relevant groups outlined by Birnir et al. (2015),
   according to the new AMAR criteria summarized in the AMAR codebook.
   The measures of intragroup factional conflict we employ are constructed using the INTRA-
   CON variable in the AMAR Sample Data. This is a dummy variable, coded for each group
   in the AMAR sample, indicating the presence of an intracommunal conflict within that group
   in a given year. Specifically, the variable is coded for each year during the 1980–2006 time
   period. However, since the coverage of AMAR groups for the 1980–1984 time period is rather
   limited, our measures of intragroup conflict are based on information for the 1985–2006 time
   frame. Thus, the outcome variable in our cross-country analysis of intragroup conflict is the
   share of AMAR group-years with at least one intracommunal conflict within a
   country during this time period. Further, the outcome variable in our analysis of intragroup
   conflict using annually repeated cross-country data is annual intracommunal conflict
   incidence, coded 1 for each country-year in which there was at least one AMAR sample
   group with an active intracommunal conflict and zero otherwise. For further information on
   the data underlying our measures of intragroup conflict, the reader is referred to Version 1 of
   the codebook for the AMAR Phase I Project.

3. Historical conflict outcomes: To construct historical conflict outcomes between the 15th
   and 19th centuries, we make use of information on the locations of violent conflicts during the
   1400–1799 time period, as compiled by Brecke (1999) and georeferenced by Dincecco et al.
   (2015). The georeferenced conflict locations are used to map historical conflicts to territories,
   as defined by their contemporary national borders. It may be noted that in the catalog of
   conflicts from Dincecco et al. (2015), there were a small number of instances where the country
   assignment did not match the country implied by the georeferenced location of the conflict
   in ArcGIS. In such cases, supplementary information from the catalog (e.g., the actors in
   the conflict or the place where the conflict occurred) was consulted to first determine if the
   mismatch was due to an error in the original country assignment or an error in the supplied
   coordinates. Then, either the country assignment or the coordinates were altered to match
   our understanding of the true location of the conflict. In addition, for naval conflicts or for
   conflicts between actors that took place on lands to which neither actor was native, these
   specific conflicts were assigned to either one of the actors’ countries (rather than the country
   implied by the location of the conflict) but only if the actors possessed comparable levels of
   diversity (e.g., if the actors were both European colonial powers engaged in a conflict on a
   colonized territory).
   As for the underlying conflict data, the definition of a violent conflict in Brecke’s dataset
   is based on Cioffi-Revilla (1996): “An occurrence of purposive and lethal violence among
   2+ social groups pursuing conflicting political goals that results in fatalities, with at least
   one belligerent group organized under the command of authoritative leadership. The state
   does not have to be an actor. Data can include massacres of unarmed civilians or territorial
   conflicts between warlords.” The list is comprised of conflicts that resulted in at least 32
   fatalities. This fatality level corresponds to a magnitude of 1.5 or higher on Richardson’s
   (1960) base-10 log conflict scale. Although the dataset does not systematically distinguish
   between intrastate and interstate conflicts, the latter appear to form the basis of the recorded
   conflicts, and while the recorded conflicts do not necessarily represent the whole universe


                                              A.26
  of conflict events during the sample period, the list contains almost all major conflicts that
  have been documented by historians. The conflict catalog is also considered to be fairly
  comprehensive in terms of its broad regional coverage, including five regions of the world:
  Western Europe, Eastern Europe, North Africa, West & Central Africa, East & Southern
  Africa, as well as Central Asia & Siberia.
  Based on these conflict data, our study employs two distinct categories of country-level
  outcome measures: (1) the number of distinct conflicts, occurring in each century of the
  1400–1799 time period or across this entire time frame; and (2) the likelihood of observing
  one or more conflicts, either during the entire 1400–1799 time period or in each century
  therein.

4. MEPV civil conflict severity: This variable is constructed using information provided
   by the Major Episodes of Political Violence (MEPV) War List (1946–2017), maintained by
   the Center for Systemic Peace. This list is a regularly updated version of Appendix C from
   Marshall (1999) and further detailed in Marshall (2002).
  A major episode of political violence is defined as the systematic and sustained use of lethal
  violence by one or more organized groups, resulting in at least 500 directly-related deaths over
  the course of the episode. Episodes are coded for both time span and a general magnitude
  of societal-systemic impact (an eleven-point scale, 0-10). These magnitude scores are consid-
  ered to be consistent and comparable across categories and cases. Further, each episode is
  assigned to one of seven categories of armed conflict: international violence (IV), international
  war (IW), international independence war (IN), civil violence (CV), civil war (CW), ethnic
  violence (EV), and ethnic war (EW). Episodes belonging to the last four of these categories
  constitute the universe of intrastate episodes that are of interest to our analysis. The
  magnitude scores for these episodes are aggregated into the CIVTOT variable in the MEPV
  dataset. CIVTOT is an annual ordinal index of civil conflict intensity at the country level
  that underlies the particular measure of quinquennial MEPV civil conflict severity
  we employ – namely, the maximum value of CIVTOT across all years in any given 5-year
  interval during the 1960–2017 time period. For further information on the data underlying
  our measure of civil conflict severity, the reader is referred to the codebook for the MEPV
  dataset.

5. CNTS social conflict index: This variable is based on the Domestic Conflict Event Data
   from the Cross-National Time Series (CNTS) Data Archive 2018 Edition (Banks and Wilson,
   2018), which covers the 1815–2017 time period.
  Specifically, the basis of our CNTS social conflict index is the variable Domestic9 from
  the CNTS Data Archive. Domestic9 is an annual continuous index of the degree of social
  unrest, computed by first taking the weighted sum of the counts of different unrest/conflict
  events (given by the variables domestic1-8 ) in a country-year. As of October 2007, the
  weights employed were as follows: Assassinations (25), Strikes (20), Guerrilla Warfare (100),
  Government Crises (20), Purges (20), Riots (25), Revolutions (150), and Anti-Government
  Demonstrations (10). In a second step, the weighted sum is multiplied by 100/8 to obtain
  Domestic9. The specific measure used in our study is a quinquennial CNTS social
  conflict index , calculated for each country as the maximum value of Domestic9 across all
  years in any given 5-year interval during the 1960–2017 time period. For further information
  on the source data for our social conflict index, the reader is referred to the website of the
  CNTS Data Archive.


                                             A.27
  6. UCDP nonstate conflict incidence: This measure is based on information from Version
     18.1 of the UCDP Non-State Conflict Dataset, covering the 1989–2017 time period (Sundberg
     et al., 2012).
     A non-state conflict is defined by the Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP) as “the use
     of armed force between two organized armed groups, neither of which is the government of a
     state, which results in at least 25 battle-related deaths in a year.” An organized group can
     be either (i) a formally organized group, i.e., any non-governmental group of people having
     announced a name for their group and using armed force against another similarly organized
     group; or (ii) an informally organized group. The latter type of group does not have an
     announced name, but it uses armed force against another similarly organized group such that
     there is a clear pattern of violent incidents that are connected and in which both groups use
     armed force against the other. Quinquennial UCDP nonstate conflict incidence is
     coded 1 for any 5-year interval for a country if in any year during this interval there was at
     least one active (ongoing) non-state conflict in the country. A conflict is deemed active in a
     given calendar year if it resulted in at least 25 battle-related deaths during that year. For
     further information on the source data for our measure of non-state conflict incidence, the
     reader is referred to the codebook for Version 18.1 of the UCDP Non-State Conflict Dataset.

Other outcomes

  1. Number of ethnic groups: The total number of distinct ethnic groups in a country’s
     population, as compiled by Fearon (2003). The specific variable employed by our analysis
     is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of ethnic groups. See Fearon (2003) for
     additional details on primary data sources and methodological assumptions.

  2. Prevalence of interpersonal trust: This variable is constructed using information from
     the World Values Survey (2006, 2009) (henceforth, WVS) on the prevalence of generalized
     interpersonal trust in a country’s population. In particular, this well-known measure of
     social capital at the country level reflects the proportion of all respondents (from across five
     different waves of the WVS, conducted over the 1981–2009 time period) that opted for the
     answer “Most people can be trusted” (as opposed to “Can’t be too careful”) when responding
     to the survey question “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted
     or that you need to be very careful in dealing with people?” For additional details, the reader
     is referred to documentation available on the WVS website.

  3. Variation in political attitudes: The intra-country dispersion in self-reported individual
     political positions on a “left”–“right” categorical scale, based on data from the WVS. Specif-
     ically, this measure of heterogeneity in political attitudes at the country level is calculated as
     the intra-country standard deviation across all respondents (sampled over five different waves
     of the WVS during the 1981–2009 time period) of their self-reported positions on a categorical
     scale from 1 (politically “left”) to 10 (politically “right”) when answering the survey question
     “In political matters, people talk of ‘the left’ and ‘the right.’ How would you place your
     views on this scale, generally speaking?” Given that this variable’s unit of measurement does
     not possess a natural interpretation, we standardize the cross-country distribution of this
     variable prior to conducting our regressions. For additional details, the reader is referred to
     documentation available on the WVS website.




                                                A.28
Main Control Variables

  1. Ethnic fractionalization: This is the well-known ethnic fractionalization index of a country,
     reflecting the probability that two individuals, randomly selected from the country’s popu-
     lation, will belong to different ethnic groups. Formally, a country’s ethnic fractionalization
     index is calculated as follows:
                                                        Xn
                                          F RAC = 1 −      p2i ,
                                                              i=1

     where pi is the proportional representation of ethnic group i in the national population; and n
     is the total number of ethnic groups in the country. The specific variable we employ is based
     on the list of ethnic groups (and their national population shares) by country as compiled by
     Alesina et al. (2003). See Alesina et al. (2003) for additional details on primary data sources
     and methodological assumptions.

  2. Ethnolinguistic polarization: An ethnolinguistic polarization index at the country level,
     calculated by applying the following definition of polarization due to Reynal-Querol (2002)
     and Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005):
                                                     n
                                                     X
                                          P OL = 4         p2i [1 − pi ] ,
                                                     i=1

     where pi is the proportional representation of linguistic group i in the national population;
     and n is the total number of linguistic groups in the country. The employed ethnolinguistic
     polarization index is sourced from the replication dataset of Desmet et al. (2012). The
     authors provide measures of several such polarization indices, constructed at different levels
     of aggregation of linguistic groups in a country’s population (based on hierarchical linguistic
     trees). The specific polarization measure we use corresponds to the most disaggregated level
     of the linguistic tree, and it reflects the extent of polarization across subnational groups
     classified according to modern-day languages. See Desmet et al. (2012) for additional details
     on primary data sources and methodological assumptions.

  3. Absolute latitude: The absolute value of the latitude of a country’s geodesic centroid, as
     reported by the At These Coordinates resource repository, based on metadata from (i) the
     National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency’s (NGA) GEOnet Names Server (GNS); and (ii) the
     United States Geological Survey’s (USGS) Geographic Names Information System (GNIS).

  4. Ruggedness: A measure of the degree of terrain ruggedness of a country’s territory. Based
     on Riley et al. (1999), the ruggedness of a grid cell, i, is defined as
                                                 v
                                                 u 8
                                                 uX
                                      RIX(i) = t (hi − hjk )2 ,
                                                       k=1

     where hl is the elevation (in meters above sea level) of cell l = i, j1 , j2 , ..., j8 , and the cells
     indexed by j are the eight neighboring cells of i. The country-level measure of ruggedness used
     by our study is the mean value of RIX(i) across all 1 km × 1 km grid cells of a country. The
     cell-level ruggedness index is computed by Özak (2010), based on topographical data from



                                                  A.29
   the Global Land One-Kilometer Base Elevation (GLOBE) digital elevation model (Hastings
   et al., 1999).

5. Mean and range of elevation: The country-level mean and range of elevation (in thousands
   of kilometers above sea level), calculated using geospatial elevation data at a 1-degree reso-
   lution from the Geographically based Economic data (G-ECON) project (Nordhaus, 2006),
   based on similar data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The mean of elevation
   at the country level reflects the average value across the grid cells that are located within a
   country’s national borders, whereas the range of elevation reflects the difference between the
   maximum and minimum values across the same set of grid cells. See the G-ECON project
   website for additional details.

6. Mean and range of land suitability: The country-level mean and range of a geospatial
   index of the suitability of land for agriculture, based on ecological indicators of climate
   suitability for cultivation, such as growing degree days and the ratio of actual to potential
   evapotranspiration, as well as on ecological indicators of soil suitability for cultivation, such as
   soil carbon density and soil pH. This index was initially developed at a half-degree resolution
   by Ramankutty et al. (2002), and it has been aggregated to the country level by Michalopoulos
   (2012), with the mean at the country level reflecting the average value of the index across
   the grid cells that are located within a country’s national borders, and the range reflecting
   the difference between the maximum and minimum values of the index across the same set
   of grid cells. See Michalopoulos (2012) for additional details.

7. Island nation: An indicator for whether a country shares a land border with any other
   country, as reported by the CIA’s World Factbook. Of the 147 countries in our baseline
   sample, the following 7 are coded as island nations: Australia, Cuba, Japan, Sri Lanka,
   Madagascar, New Zealand, and Philippines.

8. Distance to nearest waterway: The distance (in thousands of kilometers) from a grid
   cell to the nearest ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river, averaged across the grid cells of
   a country. This variable was originally constructed by Gallup et al. (1999) and is available
   from the Research Datasets online repository maintained by Harvard University’s Center for
   International Development.

9. Colonial history: A set of three indicators reflecting a country’s experience of colonial rule
   by (i) the U.K., (ii) France, or (iii) any other major colonizing power, respectively. Therefore,
   the omitted category is the absence of colonial rule. These variables are constructed based
   on information from various sources, including the CIA’s World Factbook, the Encyclopae-
   dia Brittanica, Country Studies of the Library of Congress, and rulers.org amongst others.
   Additional details are available from the authors upon request.
   In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measures comprise time-
   invariant indicators for the historical presence of colonial rule – i.e., whether the country
   has ever been ruled by the colonizing power in question. In regressions using repeated cross-
   country data, the relevant measures comprise time-varying indicators of the lagged prevalence
   of colonial rule – i.e., whether the country was ruled by the colonizing power in question at
   any point in the preceding 5-year time interval or in the preceding year, depending on the
   temporal dimension of the repeated cross-section.


                                               A.30
10. Legal origins: A set of two time-invariant indicators for British and French legal origins,
    as reported by La Porta et al. (1999). Specifically, these indicators identify whether the
    legal origin of country’s Company Law or Commercial Code is (i) the English Common
    Law or (ii) the French Commercial Code, respectively. The omitted category is German,
    Scandinavian, or Socialist legal origins, as recognized by La Porta et al. (1999).

11. Executive constraints: An index, reported at an annual frequency as a 7-point categorical
    variable (from 1 to 7) by the Polity IV Project (Version 2017), quantifying the extent of
    institutionalized constraints on the decision-making power of chief executives (Marshall et al.,
    2017). The specific version of the Polity IV Project dataset employed by our study covers
    the 1800–2017 time period. For further information on the index of executive constraints, the
    reader is referred to the codebook for Version 2017 of the Polity IV Project dataset.
    In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measure is the temporal average
    of the index across all years in the 1960–2017 time period. In regressions using quinquennially
    repeated cross-country data, the relevant measure is the temporal average of the index across
    all years in the preceding 5-year time interval. Finally, in regressions based on annually
    repeated cross-country data, the relevant measure is the value of the index from the preceding
    year.

12. Type of political regime: Our measures of the type of political regime are based on
    two indicators reflecting whether a country is classified as a democracy (or not) and as an
    autocracy (or not) in a given year. The omitted category is anocracy, a hybrid regime that
    constitutes the middle range of the autocracy-democracy political spectrum. This regime
    classification is based on the POLITY2 index (the Revised Combined Polity Score), as
    reported at an annual frequency by the Polity IV Project (Version 2017) for the 1800–2017
    time period (Marshall et al., 2017). POLITY2 is a discrete index that ranges from -10
    (strongly autocratic) to +10 (strongly democratic). Following the norm in the literature, a
    country-year is coded as a democracy if the POLITY2 score is above 5 or as an autocracy
    if the score is below -5. The prevalence of anocracy, occurring when the POLITY2 score is
    between -5 and 5 for a country-year, therefore serves as the omitted political regime category.
    For further information on the POLITY2 index, the reader is referred to the codebook for
    Version 2017 of the Polity IV Project dataset.
    In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measures of regime type are
    the fractions of years during the 1960–2017 time period that a country spent as a democracy
    and as an autocracy, respectively. In regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country
    data, the relevant measures are the fractions of years during the preceding 5-year time interval
    that a country spent as a democracy and as an autocracy, respectively. Finally, in regressions
    based on annually repeated cross-country data, the relevant measures are the indicators for
    democracy and autocracy for the preceding year.

13. Oil or gas reserve discovery: A time-invariant indicator of at least one petroleum (oil
    or gas) reserve on the land territory of a country. This variable is based on information
    provided in the Petroleum Dataset (Version 1.2), covering the 1946–2003 time period (Lujala
    et al., 2007). Therefore, the available data does not provide information about any petroleum
    deposit discovered after 2003. The dataset is compiled for the main purpose of investigating
    the relationship between armed civil conflict and natural resources. Each on-shore petroleum
    (oil or gas) reserve – identified as polygons in the shapefile accompanying the dataset – is

                                               A.31
     assigned to a modern-day country based on the coordinates of the centroids of the deposit
     polygons. For additional information, the reader is referred to the codebook for Version 1.2
     of the Petroleum Dataset, available from the Geographical and Resource Datasets online
     repository maintained by PRIO.

 14. Log population size: The log-transformed size of a country’s population, as reported by
     the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) online data catalog.
     In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measure is the log-transformed
     temporal average of annual population observations across all years in the 1960–2017 time
     period. In regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country data, the relevant measure
     is the log-transformed temporal average of observations across all years in the preceding 5-
     year time interval. Finally, in regressions based on annually repeated cross-country data, the
     relevant measure is the log-transformed observation from the preceding year.

 15. Log GDP per capita: The log-transformed per-capita GDP (in current US$) of a country,
     as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) online data catalog.
     In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measure is the log-transformed
     temporal average of annual per-capita GDP observations across all years in the 1960–2017 time
     period. In regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country data, the relevant measure
     is the log-transformed temporal average of observations across all years in the preceding 5-
     year time interval. Finally, in regressions based on annually repeated cross-country data, the
     relevant measure is the log-transformed observation from the preceding year.
Other Control Variables (for Robustness Checks)
  1. Ecological fractionalization and polarization: These measures of ecological diversity
     are motivated by Fenske (2014). The measure of ecological fractionalization is a Herfindahl
     index, constructed as
                                                                    t=18
                                                                    X
                              Ecological fractionalizationi = 1 −          (sti )2 ;
                                                                     t=1

     and ecological polarization index is given by
                                                            t=18               2
                                                            X     0.5 − sti
                           Ecological polarizationi = 1 −                              sti ,
                                                                     0.5
                                                            t=1

     where sti is the share of the area of country i that is occupied by ecological type t. The
     polarization index measures the degree to which a country’s area approximates a territory
     in which two ecological types each occupy half the total area. The relevant information on
     the spatial distribution of ecological types across the land surface of the earth is derived from
     global maps of agro-ecological zones from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of
     the United Nations.

  2. Mean and volatility of temperature and precipitation: These four variables are
     constructed using information on mean temperature (in degree Celcius) per annum and total
     precipitation (in mm) per annum as reported by the Climate Research Unit (CRU) (Harris
     et al., 2014). Specifically, we employ the country-level spatial aggregates of annual mean

                                                A.32
   temperature and annual total precipitation, provided the CRU CY Version 4.01 dataset,
   which spans the 1901–2016 time period.
   In cross-sectional regressions at the country level, the relevant measures of mean temperature
   and total precipitation reflect the temporal averages of the annual observations of these
   variables across all years in the 1960–2017 time period, whereas the corresponding volatility
   measures capture their respective temporal standard deviations during the same time span. In
   regressions using quinquennially repeated cross-country data, the relevant mean and volatility
   measures are similarly defined, except that the temporal averages and standard deviations are
   calculated across the years of the preceding 5-year time interval (rather than the full sample
   period). Finally, in regressions based on annually repeated cross-country data, the relevant
   measures are the one-year lags of annual mean temperature and annual total precipitation
   as well as the interannual standard deviations of temperature and precipitation over a 5-year
   rolling window that ends in the preceding year.

3. Log years since Neolithic Revolution: The log-transformed number of thousand years
   elapsed (as of the year 2000) since the majority of the population residing in a territory
   defined by a country’s modern national borders began practicing sedentary agriculture as
   the primary mode of subsistence. This measure, initially reported by Putterman (2008), is
   compiled using a host of both region- and country-specific archaeological studies as well as
   more general encyclopedic works on the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture
   during the Neolithic Revolution. The reader is referred to Putterman’s website for a detailed
   description of the primary and secondary data sources employed in the construction of this
   variable.

4. Log index of state antiquity: The log-transformation of an index reflecting a country’s
   cumulative experience with institutionalized statehood since antiquity. Specifically, we employ
   the State Antiquity Index (version 3.1), first introduced by Bockstette et al. (2002). The
   underlying index quantifies the exposure of a territory – as defined by a country’s modern
   national borders – to formal statehood (i.e., being an independent nation-state or part of a
   larger kingdom or an empire) since the year 1 CE and until 1950. In particular, for each
   50-year time interval, information on a territory’s status with respect to the following 3
   questions (each with specific weights applied) is employed: (i) is there a government above
   the tribal level?; (ii) is this government foreign or locally based?; and (iii) how much of
   the territory of the modern country was ruled by this government? These information are
   then aggregated over time to produce an index that ranges between 0 and 1. The reader
   is referred to Putterman’s website for a detailed description of the methodology and data
   sources employed in the construction of this index.

5. Log duration of human settlement: The natural logarithm of the maximum duration
   (in tens of thousands of years) of uninterrupted settlement by anatomically modern humans
   across locations in a territory defined by a country’s modern national borders. The underlying
   measure is obtained from the dataset of Ahlerup and Olsson (2012). The reader is therefore
   referred to that work for additional details on data sources and methodological assumptions.

6. Log distance from regional frontier in 1500: The great circle distance from a country’s
   capital city to the closest regional technological frontier around the year 1500. The variable
   is obtained from the dataset of Ashraf and Galor (2013a). The set of regional frontiers


                                             A.33
    comprises the two most populous cities, reported for the year 1500 and belonging to different
    civilizations or sociopolitical entities, from each of Africa, Europe, Asia, and the Americas.
    Distances are calculated using the Haversine formula and are measured in kilometers. The
    historical urban population data used to identify the frontiers are sourced from Chandler
    (1987) and Modelski (2003), and the geographical coordinates of ancient urban centers are
    sourced from online resources such as Wikipedia.

 7. Ethnic inequality in luminosity: A measure of intra-country economic inequality as
    captured by the subnational spatial distribution of per-capita adjusted nighttime luminosity
    in the year 2000 across the georeferenced homelands of ethnic groups. This measure is sourced
    from the replication dataset of Alesina et al. (2016). The reader is therefore referred to that
    work for additional details on data sources and methodological assumptions.

 8. Spatial inequality in luminosity: A measure of intra-country economic inequality as
    captured by the subnational spatial distribution of per-capita adjusted nighttime luminosity
    in the year 2000 across 2.5×2.5-degree geospatial grid cells. This measure is sourced from the
    replication dataset of Alesina et al. (2016). The reader is therefore referred to that work for
    additional details on data sources and methodological assumptions.

 9. Linguistic fractionalization and polarization (georeferenced): These are the country-
    level counterparts of the measures of linguistic fractionalization and polarization that are
    used in our analysis of conflicts at the ethnic homelands level. Specifically, these measures are
    constructed using georeferenced information on the spatial distribution of language homelands
    from the World Language Mapping System (WLMS) along with gridded population data from
    the Gridded Population of the World (GPW) dataset.

10. Ethnic fractionalization (Fearon, 2003): The ethnic fractionalization index compiled by
    Fearon (2003). The index reflects the probability that two individuals, randomly selected
    from a country’s population, will belong to different ethnic groups.

11. Linguistic fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003): The linguistic fractionalization index
    compiled by Alesina et al. (2003). The index reflects the probability that two individuals,
    randomly selected from a country’s population, will belong to different linguistic groups.

12. Religious fractionalization (Alesina et al., 2003): The religious fractionalization index
    compiled by Alesina et al. (2003). The index reflects the probability that two individuals,
    randomly selected from a country’s population, will belong to different religions.

13. Ethnolinguistic fractionalization (Esteban et al., 2012): An index of ethnolinguistic
    fractionalization, as represented by the frac fear variable in the replication dataset of Esteban
    et al. (2012). The underlying ethnolinguistic population shares are sourced from Fearon
    (2003).

14. Ethnolinguistic polarization (Esteban et al., 2012): The Esteban-Ray index of ethno-
    linguistic polarization with δ = 0.05, as represented by the er fear delta005 variable in the
    replication dataset of Esteban et al. (2012). The underlying ethnolinguistic population shares
    are sourced from Fearon (2003).


                                               A.34
15. Gini index of ethnolinguistic diversity (Esteban et al., 2012): The gini index of
    ethnolinguistic diversity per capita with δ = 0.05, as represented by the variable named
    gini fear delta005 PERCAPTA in the replication dataset of Esteban et al. (2012). It is
    obtained after dividing the gini index of ethnolinguistic diversity by population size. The
    underlying ethnolinguistic population shares are sourced from Fearon (2003).

16. Log percentage mountainous terrain: The log-transformation of the proportion (in
    percentage) of a country’s territory that is “mountainous” according to the codings of the
    geographer A.J. Gerard. This variable is sourced from the replication dataset of Fearon and
    Laitin (2003), where it is used to test the hypothesis that “rough terrain, poorly served by
    roads, at a distance from the centers of state power should favor insurgency and civil war.”

17. Noncontiguous state dummy: A time-invariant indicator of whether a country possesses
    a territory with a population of at least 10,000 that is separated from the region containing
    its capital city either by land or 100 kilometers of water. This variable is sourced from the
    replication dataset of Fearon and Laitin (2003), where it is used to test the hypothesis that
    “the presence of a territory that is separated from the center of national governance by water
    or distance can help rebels more easily sustain insurgent activity and, thereby, make civil war
    more likely.”

18. Disease richness: The total number of different types of infectious diseases in a country
    as reported by Fincher and Thornhill (2008), based on the Global Infectious Disease and
    Epidemiology Network (GIDEON; www.gideononline.com).

19. Ethnic dominance: A time-invariant indicator of whether the largest ethnic group in a
    country constitutes 45-90% of the national population. This variable is sourced from the
    replication dataset of Hegre and Sambanis (2006), but the primary source of the measure is
    Collier and Hoeffler (2004).

20. Political instability: A time-varying indicator at the country-year level of whether there was
    a change in the Polity IV regime index by 3 or more points in any of the three years prior to the
    country-year in question. Periods of regime transition (-88) and “interruptions” (indicating a
    complete collapse of central authority) are also coded as cases of political instability. Episodes
    of foreign occupation, however, are treated as missing observations. In robustness checks of
    our civil conflict onset regressions, the one-year lagged value of this variable is employed.
    This variable is sourced from the replication dataset of Hegre and Sambanis (2006), but the
    primary source is Fearon and Laitin (2003).

21. New state dummy: A time-varying indicator at the country-year level for whether the
    current year is the first year of the country’s existence (e.g., as a newly independent state
    from colonial rule). In robustness checks of our civil conflict onset regressions, the one-year
    lagged value of this variable is employed. This variable is sourced from the replication dataset
    of Hegre and Sambanis (2006).

22. Commodity export price shocks: A set of four variables capturing different types of
    commodity export price shocks on an annual basis, sourced from the replication dataset of
    Bazzi and Blattman (2014). The first variable reflects aggregate price shocks and is computed


                                               A.35
as the annual change in a country’s log commodity export price index (a geometric average
of all commodity export prices weighted by lagged export shares). The remaining variables
reflect three types of disaggregated price shocks. The first of these reflects annual crop
price shocks, i.e., price shocks to annual agricultural goods, such as oilseeds, food crops, and
livestock, that are more likely to accrue to households. The second reflects perennial crop
price shocks, i.e., price shocks to perennial tree crops like cocoa, coffee, rubber, or lumber.
Finally, the third type of disaggregated price shocks captures extractive crop price shocks,
i.e., price shocks to extractive products, namely, minerals, oil, and gas, that are more likely
accrue to states. By construction, the sum of the three disaggregated types of shocks yields
the aggregate price shock variable. In robustness checks of our civil conflict onset regressions,
we employ the contemporaneous as well as the one- and two-year lagged values of these various
commodity export price shock variables. For additional details, the reader is referred to Bazzi
and Blattman (2014).




                                           A.36
Supplement B               Supplement to the Ethnicity-Level Analyses
B.1    Construction of the Georeferenced Ethnicity-Level Dataset
This research constructs a novel geo-referenced data set of population diversity for a large number
of ethnic groups across the globe. Two measures are constructed: (i) a measure of genetic diversity
for 207 ethnic homelands for all individuals covered in the Pemberton et al. (2013) dataset that
can be mapped to an ethnic homeland, and (ii) a measure of predicted population diversity for 901
ethnic homelands covered in the Geo-Referencing of Ethnic Groups (GREG) map of Weidmann
et al. (2010).
         The geo-referenced dataset for observed genetic diversity maps all 10,386 linkable individuals
in the Pemberton et al. (2013) dataset into their ethnic homelands. This mapping results in a
sample of 207 ethnic homelands for which, in addition to the measure of genetic diversity, spatial
characteristics (e.g., geographic, climatic, and societal attributes) are available. Furthermore, using
data on the spatial distribution of language areas in conjunction with data on the spatial distribution
of population sizes, the study generates measures of linguistic fractionalization and polarization for
each ethnic homeland. Finally, using gridded PRIO data (PRIO-GRID version 1.01) as reported
by Tollefsen et al. (2012) based on the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al.,
2002) as well as data on UCDP Georeferenced conflict events (Sundberg et al., 2012; Croicu and
Sundberg, 2015) the study generates a range of measures of conflict within each ethnic homeland.
         The mapping of the 10,386 linkable individuals in the Pemberton et al. (2013) dataset into
their ethnic homelands was based on the individual’s ethnic identity, location, and geographical
coordinates, where the polygons for the ethnic homelands were based on (i) polygons found in
Murdock (1959) and digitized by Nunn (2008); Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), (ii) the Handbook
of North American Indians (Heizer, 1978), (iii) Global Mapping International’s World Language
Mapping System (WLMS) (see http://worldgeodatasets.com/language), (iv) the Geo-Referencing
of Ethnic Groups (GREG) map of Weidmann et al. (2010), and (v) the Database of Global
Administrative Areas (GADM) map version 3.6 (gadm.org).
         The geo-referenced dataset for predicted predicted population diversity for 901 ethnic
homelands covered in the Geo-Referencing of Ethnic Groups (GREG) map of Weidmann et al.
(2010) is constructed based on the migratory distance from Addis Ababa in East Africa to the
centroid of the homeland.1

B.2    Variable Definitions for the Ethnic-level Analyses
Conflict measures

   1. Conflict prevalence: The average yearly share of the area of each ethnic homeland, over the
      period 1989–2008, that was within the boundaries of internal armed conflict event (between
      the government of a state and internal opposition groups). This measure is calculated using
      the gridded PRIO data (PRIO-GRID version 1.01) as reported by Tollefsen et al. (2012)
      based on the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al., 2002).

   2. Number of conflict events: The number of conflict events within each ethnic homeland
      in the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset covering the period 1989–2017 (Sundberg et al.,
      2012; Croicu and Sundberg, 2015).

  1
    One homeland spanning territories in South America and Mauritius labeled “Indians of India and Pakistan” is
excluded from the sample. The qualitative results would not be affected by the inclusion of this territory.



                                                     B.1
   3. Number of deaths: The best (i.e., most likely) estimate of total fatalities resulting from
      a conflict event within each ethnic homeland in the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset
      covering the period 1989–2017 (Sundberg et al., 2012; Croicu and Sundberg, 2015).

   4. Number of deaths per event: The number of deaths per event within each ethnic homeland
      in the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset covering the period 1989–2017 (Sundberg et al.,
      2012; Croicu and Sundberg, 2015).
Trust-related measures
   1. Intra-group trust (Africa): The measure of an individual’s trust in individuals from the
      same ethnic group in the 2005 Afrobarometer survey (3rd wave), as linked by Nunn and
      Wantchekon (2011) to the ethnicity names used in the Ethnographic Atlas. The measure
      takes the value 0 if the response to the question “How much do you trust each of the following
      types of people: People from your own ethnic group?” is “not at all”, 1 if the response is
      “just a little”, 2 if the value is “I trust them somewhat” and 3 if the value is “I trust them a
      lot”.

   2. Slave exports (Africa): A measure of the number of slaves taken from each ethnicity in
      transatlantic and Indian Ocean slave trades. The measure comes from Nunn and Wantchekon
      (2011) and is based on data from Nunn (2008).

   3. Other control variables (Africa): The measures come from Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)
      and are based on data from 2005 Afrobarometer survey (3rd wave).

   4. Trust (US): A measure of an individual’s trust in people in general based on data from the
      General Social Survey 1972–2014 Release 6b Smith et al. (2018). The measure takes the value
      1 if the response to the question “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can
      be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?” is “cannot trust”, 2 if
      the response is “depends”, and 3 if the value is “can trust”.

Migratory distance and interpersonal population diversity
   1. Observed population diversity: The expected heterozygosity (genetic diversity) of indi-
      viduals in each of the 207 ethnic homelands, as calculated using Nei’s formula (Nei, 1973),
      based on the individual-level data from Pemberton et al. (2013).

   2. Predicted population diversity: The predicted level of population diversity of an ethnic
      homeland based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the centroid of the homeland,
      using the linear regression fit between observed population diversity and migratory distance
      from Addis Ababa obtained in sample of 207 ethnic homelands for which observed genetic
      diversity is available. The migratory distance from Addis is defined as the shortest traversable
      paths from Addis Ababa to the centroid of each ethnic group was computed. Given the limited
      ability of humans to travel across large bodies of water, the traversable area included bodies
      of water at a distance of 100km from land mass (excluding migration from Africa into Europe
      via Italy or Spain).2
   2
    For the computation of predicted population diversity, distances to islands, where travel on water exceeds 100kms,
are ignored since the Serial Founder Effect requires the serial foundation of populations along the migratory path
and this was not feasible on water.


                                                        B.2
Control variables

   1. Linguistic fractionalization and polarization:
                                               P 2           The degree of fractionalization in the
      ethnic homeland, using the formula
                                     P 2   1 −      s
                                                  i i , and the degree of polarization in the ethnic
      homeland, using the formula 4 i si (1 − si ), where si is an estimate of the population share
      of language group i in the homeland. Using the WLMS map of the spatial distribution of
      language areas in conjunction with the Gridded Population of the World dataset, the study
      estimates the number of individuals living in each intersection between ethnic homelands and
      language areas, assuming that population counts in overlapping language areas are equally
      split between these languages.

   2. Absolute latitude: The absolute value of the latitude of an ethnic homeland’s geodesic
      centroid, or, when the centroid is outside of the homeland, a representative interior point.

   3. Ruggedness:      The average level of the Terrain Ruggedness Index measure of Nunn and
      Puga (2012) across the grid cells that are located within a homeland.

   4. Mean and range of elevation:        The mean and range of elevation above sea level of an
      ethnic homeland, calculated using geospatial data from the Atlas of the Biosphere project
      (nelson.wisc.edu/sage/data-and-models/atlas/), across the grid cells that are located within
      a homeland.3

   5. Mean and range of land suitability:         The mean and range of the post-1500 optimal
      Caloric Suitability Index, measured by Galor and Özak (2016), across the grid cells that are
      located within a homeland.

   6. Island location: A dummy variable indicating if the land type of an ethnic homeland’s
      geodesic centroid (or a representative interior point) is a “small island” or a “very small
      island” as reported in the World Countries geographical dataset provided by ESRI (arcgis.
      com/home/item.html?id=ac80670eb213440ea5899bbf92a04998).

   7. Distance to nearest waterway: The mean of the geodesic distance to the nearest coast
      or river, across the grid cells that are located within a homeland. Coastline locations
      are reported in the Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical, High-resolution Geography Database
      (http://soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg). River locations are reported in the 1:10m Natural
      Earth River + Lake Centerlines dataset version 4 (http://naturalearthdata.com/downloads/
      10m-physical-vectors/10m-rivers-lake-centerlines).

   8. Temperature: The mean of the daily average temperature (in degree Celcius), across the
      grid cells that are located within a homeland, based on data from the CRU TS dataset version
      3.21 for the period 1901–2012, as reported by Climate Research Unit (CRU) (Harris et al.,
      2014).

   9. Precipitation: The mean of the annual total precipitation (in mm), across the grid cells
      that are located within a homeland, based on data from the CRU TS dataset version 3.21 for
      the period 1901–2012, as reported by Climate Research Unit (CRU) (Harris et al., 2014).
   3
    The mean elevation can be negative in some cases due to the existence of places on land with elevation below sea
level or the inclusion of territories at sea in the homeland polygon, for which the elevation is negative.




                                                       B.3
10. Time since settlement: The earliest year with a positive population count estimate in the
    ethnic homeland. Specifically, the study employs the population count data from the His-
    tory Database of the Global Environment dataset version 3.1 (themasites.pbl.nl/tridion/en/
    themasites/hyde/download/index-2.html), described in Klein Goldewijk et al. (2010, 2011).

11. Malaria: The mean level of plasmodium falciparum malaria endemicity in 2010, across the
    grid cells that are located within a homeland. Specifically, the current study employs the data
    on the age-standardised plasmodium falciparum Parasite Rate from Gething et al. (2011). It
    represents the estimated proportion of 2–10 year olds in the general population that are
    infected with plasmodium falciparum, averaged over the months of 2010. The estimates are
    based on data from parasite rate surveys and a geostatistical model that produces a range
    of predicted endemicities for each location. The model includes environmental covariates
    which improves the accuracy of the prediction. The environmental covariates include rainfall,
    temperature, land cover and urban/rural status. The endemicity data reports the mean value
    for the probability distribution at each location (approx. 1km2 ).

12. Oil or gas reserve discovery:          A time-constant dummy for the presence of at least
    one petroleum (oil or gas) reserve on the territory of an ethnic homeland. The variable is
    based on information provided in the Petroleum Dataset (version 1.2, dated 2009) covering
    the period 1946–2003 (Lujala et al., 2007). The dataset is compiled for the main purpose
    of investigating the relationship between armed civil conflict and natural resources. Each
    on-shore petroleum reserve (oil or gas) – indicated as polygons in the shapefile accompanying
    the dataset – is assigned to an ethnic homeland using the coordinates of the centerpoints of
    the deposit polygons.

13. Luminosity:       The mean level of cloud-free nighttime light intensity for the years 1992–
    2013, accross the grid cells that are located within a homeland. Specifically, the current
    study employs all available data in version 4 of the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program
    – Operational Linescan System (DMSP-OLS) Nighttime Lights Time Series (ngdc.noaa.gov/
    eog/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html). Since the log of zero is undefined, log luminosity is
    defined as the log of the sum of 0.001 and the luminosity measure.




                                              B.4
B.3     Robustness Checks

Table SB.I: Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands – Robustness to
Accounting for Alternative Distances

                                                                                         Log conflict prevalence
                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                                   OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS           OLS         OLS
 Observed population diversity                                   28.338∗∗∗   31.342∗∗∗   30.591∗∗∗
                                                                  (9.622)     (9.692)     (9.735)
 Predicted population diversity                                                                      73.828∗∗∗     70.194∗∗∗   75.334∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (7.390)       (7.313)     (7.305)
 Distance to Technological Frontier in Year 1 (in 1000 kms)        -0.045                            -0.172∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.163)                             (0.066)
 Distance to Technological Frontier in Year 1000 (in 1000 kms)                -0.324∗                              -0.268∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.168)                               (0.062)
 Distance to Technological Frontier in Year 1500 (in 1000 kms)                             -0.210                              -0.124∗∗
                                                                                          (0.148)                               (0.061)
 Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                 1.633        1.446       1.474      0.279         0.340       0.330
                                                                  (1.219)     (1.171)     (1.196)     (0.383)       (0.381)     (0.381)
 Ethnolinguistic polarization                                      -0.353      -0.213      -0.237      0.332         0.315       0.296
                                                                  (1.029)     (0.990)     (1.010)     (0.348)       (0.344)     (0.347)
 Regional dummies                                                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Geographical controls                                             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Climatic controls                                                 Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Sample                                                          Observed    Observed    Observed    Predicted     Predicted   Predicted
 Observations                                                       207         207         207         901           901         901
 Effect of 10th90th %ile move in diversity                       0.443***    0.490***    0.478***    1.639***      1.558***    1.672***
                                                                  (0.150)     (0.152)     (0.152)     (0.164)       (0.162)     (0.162)
 First-stage F statistic
 Adjusted R2                                                      0.304       0.316       0.310       0.367         0.375        0.365
 β∗                                                               26.359      28.224      29.899      80.379        77.719      77.280
Notes: This table exploits variations across ethnic homelands to establish a significant positive impact of observed and
predicted population diversity on the log conflict prevalence during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on migratory distances
from historical technological frontiers as well as the baseline geographical characteristics. The set of continent and regional
dummies includes indicators for Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan
Africa. Additional climatic covariates refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average
temperature range in the homeland. The estimated effect associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to
the ninetieth percentile of its distribution is expressed in terms of the change in the prevalence of conflicts within the territory
of a homeland over the years 1989–2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                 B.5
Table SB.II: Observed Population Diversity and Conflict across Ethnic Homelands – Robustness
to Accounting for Measures of Ecological Diversity

                                                                          Log conflict prevalence
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS        OLS
 Observed population diversity                27.700∗∗∗   32.958∗∗∗   24.748∗∗∗   25.591∗∗∗   24.996∗∗∗   26.869∗∗   26.325∗∗
                                              (10.372)    (10.482)     (9.315)     (9.313)     (9.287)    (10.427)   (10.425)
 Ecological diversity                           -0.838      -0.637      1.029       0.748       0.909       0.733      0.843
                                               (1.430)     (1.595)     (1.429)     (1.418)     (1.414)     (1.384)    (1.379)
 Ecological polarization                         0.942      1.103       0.675       0.702       0.687       1.006      1.009
                                               (1.141)     (1.228)     (1.065)     (1.045)     (1.054)     (1.024)    (1.025)
 Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                                 1.140∗                   0.893
                                                                                   (0.636)                 (0.652)
 Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                                   0.734                 0.641
                                                                                               (0.527)               (0.530)
 Regional dummies                               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Geographical controls                          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Climatic controls                              No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Development outcomes                           No          No          No          No          No          Yes        Yes
 Disease environment controls                   No          No          No          No          No          Yes        Yes
 Sample                                       Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed    Observed   Observed
 Observations                                    205         205         205         205         205         205        205
 Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity   0.433***    0.515***    0.387***    0.400***    0.391***    0.420***    0.411**
                                               (0.162)     (0.164)     (0.146)     (0.146)     (0.145)     (0.163)    (0.163)
 Adjusted R2                                    0.106       0.168       0.308       0.317       0.312       0.330      0.328
 β∗                                                        37.005      23.299      24.574      23.683      26.483     25.685
Notes: This table exploits cross-ethnicity variations to establish a significant positive impact of contemporary population
diversity on the log spatio-temporal prevalence of UCDP/PRIO conflicts during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on
ecological diversity and ecological polarization as well as the baseline control variables. The set of continent and regional
dummies includes indicators for Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan
Africa. Additional climatic covariates refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average
temperature range in the homeland. The 2SLS regressions exploit prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to each
ethnic homeland as an excluded instrument for the observed population diversity of this ethnic group. The estimated effect
associated with increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution
is expressed in terms of the change in the average yearly share of the area of each ethnic homeland that was within the
boundaries of internal armed conflict over the period 1989–2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent
level.




                                                             B.6
Table SB.III: Predicted Population Diversity and the Spatiotemporal Prevalence of Conflict across
Ethnic Homelands – Robustness to Accounting for Measures of Ecological Diversity

                                                                                      Log conflict prevalence
                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                        OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS         2SLS
 Predicted population diversity                       77.597∗∗∗   79.803∗∗∗   76.148∗∗∗    75.668∗∗∗    77.910∗∗∗   77.646∗∗∗
                                                       (6.245)     (7.314)     (7.425)      (7.458)      (9.700)     (9.807)
 Observed population diversity                                                                                                  130.105∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                 (33.284)
 Ecological diversity                                   0.711       0.808      1.064∗       1.070∗       1.565∗∗     1.496∗∗       -0.078
                                                       (0.631)     (0.638)     (0.629)      (0.634)      (0.714)     (0.719)      (1.722)
 Ecological polarization                                0.396       0.466       0.317        0.299        -0.455      -0.435       0.263
                                                       (0.587)     (0.541)     (0.533)      (0.536)      (0.596)     (0.599)      (1.233)
 Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                              0.341                      0.174
                                                                               (0.300)                   (0.354)
 Ethnolinguistic polarization                                                               0.450∗                   0.565∗
                                                                                            (0.267)                  (0.315)
 Regional dummies                                       Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
 Geographical controls                                  No          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
 Climatic controls                                      No          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
 Development outcomes                                   No          No          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         No
 Disease environment controls                           No          No          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         No
 Sample                                               Predicted   Predicted   Predicted    Predicted   Old World    Old World   Observed
 Observations                                            891         891         891          891          697          697        205
 Effect of 10th-90th %ile move in diversity           1.748***    1.797***    1.715***     1.704***     0.976***     0.972***   2.034***
                                                       (0.141)     (0.165)     (0.167)      (0.168)      (0.121)      (0.123)    (0.520)
 Adjusted R2                                            0.207       0.365       0.381        0.382        0.406        0.409
 β∗                                                                81.333      75.203       74.414       69.099       68.719
 Migratory distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)                                                                             -0.043∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                 (0.009)
 First-stage F -statistic                                                                                                        23.605
Notes: This table exploits cross-ethnicity variations to establish a significant positive impact of predicted population diversity
on the log spatio-temporal prevalence of UCDP/PRIO conflicts during the 1989–2008 period, conditional on ecological
diversity and ecological polarization as well as the baseline control variables. The set of continent and regional dummies
includes indicators for Europe, Asia, North America, South America, Oceania, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa.
Additional climatic covariates refer to the average diurnal temperature range, average cloud cover, and average temperature
range in the homeland. The 2SLS regressions exploit prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa to each ethnic homeland
as an excluded instrument for the observed population diversity of this ethnic group. The estimated effect associated with
increasing population diversity from the tenth to the ninetieth percentile of its cross-country distribution is expressed in terms
of the change in the average yearly share of the area of each ethnic homeland that was within the boundaries of internal
armed conflict over the period 1989–2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                  B.7
B.4   Descriptive Statistics for the Trust Analyses

                            Table SB.IV: Summary Statistics

                                                                    Percentile
                                             Mean      SD         10th      90th      N
 PANEL A                                                  African sample
 Intra-group trust                             1.52     1.00      0.00       3.00    3,212
 Population diversity (observed)              0.76     0.00       0.76      0.77     3,212
 Age                                          35.82   14.54      20.00     58.00     3,212
 Male                                         0.49     0.50       0.00      1.00     3,212
 Ethnic fractionalization                     0.27     0.28      0.00       0.72     3,212
 Ethnolinguistic polarization                  0.53    0.13       0.30      0.62     3,212
 Proportion of ethnic group in district       0.73     0.33       0.12      1.00     3,212
 School present                                0.84    0.37       0.00      1.00     3,208
 Electricity present                           0.65     0.48      0.00       1.00    3,210
 Piped water present                          0.44     0.50      0.00       1.00     3,157
 Sewage present                               0.23     0.42      0.00       1.00     3,054
 Health clinic present                        0.58     0.49       0.00      1.00     3,060
 Living in an urban area                      0.44     0.50       0.00      1.00     3,212
 Living condition categories                  2.65     1.25       1.00      4.00     3,206
 Education categories                         3.51     2.10       0.00      6.00     3,207
 Occupation categories                        18.92    92.10      1.00     23.00     3,201
 Religion categories                          10.52    51.36      2.00      12.00    3,204
 Slave exports (Atlantic and Indian)         277.44   262.45      0.17     665.97    3,212

 PANEL B                                                       US sample
 Trust                                        1.88      0.97      1.00       3.00    2,294
 Population diversity (predicted)             0.72     0.02      0.67        0.74    2,294
 GSS year                                   1993.94    10.59    1980.00    2010.00   2,294
 Age                                         54.37    19.46      27.00      80.00    2,284
 Sex                                          1.55      0.50      1.00       2.00    2,294
 Family income categories                     2.73      0.89      2.00       4.00    1,803
 Religion categories                          2.02      1.29      1.00       3.00    2,283
 Highest educational degree categories        1.30     1.20       0.00       3.00    2,290
 Ethnic fractionalization (ancestral)         0.23      0.18      0.11       0.54    2,294
 Ethnolinguistic polarization (ancestral)     0.41     0.21       0.12       0.67    2,294
 Absolute latitude (ancestral)               46.07     11.82     23.00       60.00   2,294
 Ruggedness (ancestral)                     131.80    94.05      30.64     237.76    2,294
 Mean elevation (ancestral)                  436.42   339.34    105.77     1015.28   2,294
 Mean land suitability (ancestral)            0.48      0.21      0.10       0.75    2,294
 Range of land suitability (ancestral)        0.92     0.12       0.82       1.00    2,294
 Distance to nearest waterway (ancestral)   223.00    496.37     29.43      332.58   2,294


                                            B.8
Supplemental References
Ahlerup, P. and O. Olsson (2012): “The Roots of Ethnic Diversity,” Journal of Economic Growth, 17,
  71–102.
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003): “Fraction-
  alization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 155–194.
Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2016): “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 124, 428–488.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013a): “The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and
  Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103, 1–48.
Banks, A. S. and K. A. Wilson (2018): “Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive [Data file],” Databanks
  International, Jerusalem, Israel. https://www.cntsdata.com/.
Bazzi, S. and C. Blattman (2014): “Economic Shocks and Conflict: Evidence from Commodity Prices,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6, 1–38.
Birnir, J. K., D. D. Laitin, J. Wilkenfeld, D. M. Waguespack, A. S. Hultquist, and T. R.
  Gurr (2018): “Introducing the AMAR (All Minorities at Risk) Data,” Journal of Conflict Resolution,
  62, 203–226.
Birnir, J. K., J. Wilkenfeld, J. D. Fearon, D. D. Laitin, T. R. Gurr, D. Brancati, S. M.
  Saideman, A. Pate, and A. S. Hultquist (2015): “Socially Relevant Ethnic Groups, Ethnic Structure,
  and AMAR,” Journal of Peace Research, 52, 110–115.
Bockstette, V., A. Chanda, and L. Putterman (2002): “States and Markets: The Advantage of an
  Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7, 347–369.
Brecke, P. (1999): “Violent Conflicts 1400 A.D. to the Present in Different Regions of the World,” Paper
  presented at the 1999 Annual Meeting of the Peace Science Society, October 8–10.
Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015): “Climate and Conflict,” Annual Review of Economics,
  7, 577–617.
Burke, M. B., E. Miguel, S. Satyanath, J. A. Dykema, and D. B. Lobell (2009): “Warming
  Increases the Risk of Civil War in Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 20670–
  20674.
Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011): “Robust Inference With Multiway
  Clustering,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29, 238–249.
Central Intelligence Agency (2018): “The World Factbook,” The Central Intelligence Agency,
  Washington, DC. Data retrieved at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/.
Cervellati, M., U. Sunde, and S. Valmori (2017): “Pathogens, Weather Shocks and Civil Conflicts,”
  Economic Journal, 127, 2581–2616.
Chandler, T. (1987): Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census, Lewiston, NY: The
  Edwin Mellen Press.
Cioffi-Revilla, C. (1996): “Origins and Evolution of War and Politics,” International Studies Quarterly,
  40, 1–22.
Collier, P. and A. Hoeffler (2004): “Greed and Grievance in Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers,
  56, 563–595.
Conley, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Econometrics,
  92, 1–45.
Croicu, M. and R. Sundberg (2015): “UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset Codebook version 4.0,”
  Department of Peace and Conflict Research, Uppsala University. http://ucdp.uu.se/downloads/ged/
  ucdp-ged-40-codebook.pdf.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and R. Wacziarg (2012): “The Political Economy of Linguistic
  Cleavages,” Journal of Development Economics, 97, 322–338.
Dincecco, M., J. Fenske, and M. G. Onorato (2015): “Is Africa Different? Historical Conflict and
  State Development,” IMT Lucca EIC Working Paper No. 08/2015, IMT Institute for Advance Studies
  Lucca.
Esteban, J., L. Mayoral, and D. Ray (2012): “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,” American
  Economic Review, 102, 1310–1342.



                                                    i
Fearon, J. D. (2003): “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8,
  195–222.
Fearon, J. D. and D. D. Laitin (2003): “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political
  Science Review, 97, 75–90.
Fenske, J. (2014): “Ecology, Trade and States in Pre-Colonial Africa,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 12, 612–640.
Fincher, C. L. and R. Thornhill (2008): “Assortative Sociality, Limited Dispersal, Infectious Disease
  and the Genesis of the Global Pattern of Religion Diversity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
  Sciences, 275, 2587–2594.
Gallup, J. L., J. D. Sachs, and A. D. Mellinger (1999): “Geography and Economic Development,”
  International Regional Science Review, 22, 179–232.
Galor, O. and Ö. Özak (2016): “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American Economic
  Review, 106, 3064–3103.
Gething, P. W., A. P. Patil, D. L. Smith, C. A. Guerra, I. R. Elyazar, G. L. Johnston, A. J.
  Tatem, and S. I. Hay (2011): “A New World Malaria Map: Plasmodium falciparum Endemicity in
  2010,” Malaria Journal, 10.
Gleditsch, N. P., P. Wallensteen, M. Eriksson, M. Sollenberg, and H. Strand (2002): “Armed
  Conflict 1946-2001: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 39, 615–637.
Harris, I., P. D. Jones, T. J. Osborn, and D. H. Lister (2014): “Updated High-Resolution Grids of
  Monthly Climatic Observations – The CRU TS3.10 Dataset,” International Journal of Climatology, 34,
  623–642.
Harris, I. C. and P. D. Jones (2013): “CRU TS3.21: Climatic Research Unit (CRU) Time-Series (TS)
  Version 3.21 of High Resolution Gridded Data of Month-by-Month Variation in Climate (Jan. 1901 - Dec.
  2012) [Data file],” University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit, NCAS British Atmospheric Data
  Centre, 24 September 2013. doi:10.5285/D0E1585D-3417-485F-87AE-4FCECF10A992.
——— (2017): “CRU CY4.01: Climatic Research Unit (CRU) Year-by-Year Variation of Selected
  Climate Variables by Country (CY) version 4.01 (Jan. 1901 - Dec. 2016) [Data file],” University
  of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit, Centre for Environmental Data Analysis, 4 December 2017.
  doi:10.5285/d4e823f0172947c5ae6e6b265656c273.
Hastings, D. A., P. K. Dunbar, G. M. Elphingstone, M. Bootz, H. Murakami, H. Maruyama,
  H. Masaharu, P. Holland, J. Payne, N. A. Bryant, et al. (1999): “The Global Land
  One-kilometer Base Elevation (GLOBE) Digital Elevation Model, Version 1.0,” National Oceanic and
  Atmospheric Administration, National Geophysical Data Center, Boulder, CO. Data retrieved at https:
  //www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/topo/globe.html.
Hegre, H. and N. Sambanis (2006): “Sensitivity Analysis of Empirical Results on Civil War Onset,”
  Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50, 508–535.
Heizer, R. F. (1978): Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 8: California, Washington, DC:
  Smithsonian Institution.
Hsiang, S. M., M. Burke, and E. Miguel (2013): “Quantifying the Influence of Climate on Human
  Conflict,” Science, 341, 1235367/1–14.
King, G. and L. Zeng (2001): “Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data,” Political Analysis, 9, 137–163.
Klein Goldewijk, K., A. Beusen, and P. Janssen (2010): “Long-Term Dynamic Modeling of Global
  Population and Built-Up Area in a Spatially Explicit Way: HYDE 3.1,” The Holocene, 20, 565–573.
Klein Goldewijk, K., A. Beusen, G. van Drecht, and M. de Vos (2011): “The HYDE 3.1 Spatially
  Explicit Database of Human-Induced Global Land-Use Change Over the Past 12,000 Years,” Global
  Ecology and Biogeography, 20, 73–86.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1999): “The Quality of
  Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 222–279.
Lujala, P., J. Ketil Rod, and N. Thieme (2007): “Fighting over Oil: Introducing a New Dataset,”
  Conflict Management and Peace Science, 24, 239–256.
Marshall, M. G. (1999): Third World War, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
——— (2002): “Measuring the Societal Impact of War,” in From Reaction to Conflict Prevention:
  Opportunities for the UN System, ed. by F. O. Hampson and D. M. Malone, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner,
  63–105.


                                                      ii
——— (2017): “Major Episodes of Political Violence (MEPV) and Conflict Regions, 1946–2017,” Center for
  Systemic Peace, Vienna, VA. Data retrieved at http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html.
Marshall, M. G., T. R. Gurr, and K. Jaggers (2017): “Polity IV Project: Political Regime
  Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2017,” Center for Systemic Peace, Vienna, VA. Data retrieved
  at http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic Review, 102,
  1508–1539.
Modelski, G. (2003): World Cities: -3000 to 2000, Washington, DC: FAROS 2000.
Montalvo, J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil
  Wars,” American Economic Review, 95, 796–816.
Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book
  Co., Inc.
Nei, M. (1973): “Analysis of Gene Diversity in Subdivided Populations,” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 70, 3321–3323.
New, M., D. Lister, M. Hulme, and I. Makin (2002): “A High-Resolution Data Set of Surface Climate
  Over Global Land Areas,” Climate Research, 21, 1–25.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2006): “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings,” Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 3510–3517.
Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long-term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
  139–176.
Nunn, N. and D. Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 94, 20–36.
Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
  Economic Review, 101, 3221–3252.
Özak, Ö. (2010): “The Voyage of Homo-Economicus: Some Economic Measures of Distance,” Unpublished
  manuscript. Department of Economics, Southern Methodist University.
Pemberton, T. J., M. DeGiorgio, and N. A. Rosenberg (2013): “Population Structure in a
  Comprehensive Genomic Data Set on Human Microsatellite Variation,” G3: Genes, Genomes, and
  Genetics, 3, 891–907.
Pettersson, T. and K. Eck (2018): “Organized Violence, 1989–2017,” Journal of Peace Research, 55,
  535–547.
Putterman, L. (2008): “Agriculture, Diffusion, and Development: Ripple Effects of the Neolithic
  Revolution,” Economica, 75, 729–748.
Putterman, L. and D. N. Weil (2010): “Post-1500 Population Flows and The Long-Run Determinants
  of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1627–1682.
Ramachandran, S., O. Deshpande, C. C. Roseman, N. A. Rosenberg, M. W. Feldman, and L. L.
  Cavalli-Sforza (2005): “Support from the Relationship of Genetic and Geographic Distance in Human
  Populations for a Serial Founder Effect Originating in Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 102, 15942–15947.
Ramankutty, N., J. A. Foley, J. Norman, and K. McSweeney (2002): “The Global Distribution
  of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change,” Global Ecology and
  Biogeography, 11, 377–392.
Reynal-Querol, M. (2002): “Ethnicity, Political Systems, and Civil Wars,” Journal of Conflict
  Resolution, 46, 29–54.
Riley, S. J., S. D. DeGloria, and R. Elliot (1999): “A Terrain Ruggedness Index that Quantifies
  Topographic Heterogeneity,” Intermountain Journal of Sciences, 5, 23–27.
Smith, T. W., M. Davern, J. Freese, and S. L. Morgan (2018): “General Social Surveys, 1972–2018
  [Data file],” National Data Program for the Social Sciences, Chicago, IL. Data retrieved at gss.norc.org.
Sundberg, R., K. Eck, and J. Kreutz (2012): “Introducing the UCDP Non-State Conflict Dataset,”
  Journal of Peace Research, 49, 351–362.
Tollefsen, A. F., H. Strand, and H. Buhaug (2012): “PRIO-GRID: A Unified Spatial Data Structure,”
  Journal of Peace Research, 49, 363–374.
Weidmann, N. B., J. K. Rød, and L.-E. Cederman (2010): “Representing Ethnic Groups in Space: A
  New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 47, 491–499.


                                                    iii
World Bank (2018): “World Development Indicators,” The World Bank, Washington, DC. Data retrieved
 at https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-indicators.
World Values Survey (2006): “European and World Values Surveys, Four-Wave Integrated Data File,
 1981–2004, version 20060423,” The World Values Survey Association, Stockholm, Sweden. Data retrieved
 at http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org.
——— (2009): “World Values Survey, 1981–2008 Official Aggregate, version 20090914,” The World Values
 Survey Association, Stockholm, Sweden. Data retrieved at http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org.




                                                 iv
