                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DEMAND FOR VALUE ADDED AND VALUE-ADDED EXCHANGE RATES

                                         Rudolfs Bems
                                        Robert C. Johnson

                                       Working Paper 21070
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21070


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2015


This paper combines material from two papers previously circulated under the titles "Value-Added
Exchange Rates" (NBER Working Paper No. 18498, October 2012) and "International Prices and
Demand for Value Added with Global Supply Chains" (July 2014). We thank Olivier Blanchard,
Menzie Chinn, Diego Comin, Robert Dekle, Julian Di Giovanni, Jordi Gali, Sarma Jayanthi, Rhys
Mendes, Nikhil Patel, Steven Phillips, Jay Shambaugh, Martin Schmitz, Erol Taymaz, Kei-Mu Yi,
and Jing Zhang for helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at the Banque de France, BICEPS
(Riga), CREI (Pompeu Fabra), Dartmouth, the Geneva Graduate Institute, the IMF, the CEPR/SNB
Conference on Exchange Rates and External Adjustment, the NBER ITM Summer Institute (2013),
the Tsinghua International Conference on Global Value Chains and Structural Adjustments, the Mainz
Workshop in Trade and Macroeconomics (2014), the NBER IFM Summer Institute (2014), the ECB/CBRT
Conference on Assessing the Macroeconomic Implications of Financial and Production Networks,
the BoE/CfM/CEPR Workshop on International Trade, Finance, and Macroeconomics, and the AEA
Annual Meetings (2014). This work was partly carried out while Johnson was a Visiting Scholar in
the IMF Research Department. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should
not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its executive board or its management, Bank
of Latvia, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Rudolfs Bems and Robert C. Johnson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Demand for Value Added and Value-Added Exchange Rates
Rudolfs Bems and Robert C. Johnson
NBER Working Paper No. 21070
April 2015
JEL No. F1,F4

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the role of cross-border input linkages in governing how international relative price changes
influence demand for domestic value added. We define a novel value-added real effective exchange
rate (REER), which aggregates bilateral value-added price changes, and link this REER to demand
for value added. Input linkages enable countries to gain competitiveness following depreciations
by supply chain partners, and hence counterbalance beggar-thy-neighbor effects. Cross-country differences
in input linkages also imply that the elasticity of demand for value added is country specific. Using
global input-output data, we demonstrate these conceptual insights are quantitatively important and
compute historical value-added REERs.


Rudolfs Bems
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC
rbems@imf.org

Robert C. Johnson
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
robert.c.johnson@dartmouth.edu
    Global supply chains are important conduits for international trade [Feenstra (1998);
Antràs (2014)]. Despite this, cross-border input linkages are largely absent in conventional
macroeconomic analysis, which emphasizes demand-side expenditure switching as the key
channel via which changes in international relative prices affect real economic activity and
external balances [Johnson (1958); Corden (1960); Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994); Ob-
stfeld (2001)]. Global supply chains pose a challenge to this conventional view, because they
link countries together on the supply side as well. These supply-side linkages alter how rel-
ative price changes influence international competitiveness – i.e., the ability to sell domestic
goods, and ultimately domestic value added, on world markets.
    Global supply chains introduce new, supply-side channels via which relative price changes
affect demand for domestic goods. To fix ideas, consider how a yen depreciation affects
Japan’s Asian trading partners. The conventional logic is straightforward: Japanese goods
become more competitive, so consumers switch expenditure toward them, which lowers de-
mand for Asian-produced goods. When input trade is important, this conventional logic is
incomplete. Because Japan supplies inputs to Asia, the yen depreciation also lowers pro-
duction costs for downstream Asian producers, making their goods more competitive and
stimulating demand for them. This counterbalances the demand-side expenditure switching
channel, so which channel dominates is ultimately an empirical matter.
    Global supply chains also alter the nature of international competition. In conventional
macro-frameworks, each country’s differentiated ‘product’ competes against ‘products’ from
other countries on world markets [Armington (1969)]. The rise of global supply chains has
made this product-centric view obsolete: countries increasingly specialize in adding value at
particular stages of production, rather than in producing entire finished products [Hummels,
Ishii and Yi (2001); Yi (2003)]. This means that countries compete over supplying domestic
value added to world markets, rather than products (final goods or gross exports) per se.
    These observations highlight the potentially important role that global supply chains play
in determining how international relative prices influence the competitiveness of, and hence
demand for, domestic value added. In this paper, we put the role of supply chains under the
microscope. We develop a framework to characterize demand for value added that includes
trade in both final goods and intermediate inputs. Specifically, we elaborate on the supply
side of workhorse international macro-models to distinguish gross output from value added
in production and intermediate inputs from final goods in international trade.1
   1
    As in Armington (1969), each country produces a differentiated gross product. Departing from that
framework, each country’s product may be used as either an intermediate input or final good, and products
themselves are produced by combining traded inputs with domestic factors. The resulting framework features
three separate margins of substitution: among inputs from different source countries, between inputs and
value added in production, and among final goods from alternative sources.



                                                    2
    Using this framework, we derive an expression that links changes in demand for value
added to value-added prices and final expenditure levels. This enables us to define a new
value-added REER index, which aggregates bilateral value-added price changes into a com-
posite multilateral price of domestic relative to foreign value added. We combine this value-
added REER with two additional components – the price elasticity of demand for domestic
value-added and an indicator for how open the economy is in value-added terms – to summa-
rize the determinants of demand for value added. This analysis boils down the complex set
of gross trade linkages across countries to describe how value-added price changes induce ex-
penditure switching between home and foreign value added. Using global input-output data,
we then characterize how input linkages shape these empirical building blocks of demand for
value added and compute historical value-added REERs.
    We focus our discussion around the the value-added REER index because REERs are a
core piece of macroeconomic data, produced by most major statistical agencies and widely
used in applications.2 Existing REER indexes are based on product-centric theoretical foun-
dations, which fail to account for cross-border input linkages. Our framework updates the
theoretical foundations for constructing REERs to reflect the importance of global supply
chain linkages in the modern global economy. In doing so, we develop an index that answers
a well-defined economic question: how much does demand for value added change following
a change in relative value-added prices? This value-added perspective is useful, because
macro-policy objectives (employment, inflation, etc.) are conceptually linked to demand
pressure in factor markets, to which demand for value added is directly linked.
    Our value-added REER index differs conceptually from conventional REER indexes in
three important ways. First, the weights attached to bilateral price changes in the value-
added REER depend on both the global input-output structure and relative elasticities in
production versus consumption. In contrast, conventional REER weights are based on gross
trade flows and production alone. Incorporating input-output linkages and elasticities yields
some initially surprising results. For example, REER weights can actually be negative in our
framework. The reason is that input linkages imply that a country gains competitiveness
when prices in supply chain partners decline, which counteracts conventional beggar-thy-
neighbor effects (as in the Japan-Asia example above).
    Second, the mapping from the value-added REER to demand for value added depends
on the country-specific elasticity of demand for value added. This value-added elasticity
is a weighted average of primitive gross elasticities, with weights that depend on final and
  2
    REERs are produced by the Bank of International Settlements, the European Central Bank, the Federal
Reserve, the International Monetary Fund, and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), among others. For an overview of applications, see Chinn (2006).



                                                  3
intermediate linkages across countries. For example, countries with larger shares of inputs
in trade put larger weight on substitution elasticities among inputs. Because this elasticity
is heterogeneous across countries, the value-added REER alone is an incomplete statistic for
measuring the competitiveness of domestic value added. This contrasts with conventional
REER indexes, where demand elasticities are assumed to be identical for all countries and
hence normalized away in cross-country comparisons. Moreover, the value-added elasticity
formula we provide is useful in its own right for calibrating macro-models. It describes how
to aggregate gross elasticities of substitution, which can be estimated using conventional
trade and production data, into composite value-added elasticities that are appropriate for
value-added models.
    Third, because our framework distinguishes between gross and value-added data concepts,
it yields clear guidance about how to combine REER weights and prices in a theoretically
consistent way to measure the price competitiveness of domestic value added. To summarize
demand for value added in terms of its own price, we derive weights to attach to value-added
price changes, measured using GDP deflators. In contrast, prominent conventional indexes
mix gross trade weights with either consumer price changes, unit cost indexes, or GDP
deflators in ways that cannot be rationalized in our framework.3 Because our framework
clarifies the link between theory and data, it yields an index that has a clear economic
interpretation.
    To quantify these conceptual contributions, we parameterize the framework using data
on input-output linkages across countries and assign values for the substitution elasticities.
We focus on two illustrative elasticity cases. The first is a case with equal elasticities in
production and final demand. In this case, the framework behaves as if consumers have
CES-Armington preferences directly defined over real value added purchased from alternative
source countries. As a result, value-added REER weights can be computed using only value-
added trade and production data. The second is a case with low elasticities of substitution
in production (literally, Leontief production). This second case reflects the commonly held
view that global supply chains are inflexible in the short run. It also highlights the role that
input linkages play in dampening beggar-thy-neighbor effects in the framework.
    We first examine the individual building blocks underlying value-added competitiveness.
We show that the weight attached to supply chain partners in the value-added REER index
is typically smaller than in conventional indexes. Further, this effect is amplified when
production elasticities are low. This reflects the role of input linkages in dampening the
  3
    For example, the IMF REER and the US Federal Reserve’s Broad Dollar index use consumer prices
(CPIs), while the ECB’s Harmonised Competitiveness Indicators include REERs based on unit cost indexes
and GDP deflators. We describe the methods used by various statistical agencies in Section 2.3.



                                                  4
loss of competitiveness and insulating demand for value added following devaluations in
supply chain partners. We also show that low production elasticities yield lower value-added
elasticities for countries heavily integrated into global supply chains.
    To complete the empirical analysis, we construct time series value-added REERs using
historical data on input-output linkages across countries and observed price changes over the
1970-2009 period. We show that value-added indexes differ significantly from conventional
REER indexes, both due to differences in weights and different measures of prices used
in constructing each index. Moreover, value-added exchange rates capture competitiveness
developments missed by conventional indexes in important episodes. For example, China’s
value-added REER appreciated by 20% during the 2000’s, while its conventional REER was
roughly unchanged. Value-added REERs also better capture pernicious changes in relative
prices in the run-up to the Eurozone crisis – e.g., Germany experienced a substantially
stronger depreciation (matched by stronger appreciations in Ireland, Spain, etc.) of its value-
added REER than its conventional REER. Finally, we examine how value-added REERs and
value-added elasticities combine to determine demand for value added and find that both
components play a significant role.
    Consistent with tradition and practice in the price index literature, our framework takes
relative price changes as given. As a result, our analysis is partial equilibrium in nature, so
we cannot examine the effects of particular identified shocks on relative prices or equilibrium
output. Nonetheless, we are able to characterize historical shifts in competitiveness, using
realized changes in relative prices observed in the data. Further, insights from our framework
concerning the role of input linkages and elasticities in governing price spillovers and value-
added expenditure switching can be carried over to the broader international macroeconomics
literature.
    In this way, our work contributes to an active literature on input linkages in interna-
tional macroeconomics [Ambler, Cardia and Zimmerman (2002); Huang and Liu (2007);
Burstein, Kurz and Tesar (2008); Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010); Bussière et al. (2013);
Bems (2014); Johnson (2014)].4 It also contributes to the analysis of beggar-thy-neighbor ef-
fects and competitive devaluations [Corsetti et al. (2000); Corsetti and Pesenti (2001); Tille
(2001)]. Supplementing these monetary models, we identify a real channel (cross-border
input linkages) that undermines standard beggar-thy-neighbor effects. More generally, our
work also speaks to broad questions about the relationship between expenditure switching
in gross versus value-added representations of the international macro-economy.
    Our work is also naturally linked to the large macroeconomic literature on exchange rate
  4
   See also Bems, Johnson and Yi (2010) and Eaton et al. (2011), who analyze the great trade collapse in
models with cross-border input linkages.



                                                   5
indexes and demand-side measures of competitiveness, dating to Artus and Rhomberg (1973),
Black (1976), and McGuirk (1987). Among recent work, our work is complementary in
spirit to Thomas, Marquez and Fahle (2008) and Lane and Shambaugh (2010), who develop
new exchange rate indexes to capture important aspects of the modern global economy.5
More directly, our focus on demand for value added echoes Neary (2006), who defines a
competitiveness index as the change in the nominal exchange rate that would hold GDP
constant, given price changes.6 Further, Patel, Wang and Wei (2014) build on the framework
presented here to study how input linkages affect REER measurement in a multi-sector
economy. This extension shifts attention toward cross-sector price adjustment, relative to
our focus on international relative prices here.
    The paper proceeds as follows. We present the demand for value added framework
and define the real effective exchange rate in Section 1. Section 2 discusses the economics
underlying our framework, highlighting our conceptual contributions and contrasting our
value-added REER to conventional REERs. We describe data and parameters in Section 3,
present the empirical building blocks for measuring demand for value added in Section 4,
and discuss historical value-added REER indexes and competitiveness in Section 5. Section
6 concludes.


1       Framework
This section presents a partial equilibrium framework that links changes in value-added prices
to changes in demand for value added from each source country. Because we take value-
added prices and real final expenditure as given in defining the value-added real effective
exchange rate, we only need to specify three basic components of the economic environment:
(1) preferences over final goods, (2) production functions for gross output, and (3) market
clearing conditions for gross output.


1.1     Economic Environment
Suppose there are many countries indexed by i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Each country is endowed
with a production function for an aggregate Armington differentiated good, which is used
both as a final good and intermediate input. Gross output in country i, denoted Qi , is
    5
     Lane and Shambaugh (2010) examine how exchange rate indexes can be designed to capture the financial
implications of currency movements. Thomas, Marquez and Fahle (2008) develop an index of relative price
levels that captures the competitiveness implications of rising trade with developing countries.
   6
     Though related in spirit, Neary focuses on nominal GDP (and a GDP function representation of the
economy), rather than real GDP, and does not consider cross-border input linkages.



                                                   6
produced by combining domestic real value added, denoted Vi , with a composite intermediate
input, denoted Xi .7 The composite input is a bundle of domestic and imported inputs, where
inputs purchased by country i from country j are denoted Xji .
    We assume that the production structure takes the nested constant elasticity of substi-
tution (CES) form:
                                                                        γ/(γ−1)
                                           (γ−1)/γ               (γ−1)/γ
                          Qi = (ωiv )1/γ Vi        + (ωix )1/γ Xi                                           (1)
                                                                      !ρ/(ρ−1)
                                           X  ωji x 1/ρ
                                                              (ρ−1)/ρ
                           with Xi =                x
                                                           Xji                 ,                            (2)
                                             j
                                                  ωi


where the ω’s are aggregation weights, γ is the elasticity of substitution between real value
added and the composite input, and ρ is the elasticity of substitution among inputs.
   We assume that agents in each country have CES preferences defined of over final goods.8
Denoting final goods purchased by country i from country j as Fji , preferences take the form:
                                                                  !σ/(σ−1)
                                           X f         (σ−1)/σ
                                  Fi =      (ωji )1/σ Fji                    ,                              (3)
                                            j

where the ω’s are preference weights and σ is the elasticity of substitution among final goods.
    Gross output can be used as both a final good and intermediate input, so the market
clearing condition for gross output is: Qj = N
                                             P
                                                k=1 [Fjk + Xjk ].



1.2     Linearization
The first order conditions for consumers and competitive firms are standard, as are the
corresponding CES price indexes for gross output (pi ), the composite input (pxi ), and the
composite final good (PF ). To analyze these, we linearize and stack the first order conditions,
price indexes, production functions, and market clearing conditions.
     The final goods first order conditionand  final goods price index can be linearized as:
                                        P pj Fji
F̂ji = −σ(p̂j − P̂i ) + F̂i , with P̂i = j Pi Fi p̂j . We then define a vector F to be a N 2
                                                                                                              0
dimensional vector that records final goods shipments: F̂ = [F̂11 , F̂12 , . . . , F̂1N , F̂21 , F̂22 , . . .] .
   7
     Real value added can be thought of as a bundle of primary factor inputs (e.g., a Cobb-Douglas composite
of capital and labor). Throughout the paper, we focus on demand for the bundle of domestic inputs.
   8
     We define final goods as in the national accounts, including consumption, investment, and government
spending. Therefore, we could alternatively describe Equation (3) as a final goods aggregator, which forms
a composite final good used for consumption, investment, and by the government.




                                                       7
This allows us to rewrite the first order conditions and price index as:

                                        F̂ = −σM1 p̂ + σM2 P̂ + M2 F̂                                                         (4)
                                                with P̂ = Wf p̂,                                                              (5)

where M1 ≡ IN ×N ⊗ 1N ×1 and M2 ≡ 1N ×1 ⊗ IN ×N . The weighting matrix Wf is an N × N
                             p F
matrix with ij elements Pji Fjii equal to country i’s expenditure on final goods from country j
as a share of total final goods expenditure in country i.
    Turning to production, the first order conditions for intermediates linearize as: X̂i =
−γ(p̂xi − p̂i ) + Q̂i and X̂ji = −ρ(p̂j − p̂xi ) + X̂i . These can be stacked in a similar way:

                                             X̂ = −γ p̂x + γ p̂ + Q̂                                                          (6)
                                        X̂ = −ρM1 p̂ + ρM2 p̂x + M2 X̂                                                        (7)
                                                with p̂x = Wx p̂,                                                             (8)

                                                          0
where X̂ = [X̂11 , X̂12 , . . . , X̂1N , X̂21 , X̂22 , . . .] is the N 2 dimensional vector of intermediate
goods shipments.
   The market clearing conditions can be linearized as:

                                               Q̂ = SF F̂ + SX X̂.                                                            (9)

The SF and SX matrices collect shares of final and intermediate goods sold to each destination
as a share of total gross output in the source country:
                                                                                                   
                              sf1 0            ···                                sx1   0         ···
                                   f                                                                 
                              0 s2
                        SF ≡                  · · ·              0
                                                          and SX ≡                     sx2       · · ·
                               ..                                    ..
                                                                                                       
                                               ..                                                 ..
                                . ···              .                  .                 ···           .
                                                     pi Fij                                                       pi Xij
       with sfi = [sfi1 , · · · , sfiN ],   sfij =          ,     sxi = [sxi1 , · · · , sxiN ],      and sxij =          .
                                                     pi Qi                                                        pi Q i

   Finally, we linearize components of the production function and the gross output price
index as:

                                       Q̂ = [diag(svi )]V̂ + [diag(sxi )]X̂                                                  (10)
                                                     X̂ = WX X̂                                                              (11)
                                       p̂ = [diag(svi )]p̂v + [diag(sxi )]p̂x ,                                              (12)



                                                              8
               pv V              px X
where svi ≡ piiQii and sxi ≡ pii Qii are the cost shares of real value added and the composite
input in gross output. And WX = [diag(w1x ), diag(w2x ), . . .] with wix = [wi1x            x
                                                                                 , · · · , wiN ] and
  x   pi Xij
wij ≡ px Xj are shares of individual intermediates in the composite intermediate.
        j




1.3     Demand for Gross Output
Demand for gross output depends on demand for both final and intermediate goods. To
begin, we study how price changes influence production techniques for final goods. We then
layer on endogenous changes in demand for final goods to arrive at demand for gross output.

1.3.1       Substitution in Input Use

Using Equations (6), (7), (8)), we substitute for bilateral input shipments (X) in the gross
output market clearing condition [Equation (9)] to yield:
                                     h                                           i
                      Q̂ = SF F̂ + SX −ρM1 p̂ + ρM2 p̂x + M2 (−γ p̂x + γ p̂ + Q̂)              (13)

Note that there is an input-output loop in production here, as gross output appears on both
sides of this expression. Pulling output to one side, and using p̂x = Wx p̂ to eliminate the
composite input price, we get:

  Q̂ = [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF F̂ + [I − SX M2 ]−1 SX [−ρM1 p̂ + ρM2 Wx p̂ − γM2 Wx p̂ + γM2 p̂] . (14)

    The first term maps bilateral final goods shipments (F̂) through the initial input-output
structure into changes in gross output. The second term captures how input choices, and
hence the input-output structure, respond to gross output price changes. This input re-
optimization, governed by γ and ρ, alters the mapping from final goods to gross output.

1.3.2       Substitution across Final Goods

Changes in demand for final goods depend on relative prices as well. Substituting for F̂ in
Equation (14) using Equation (4), we get:

  Q̂ = [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 F̂ − σ[I − SX M2 ]−1 SF (M1 − M2 Wf )p̂
                  − ρ[I − SX M2 ]−1 SX (M1 − M2 Wx )p̂ + γ[I − SX M2 ]−1 SX M2 (I − Wx )p̂. (15)

   The first term captures the role of changes in real final expenditure levels in altering
demand for output. The second term picks up substitution in final goods purchases, hence the


                                                   9
presence of the final goods elasticity σ there. As above, the third term picks up substitution
within the input bundle, and the fourth term picks up substitution between real value added
and inputs. In the end, how price changes feed through to demand for gross output depends
on both supply side elasticities (γ, ρ) and the demand side elasticity (σ).


1.4    Demand for Value Added
To convert demand for gross output into demand for value added, we rearrange the produc-
tion function (Equation (10)) and substitute for X̂ using Equations (6) and (8):
                                                         h                           i
                                 V̂ =   [diag(svi )]−1       Q̂ −   [diag(sxi )]X̂
                                                                                                             (16)
                                   = Q̂ −     γ[diag(sxi /svi )](I      − Wx )p̂.

The first line corresponds to the definition of double-deflated real value added, which strips
out changes in input use from changes in gross output to recover changes in real value added.
The second line tells us that producers substitute towards produced inputs when country i’s
gross output price increases, and this lowers the share of real value added relative to gross
output. Combining Equations (15) and (16), we arrive at:

  V̂ = [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 F̂
       − [I − SX M2 ]−1 [σSF (M1 − M2 Wf ) + ρSX (M1 − M2 Wx ) − γSX M2 (I − Wx )] p̂
                                                                             − γ[diag(sxi /svi )](I − Wx )p̂. (17)

This summarizes how demand for real value added depends on the level of real final expen-
diture in all countries (F̂ ) and gross price changes (p̂).


1.5    Linking Value-Added to Gross Output Prices
As a final step, we substitute for gross price changes to write demand for real value added in
terms of value-added prices. To do this, we combine Equations (12) and (8) to write gross
output price changes as function of value added price changes:

                                        p̂ = [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v ,                                   (18)

where Ω0 = diag(sxi )WX is a global input-output matrix, with ij elements equal to the share
of inputs from i purchased by j in total gross output of country j.
    Two points about this formula are important to note. First, gross output price changes


                                                         10
are a weighted average of value-added price changes in all countries (p̂v ), where the weights
reflect total cost shares.9 Second, the mapping from value-added to gross output prices
involves no elasticities, only production input shares.


1.6     Value-Added Real Effective Exchange Rates
Combining Equations (17) and (18), we have a complete description of demand for value
added in terms of aggregate expenditure levels F̂ and value-added prices p̂v . This linear
system that takes the stylized form:

                                   V̂ = − [σTσ + ρTρ + γTγ ] p̂v + F̂ w ,                                (19)

where the T-matrices and F̂ w are given by:

           Tσ ≡ [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF (M1 − M2 Wf )[I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )],
           Tρ ≡ [I − SX M2 ]−1 SX (M1 − M2 Wx )[I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )],
           Tγ = [diag(sxi /svi )] − [I − SX M2 ]−1 SX M2 (I − Wx )[I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )],
                                                       

           F̂ w ≡ [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 F̂ .

     To define the real effective exchange rate, we manipulate Equation (19), following stan-
dard practice [McGuirk (1987)]. First, we set changes in real final demand F̂ to zero. This
means that we focus on the influence of price changes on demand, holding levels of final
demand constant. Second, we adopt a country-specific normalization so that weights on rel-
ative price changes sum to one. This normalization ensures that the real effective exchange
rate depreciates by x% when all foreign prices increase by x% relative to the domestic price.
     Focusing on country i, let Txij be the ij element of matrix sub-scripted by x and define
T ii ≡ σTσii + ρTρii + γTγii . Then the change in demand for value added in country i is:
                                   X
                                     σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij p̂vj
                                                          
                         V̂i = −
                                    j
                                 X  −(σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij )                                          (20)
                                    ii                              v      v
                                                                             
                            = −T                 ii
                                                                 p̂ i − p̂ j   ,
                                 j6=i
                                               T

                           P                      
where the second line uses j σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij = 0 (i.e., demand for value added is
homogeneous of degree zero in value-added prices).
   9
    The ij elements of [I − Ω0 ]−1 describe the amount of gross output from country j used directly or
indirectly in producing gross output in country i, and then the value-added to output ratios svi rescale these
to reflect how important value added from j is in producing gross output in j.


                                                     11
    We then define the real effective exchange rate index as:

                                 X  −(σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij ) 
                                                                    v      v
                                                                             
                     \i≡
                     REER                                        p̂ i − p̂ j   .            (21)
                                 j6=i
                                               T ii

Following convention, we refer to an increase in the REER index as an appreciation, and a
decrease as a depreciation. The parameter T ii translates changes in the REER index into
changes in demand for value added: V̂i = −T ii REER
                                                  \ i.
    To sign the weights, we note that σTσii + ρTρii + γTγii is always positive. Typically, though
not always, σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij for j 6= i will be negative. This sign pattern is intuitive;
own price increases lower demand, and foreign price increases raise demand for one’s own
value added. Together these signs would imply positive weights in the REER index. Note
however, we said that σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij for j 6= i is typically negative. We discuss how
under some elasticity parameter configurations σTσij + ρTρij + γTγij can actually be positive,
leading to the unconventional result that REER weights can be negative in our framework.
We return to this important point in Section 2.2.
    This completes the formal definition of our proposed REER index. There are three key
points to note, which serve as a launching point for our discussion of the index. The first is
that the index treats value-added prices as primitives, and aggregates these into a composite
multilateral index. The second is that the weights attached to individual bilateral prices
depend on the interaction of both supply and demand side elasticities with the input-output
structure. The third is that trade structure and elasticities, embodied in T ii , also influence
the mapping from the index into demand for value added. We now turn to explaining the
economics underlying each of these observations.


2     The Mechanics of Demand for Value Added
In this section, we present economic interpretations of the value-added REER index, and the
mapping from the index to demand for value added. We start in Section 2.1 with an instruc-
tive case with equal elasticities throughout the framework. With this restriction, demand for
value added takes a familiar CES form, as if consumers have CES preferences defined directly
over value added. We then describe how both the REER index and the mapping from the
index to demand changes when elasticities of substitution are heterogeneous in Section 2.2.
To provide context, we discuss conventional product-based REER’s in Section 2.3.




                                                12
2.1     Equal Elasticities
We open by analyzing demand for value added when substitution elasticities are identical
throughout the model.

2.1.1    The Value-Added Armington-CES Model

Let  ≡ γ = ρ = σ. Then, we can write demand for real value added from country i as:
                                     
                  V̂i = − p̂vi − P̂iw + F̂iw
                                X  pv Vij                           X  pv Vkj 
                           w             i                                    k
                  with P̂i =                   P̂j     where P̂j =                    p̂vk ,
                                   j
                                       pvi Vi                          k
                                                                             Pj F j                    (22)
                                X  pv Vij 
                          w            i
                  and F̂i =             v
                                              F̂j .
                                 j
                                      p i  Vi


Here Vij denotes the amount of real value added produced by country i that is ultimately
absorbed in country j, so pvi Vij is value-added exports from country i to country j [Johnson
and Noguera (2012a)]. See Appendix A for derivation details.
    Equation (22) tells us something familiar: each country faces a CES demand schedule for
the value added it produces, as if each country sells value added to a single world market.
The P̂iw and F̂iw are the aggregate price level and final demand level that each country faces
in selling to the composite world market. Demand for value added from country i falls when
the price of its own value added rises relative to Piw , with an elasticity of .
    The perceived world price of value added itself is a weighted average of price changes for
value added (p̂v ) originating from all countries. The weighting scheme has two components.
The first part is a value-added export weighted average of final goods price levels, and
the second part links final goods price levels to value-added prices via value-added import
weights. This formulation highlights that value-added trade patterns define which countries
are important destination markets for a given source country, and which other countries
provide competition in those destinations.10
    This CES-demand interpretation suggests an alternative way to characterize demand
for value added for this case. Rather than specifying the entire gross production and trade
framework, we could instead assume that countries produce and trade value added directly.11
  10
     Note that the level of perceived demand (F̂ w ) is computed using value-added export shares. This
weighting scheme is identical to the final demand weights in Bems, Johnson and Yi (2010). In that paper,
we assumed that technology and preferences were both Leontief ( = 0). This is equivalent to assuming that
price changes are zero (i.e., p̂ = 0).
  11
     This bypasses the intermediate step via which value added is aggregated into commodities prior to being
sold to consumers, and instead connects consumers to producers of value added directly.


                                                      13
Specifically, we could write preferences directly over value added from different countries,
             P                    η/(η−1)
                     v 1/η (η−1)/η                   v
as in Fi =      j (ωji )  Vji               , where ωji is now a value-added preference weight.
Together with market clearing conditions, these preferences generate a CES demand system
that aggregates to yield Equation (22). Thus, one can re-interpret Equation (22) as if it were
derived from an CES-Armington demand system for value added. This CES-Armington in-
terpretation connects our gross framework to conventional value-added macro-models, which
abstract from production and trade in intermediate inputs.

2.1.2    The VAREER

Setting F̂j = 0 for all j, we maniuplate (22) to write demand for value added as:

                                        VA
                V̂i = − TViiA REER
                               \i ,
                                             "                         #
                                 VA    X   1   X  pv Vik   pvj Vjk 
                                                         i
                                                                         p̂vi − p̂vj ,
                                                                                    
                     \i ≡
                with REER                  ii             v                                             (23)
                                 j6=i
                                         TV A k         pi Vi  Pk F k
                               X pv Vik
                                              
                                                  pvi Vik
                                                           
                      ii               i
                and TV A = 1 −                               .
                               k
                                      pvi Vi      Pk F k

                            VA
We refer to the REER \ i index as the VAREER to emphasize that it is based on value-
added data alone. The VAREER captures a normalized version of the relative price change
p̂vi − P̂iw . The impact of changes in the VAREER on demand is governed by the elasticity of
demand for value-added () and the scaling parameter TViiA . Roughly speaking, TViiA captures
the degree of openness measured in value added terms.12


2.2     Heterogeneous Elasticities
We now turn to evaluating the behavior of the REER index and demand for value added
when elasticities are not equal.

2.2.1    The IOREER

When elasticities are unequal, the value-added REER index weights differ in two ways from
the previous VAREER case. First, we need to use the full global input-output framework
to construct the index weights, not just value-added trade flows. Second, the index weights
                                                    v  v 
  12                                                 p V      pi Vii
    In practice, it is well approximated by 1 − piv Viii      Pi Fi , since the i 6= k terms in the summation
                                                      i
tend to be small. As openness increases, both the share of value added sold by i to i and the share of final
expenditure sourced by i from i fall, so TViiA tends to increase. As a result, demand for value added becomes
more sensitive to changes in the VAREER.


                                                     14
depend on the relative magnitudes of the elasticities in production versus demand. We refer
to the general value-added REER index – defined in Equation 21 – as the IOREER (as in
input-output REER) to emphasize these differences relative to the VAREER.
    Elasticities serve as weights on different elements of the input-output structure, and
therefore control the balance between different margins of substitution in the framework. As
the elasticity between final goods rises, more weight is attached to substitution across final
goods (Tσij ). In the opposite case, higher elasticities in production raise the weight attached
to substitution between inputs from different sources (Tρij ), and between inputs and value
added in production (Tγij ). To provide intuition for how these elasticities govern the mapping
from price changes influence competitiveness, we turn to a stylized three country example.

Example Consider a special case with three countries, depicted in Figure 1. Suppose that
country 1 produces and exports all its output to 2, where it is used as an intermediate input
to produce country 2’s gross output. Country 2 consumes some of its own output, and
exports the remainder to country 3. Exports from country 2 to country 3 are composed of
final goods, which are consumed in country 3. Country 3 also consumes its own output, but
does not export.
    To illustrate the main issues, we focus on demand for value added from country 1. Market
clearing for gross output from country 1 implies:Q̂1 = X̂      12 , with X̂12 = −γ (p̂1 − p̂2 ) + Q̂2 .

In turn, Q̂2 = s22 F̂22 + s23 F̂23 , with F̂23 = −σ p̂2 − P̂3 + F̂3 .13 Putting these together
                                             
yields: Q̂1 = −γ (p̂1 − p̂2 ) − σs23 p̂2 − P̂3 + s22 F̂2 + s23 F̂3 . Further, our assumptions imply
that V̂1 = Q̂1 , p̂1 = p̂v1 , p̂2 = (1 − sv )p̂v1 + sv p̂v2 , and P̂3 = (1 − w)p̂2 + wp̂3 with p̂3 = p̂v3 .14
Using these to substitute for prices, setting F̂2 = F̂3 = 0, and normalizing the weights on
prices, we can write demand for value added in terms of the IOREER:

                                      (γ − σs23 w) sv
                                                                             σs w              
                            11                                                     23
                 V̂1 = −T                                   (p̂v1
                                                              −     p̂v2 )   +             v     v
                                                                                        (p̂1 − p̂3 ) ,    (24)
                                           T 11                                   T 11
                                 |                             {z                                   }
                                                                  IO
                                                             REER
                                                             \1

with T 11 = γsv + σs23 w(1 − sv ). Even in this stylized example, the IOREER weights are
complicated functions of trade flows and elasticities. We highlight two features.
    First, the IOREER depends (negatively) on prices in country 3. This might be surprising,
since countries 1 and 3 do not compete head-to-head in any market. They do compete
indirectly, however. Country 1 sells inputs to country 2, which are re-exported to country
  13
    Similar to the notation above, sij is the share of output shipped from i to j in country i’s total output.
  14
    For completeness, sv is the share of own value added in gross output in country 2, and w is the expenditure
share of country 3’s own goods in its consumption.


                                                        15
3 embodied in country 2 goods. Therefore, a rise in prices in country 3 indirectly makes
country 1 more competitive, and hence depreciates country 1’s IOREER.15
     Second, the sign of the IOREER weight attached to prices in country 2 is ambiguous.
For example, if preferences are Leontief (σ = 0), then a fall in country 2’s value-added price
(p̂v2 < 0) is bad for country 1, appreciating its REER. This follows standard beggar-thy-
neighbor intuition. Here, p̂v2 < 0 leads country 2 to switch expenditure away from country
1 inputs in production. Further, while country 2’s final goods become more competitive in
country 3, this leaves demand for country 2 goods unchanged since σ = 0. As a result,
demand for inputs from country 1 unambiguously falls.
     In contrast, if production is Leontief (γ = 0), then a fall in country 2’s price causes the
IOREER to depreciate, overturning beggar-thy-neighbor intuition. The reason is that as
country 2’s final goods become more competitive and it sells more to country 3, demand for
country 1 inputs rises. As a result, country 1 inherits country 2’s improvement in competi-
tiveness. Further, country 1 experiences the full benefits of this because country 2 does not
switch input expenditure in response to the price change.
     In the general case, with both γ and σ greater than zero, both the beggar-thy-neighbor
channel (input expenditure switching) and the input linkages channel are operative. The net
response depends on how important input expenditure switching is relative to the compet-
itiveness spillover via input linkages. This is fundamentally a quantitative question. When
input elasticities are low, the input linkages channel is more important, and it is possi-
ble to obtain negative REER weights. In general cases, input linkages tend to lower REER
weights for supply chain partners, as the positive competitiveness spillovers via input linkages
counteract demand-side expenditure switching. In the empirical work below, we will focus
on characterizing these weights and how they vary with relative elasticities given observed
cross-border input and final goods linkages.

2.2.2    Value-Added Elasticities

Relative elasticities are not only important for understanding how the IOREER behaves,
but also in mapping the IOREER into demand for value added. As in Section 1.6, demand
                                                IO
for value added is given by: V̂i = −T ii REER
                                          \ i , with T ii = σTσii + ρTρii + γTγii . Elasticities
matter in mapping the IOREER into demand because T ii depends on elasticities.
    To build intuition for how elasticities matter, it is helpful to compare how the VAREER
                                                                                            VA
versus the IOREER map into demand. When  ≡ γ = ρ = σ, V̂i = −TViiA REER            \i ,
  15
    To be clear, the VAREER index would pick this effect up as well, since value-added exports from 1 to 3
are positive, despite zero direct gross exports between them. To verify this, set γ = σ here. In a conventional
REER index, the absence of head-to-head competition – as in, country 1 and country 3 goods are never sold
in the same market – would imply that country 3’s prices would not matter to country 1.


                                                      16
with TViiA = Tσii + Tρii + Tγii . So mapping the VAREER into demand requires knowing the
value-added openness scaling term TViiA and a value-added elasticity .
   We can use this as a guide to interpreting IOREER changes. Specifically, let us re-write
the mapping from the IOREER to demand as:
                                                          IO
                     V̂i = −˜i (σ, ρ, γ)TViiA REER
                                               \i ,
                                              T ii
                                                   
                                                     Tσii Tρii Tγii
                                                                                              (25)
                     with ˜i (σ, ρ, γ) ≡ ii = σ ii + ρ ii + γ ii .
                                             TV A    TV A TV A TV A

We will refer to ˜i (σ, ρ, γ) as the effective “value-added elasticity.” It summarizes the strength
of aggregate value-added expenditure switching, telling us how sensitive demand for value
added is to a change in the IOREER, controlling for value-added openness (encoded in TViiA ).
    To interpret this elasticity further, suppose that there is a uniform 1% increase in home
relative to foreign prices (p̂vi = 0.01 and p̂vj = 0 ∀ j 6= i). Then, both the IOREER and
VAREER would depreciate by 1%. In the heterogeneous elasticity framework, the change
in demand for value added would be ˜i (σ, ρ, γ)TViiA percent. This is equal to the change
in demand for value added for country i, following this multilateral appreciation, that one
obtains in a pure value-added CES-Armington model with elasticity  = ˜i (σ, ρ, γ). In
this sense, ˜i (σ, ρ, γ) aggregates the heterogeneous fundamental elasticities into a composite
value-added elasticity that is applicable to value-added models.


2.3    Conventional Real Effective Exchange Rates
To place the value-added REER in context, we pause to review how major statistical agencies
currently compute REER indexes. Starting from the Armington (1969) demand system,
with constant elasticity demand for products from each country, McGuirk (1987) derives the
following Armington-REER formula:
                                            "                             #
                     Armington       X           1 X Salesik      Salesjk
             REER
             \i                  =                               P              (p̂i − p̂j )
                                     j6=i
                                                S̃i k   pi Qi      l Saleslk
                                                                                               (26)
                            X  Salesik   Salesik 
             with S̃i = 1 −                P           ,
                            k
                                 pi Qi       l Saleslk


where Salesij is gross sales of products from country i to country j and p̂i denotes changes
in the price of products produced by country i (in a common currency).
    This Armington-REER formula is the basis for all the major REER indexes, including
those produced by the BIS, ECB, Federal Reserve, IMF, and OECD. It features “double


                                                        17
export weights” for bilateral relative prices.16 Thisscheme accounts
                                                                          for head-to-head com-
                                                           Salesjk
petition between i and j in all destinations k – via P Saleslk – and then weights each des-
                                                            l                     
                                                                           Salesik
tination according to its importance in country i’s total sales – via pi Qi . All statistical
agencies compute these weights using gross export and production data (i.e., Salesij ≡ EXij
                                 P
for i 6= j and Salesii = pi Qi − j6=i EXij ).
    Our VAREER formula features a similar weighting scheme, with a major difference: the
VAREER weights are double value-added export weights. Differences in weights between the
VAREER and Armington-REER then reflect differences in value-added versus gross exports.
More generally, the IOREER formula does not feature an explicit double weight scheme, and
thus it represents a completely new approach to constructing REER weights.
    A second difference between our indexes and conventional REERs is the measure of prices
used. While our indexes use value-added price changes (measured by GDP deflators), the
Armington-REER calls for using product prices, which correspond to gross output prices
in our framework. Nonetheless, statistical agencies never use product prices in practice.
The most common approach is to use consumer price indexes as a proxy for product prices,
as in the IMF REER index or the Federal Reserve’s Broad Dollar index.17 We will there-
fore
 define the conventional
                              Armington-REER index to be the index in Equation (26) with
  [I i − Êi/j − CP
  CP               [I j inserted in place of (p̂i − p̂j ), where CP[I i and Êi/j are log changes
in the CPI and nominal exchange rate. We will evaluate our VAREER and IOREER against
this benchmark, which matches the widely-used IMF-REER index closely.
    The final difference between our value-added indexes and conventional Armington-REER
formulas concerns interpretation. Reflecting the product-based view of competition, Equa-
tion (26) should be interpreted as a measure of competitiveness for gross output, under the
restriction that the demand for gross output takes the CES form. In contrast, our indexes
focus on measuring price competitiveness for value added. We arrive at a different index for
three basic reasons.18 First, demand for gross output as a function of gross prices (Equa-
  16
      Though these statistical agencies all use double export weights, they do not all implement the scheme
in Equation (26) exactly. See Desruelle and Zanello (1997) and Bayoumi, Jayanthi and Lee (2006) for the
International Monetary Fund, Lorentan (2005) for the Federal Reserve, De Clercq et al. (2012) for the ECB,
Durand, Simon and Webb (1992) for the OECD, and Turner and Van’t dack (1993) and Klau and Fung
(2006) for the BIS.
   17
      The OECD, ECB, and BIS also publish REER indexes based on consumer prices. Since the CPI includes
both domestic and foreign goods, it is conceptually ill-suited to proxy for gross output prices. Some statistical
agencies (e.g., the OECD and ECB) publish indexes based on unit labor costs or GDP deflators. While this
is closer to our approach, these indexes aggregate price changes using gross trade weights, which mixes gross
weights with value-added prices in a manner inconsistent with theory.
   18
      Our framework does not yield the REER formula in Equation (26) to describe demand for value added
under any reasonable assumptions about input use. It is immediate that it does not emerge under the
assumption that both domestic and foreign inputs are used in production. It also does not emerge under
either the assumption that there are no inputs used in production, or the assumption that only domestic


                                                       18
tion (15)) does not take the CES form in our framework, due both to input-output linkages
across countries and heterogeneous elasticities in production and final demand. Second, we
distinguish demand for gross output from demand for value added in our framework, due to
the presence of imported intermediates. Third, we write demand for value added directly in
terms of value-added prices, by linking gross prices to underlying value-added prices via the
input-output framework.


3     Data and Parameters
This section introduces the data and elasticities we use to parameterize the framework.


3.1     Global Input-Output and Price Data
We populate matrices {SX , SF , WX , WF , Ω} and production function shares {svi , sxi } using
data on the value of gross output and value added by country, and the value of bilateral
shipments of both final and intermediate goods.
    We obtain these values from two data sets, depending on the time and country coverage
needed in each application we examine.19 The first is the World Input-Output Database
(WIOD), which covers 40 countries from 1995-2011 [Dietzenbacher et al. (2013)]. The second
is the data set developed in Johnson and Noguera (2014), which covers 37 countries from
1970-2009. These data sets contain all the non-price information needed to parameterize the
framework and build the REER weight matrices at an annual frequency.20 We use both data
sets in our time series analysis. While they provide similar answers during the period in
which they overlap (1995-2009), the Johnson-Noguera data allows us to extend the analysis
backward in time to 1970.
    To construct historical REERs, we take price data – value-added (GDP) deflators, con-
sumer price indexes, and nominal exchange rates – from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook
database. These data are annual (period averages) and available for all sample countries.21
inputs are used in production. We discuss interpretation in these special cases in Appendix A.2.
   19
      In one figure, where we drill in on Asian production chains, we switch to a third source – the Global
Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) database, which covers 94 countries and 19 composite regions for one year
(2004 in Version 7). This data set has wider country coverage in Asia than the other two data sets, and so
is useful in this particular application.
   20
      In each data set, we aggregate across sectors to define the values needed for our one sector framework.
   21
      Each input-output database includes a rest-of-the-world region, in addition to individual countries.
Because there is no price data for the rest-of-the-world region, we exclude this composite region from the
REER computations. In doing so, we follow the standard practice in the construction of narrow indexes and
re-normalize the weights for the remaining countries to add to 1.




                                                     19
3.2        Elasticity Parameters
Following Section 2, we focus on two alternative elasticity parameterizations. First, we exam-
ine a homogeneous elasticity case, with σ = γ = ρ = 1. This sets the value-added elasticity
to one, near typical values for Armington elasticities in international business cycle models.
Second, we also examine a heterogeneous elasticity case, with limited input substitutability.
We adopt an extreme parametrization and shut down substitution possibilities in production,
as in Leontief production (ρ = γ = 0). To make this second case quantitatively comparable
to the first, we choose σ so that the GDP-weighted mean value-added elasticity over the
1995-2009 period equal to one. This yields σ = 3.00 for the WIOD data, and σ = 2.25 for
the Johnson-Noguera data.22
    Our interest in this low production elasticity case is motivated by the commonly-held
view that production chains are ‘rigid’ or ‘inflexible’, whereby producers find it difficult
(if not impossible) to substitute across suppliers in the short run. This view has received
attention in recent work on business cycle comovement [Burstein, Kurz and Tesar (2008);
Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010)], and is supported by evidence on (the lack of) input
substitution following the 2011 Japanese earthquake [Boehm, Flaaen and Nayar (2015)].
Further, low elasticities between real value added and inputs are consistent with recent
sector-level estimates [Atalay (2014)], as well as an older literature on the effects of raw
materials and energy price shocks [Bruno (1984); Rotemberg and Woodford (1996)].
    While we choose to set production-side elasticities to zero – a limiting case of the rigid
supply chain view – the thrust of our analysis only requires inputs to be less substitutable
than final goods. In particular, value-added REER weights depend on relative elasticities
(ρ/σ) and (γ/σ).23 Even if production elasticities are positive, the input linkage channels
we emphasize will be important whenever production elasticities are low relative to the final
goods elasticity. For given relative elasticities, the absolute level of the remaining third
elasticity is then a free parameter, which can be set to yield whatever value-added elasticity
one finds reasonable. This elasticity level matters for how determining sensitive demand for
value added is to value-added REER changes, but not for the behavior of the REER itself.
    There are two final points about elasticities worth emphasizing. First, from a quantitative
perspective, σ and ρ are the key elasticities for pinning down REER weights and value-
added elasticities. In contrast, the value of γ is less important, so our results are robust to
alternative choices for this parameter. We discuss this issue carefully in Appendix B.1.
  22
    For the GTAP data, σ = 2.90. Differences in σ across data sets reflect differences in the share of input
trade recorded in each data set, where WIOD reports a higher share of inputs in trade than do Johnson and
Noguera. Differences in country samples also play a role.
  23                                                                                 −(Tσij +(ρ/σ)Tρij +(γ/σ)Tγij )
       Referring to Equation (21), the value-added REER weights can be written as:    Tσij +(ρ/σ)Tρij +(γ/σ)Tγij )
                                                                                                                      .



                                                     20
    Second, for completeness, we discuss how our results differ if we impose Leontief de-
mand, rather than Leontief production, in Appendix B.2. Based on the relative elasticities
discussion above, it is not surprising that this case is essentially symmetric to the Leontief
production case. Further, it is both less empirically plausible and less economically inter-
esting than the low production elasticity case. A novel feature of our framework is that
input linkages enable supply chain partners to gain competitiveness following depreciation
by supply chain partners. This effect is shut down by the Leontief demand assumption, and
so this eliminates the economically interesting role of input linkages in opposing standard
beggar-thy-neighbor effects.


4      Building Blocks of Demand for Value Added
In this section, we examine the building blocks for measuring changes in demand for value
added in cross-sectional data. The first building block is the REER index itself, and so we
start by comparing the bilateral weights in the VAREER and IOREER indexes to conven-
tional Armington-REER weights. The second is the value-added elasticity. We illustrate
how aggregate value-added elasticities vary across countries when fundamental elasticities
(σ, ρ, γ) are not equal. The third building block is value-added openness, which we show is
substantially larger than gross openness measures.


4.1     Value-Added REER Weights
Each country’s value-added REER index is a weighted average of bilateral relative price
changes. To illustrate how supply chain linkages and relative elasticities influence these
weights, we compare the weights attached to major trade partners (e.g., Germany, China,
etc.) in VAREER, IOREER (with Leontief production), and Armington-REER indexes.
Literally, the weight attached by country i to partner j tells us how much (in percent) its
REER index appreciates when j’s prices fall by 1% relative to i’s own prices.
    In Figure 2, we present the weights that various countries attach to Germany. The
left panel includes the weights themselves, and the right panel reports differences between
the value-added REER and Armington-REER weights. Consistent with standard intu-
ition, countries that trade a lot with Germany attach large weights to Germany in their
Armington-REER indexes.24 For example, the core EU countries (Austria, Netherlands,
Belgium, France, etc.) and the EU accession countries (the Czech Republic, Poland, etc.)
  24
    This reflects the fact that – in the Armington view of the world – large bilateral gross trade flows signify
intense head-to-head with German products, both in Germany and in their own market.



                                                      21
put large weights on Germany in their Armington-REER indexes.
    Relative to this benchmark, countries that are integrated into supply chains with Ger-
many put less weight on Germany in both their VAREER and IOREER indexes. Looking
first at the VAREER, the weight attached to Germany falls in all the EU accession countries,
who import Germany inputs for assembly and export the resulting output. Going further, the
IOREER accentuates this shift in REER weights away from German supply chain partners,
leading REER weights attached to Germany to fall dramatically in the accession countries,
and to rise substantially elsewhere. For example, moving from the Armington-REER to
the IOREER roughly halves the weight that the Czech Republic attaches to Germany, and
doubles the weight that Ireland attaches to Germany.
    To summarize these observations, we plot these weight differences against measures of
supply chain trade in Figure 3. The left panel plots the difference between the VAREER
and the Armington-REER against the ratio of value-added to gross bilateral exports for each
country vis-à-vis Germany.25 As is evident, VAREER weights are lower than Armington-
REER weights mainly for countries where bilateral value-added exports are low relative to
gross exports. For these countries, gross exports overstate the degree of bilateral head-to-
head competition with Germany.
    In the right panel of Figure 3, we demonstrate that bilateral trade composition – the
mix of final versus intermediate goods – drives differences between IOREER and VAREER
weights. We see that low production elasticities lower REER weights for countries that trade
inputs with Germany, and raise weights for countries that trade final goods more intensively
with Germany. This yields big changes in the ranking of which countries are hurt most by
a real German devaluation. According to the Armington-REER index, the Czech Republic
experiences a large decline in price competitiveness (ranking 2nd to Austria). However, in
value-added terms, it is in fact relatively insulated (ranking 15th out of 20 countries in the
figure) according to the IOREER. On the flip side, the relative importance of Germany for
Irish price competitiveness is reversed.
    The basic insights from the German example concerning supply chain linkages carry over
to other cases. For illustration, we plot the REER index weights attached to China and
South Korea in Figure 4. In both cases, the VAREER and IOREER weights fall the most
for Asian countries that are linked to China or South Korea via supply chains in “Factory
Asia.” Further, these weight reassignments are larger than in the German example above.
For example, a 20% fall in Chinese prices would induce a 4.6% (20 × 0.23) appreciation
in Taiwan’s Armington-REER, but translates into only a 0.08% (20 × 0.04) appreciation
in the IOREER case. For Vietnam, a decline in Chinese prices actually raises Vietnamese
 25                                              pv       v
                                                  i Vij +pj Vji
      For country i, this ratio is defined as:   EXij +EXji ,     with j = Germany.


                                                            22
competitiveness in the IOREER case, as captured by its negative IOREER weight. This
illustrates that negative value-added REER weights – discussed in Section (2.2) – are not
just a theoretical possibility, but do actually arise in empirical applications of our framework.
    To summarize broader patterns beyond these examples, we report changes in weights by
broad region in Table 1. For each country in a given source region, we compute weights
attached to destination regions (Asia, EU, NAFTA, and Other) by summing across partners
within those regions. Then, we compute the mean weight across countries within each source
region. For both the VAREER and IOREER, the weight that a typical country attaches
to regional trade partners in its value-added REER declines substantially relative to its
Armington-REER, and correspondingly rises for extra-regional partners.26 In the extreme,
the total weight attached by a typical Asian country to its Asian partners is 15 percentage
points lower in the IOREER index than in a conventional Armington-REER index.
    In additional to regional boundaries, indicators of policy and non-policy barriers are also
correlated with weight changes. First, regional trade agreements (RTAs) are associated with
increased supply chain activity, lower value-added to export ratios, and hence declines in
VAREER relative to Armington-REER weights. For example, the typical country (in 2005)
attaches a VAREER weight that is about 4 percentage points lower for countries with which
it had an RTA relative to countries with whom it has no RTA. Second, distance to trade
partners is positively correlated with the difference between value-added REER weights and
Armington-REER weights. This is mostly driven by large negative gaps between value-added
and Armington REER weights among relatively close partners, with population-weighted
distances of less than 5000km.
    To sum up, global supply chains play two (related, but separate) roles in shaping REER
weights. First, they distort bilateral value-added versus gross trade. This distortion gets
picked up in comparisons between the VAREER and the conventional Armington-REER.
Second, countries linked via supply chains trade inputs intensively. This influences weights
heavily in the IOREER case, because trade composition interacts with elasticities. A subtle,
but important, point to note is that differences between IOREER and Armington-REER
weights can arise even if input trade does not distort the value added content of trade.27 This
  26
     For the VAREER, this reflects the observation that value-added to gross export ratios are lower for
intra-regional trade than for trade across regions [Johnson and Noguera (2012b)]. For the IOREER, effects
are driven by the fact that intra-regional trade is input intensive relative to extra-regional trade.
  27
     To clarify, input trade is sometimes associated with double counting in trade, and hence differences
between bilateral value-added and gross exports. For example, this is true when imports are used to produce
exports, or when exports are used abroad to produce goods shipped to third countries. However, input trade
does not necessarily generate gaps between value-added and gross exports. For example, if exported inputs
are produced from entirely domestic factors, and then used abroad to produce goods that are consumed in
the destination, this input trade represents trade in value added.



                                                    23
implies that the IOREER case is relevant even when differences between value-added and
gross trade are small. In turn, the IOREER weights will differ from conventional Armington-
REER weights even in historical data, when value-added and gross trade were more similar
than they are today.


4.2     Value-Added Elasticities and Openness
To link changes in the value-added REER to demand for value added, we need two additional
building blocks. First, we need the value-added elasticity, which tells us how responsive
demand for value added is to relative price changes. Second, we need a measure of value-
added openness, which determines how responsive total demand for value added is to value-
added expenditure switching.
                                                                            Tρii   Tγii
                                                              h ii                      i
                                                                   Tσ
      The value-added elasticity is given by: ˜i (σ, ρ, γ) = σ T ii + ρ T ii + γ T ii , as in Equa-
                                                                   VA       VA      VA
tion (25). When σ = ρ = γ, then the value-added elasticity is equal across countries,
invariant to trade and input-output linkages. In contrast, when elasticities are not equal,
˜i (σ, ρ, γ) varies across countries, as the weights attached to different margins of substitution
vary across countries.
      In Figure 5, we examine value-added elasticities for the IOREER case with Leontief pro-
duction. The left panel records ˜i (3, 0, 0)−1, where ˜i (3, 0, 0) is the value-added elasticity for
the IOREER with Leontief production and 1 is the corresponding elasticity in VAREER case.
There are significant downward adjustments in the value-added elasticity in the IOREER
case for many countries. Glancing at country names, downward adjustments tend to occur
in countries heavily engaged in global supply chains (e.g., Taiwan, Ireland, Indonesia, Hun-
gary, etc.).28 To confirm this, we plot ˜i (3, 0, 0) − 1 against the share of final goods in each
country’s trade in the right panel. As is evident, there is sizable variation in the final goods
share of trade across countries, and a strong positive correlation between the final goods
share of trade and ˜i . Countries that are more involved in global supply chains, and hence
have larger shares of intermediate inputs in their trade, have lower effective value-added
elasticities in the IOREER case. This will dampen the response of demand for value added
to relative price changes in these countries.
      Turning to value-added openness, we plot the values of TViiA for various countries in Figure
6. Across countries, TViiA varies a lot, from around 0.15 to 0.65 in the figure. As a result,
a given change in the value-added REER has a much larger (up to 4 times larger) impact
  28
    Note that there are upward adjustments in some countries, though these tend to be quantitatively
smaller. These smaller upward adjustments counterbalance the downward adjustments in the aggregate, as
the upward adjustments tend to occur in larger countries and we set the GDP-weighted average value-added
elasticity to one.



                                                  24
on demand for value-added for in the most “open” versus “closed” countries. In the figure,
we also contrast TViiA with the analog measure of gross openness (Si ) that appears in the
Armington-REER framework [Equation (26)]. While TViiA and Si are highly correlated, there
is an important difference between them: TViiA is substantially larger – about 50% larger for
the typical country – than Si .29 This implies that a uniform nominal devaluation, which
would yield identical changes in value-added and conventional REERs, would yield larger
changes in demand for value added than one would guess based on examining conventional
gross measures of openness.


5      Value-Added REERs and Expenditure Switching
Thus far, we have presented the framework in a cross-sectional context. We now turn to
examining value-added REERs and competitiveness over time. We start by comparing our
value-added REERs to conventional Armington-REERs in the time series. We then discuss
how elasticities and openness influence how historical price changes influence demand for
value added, on top of REER changes.


5.1     Value-Added REERs
Drawing on time-series input-output tables, GDP deflators, and exchange rates, we compute
VAREER and IOREER weights for each year, and bilateral value-added price changes be-
tween adjacent years. In year t, we then aggregate the price changes between t − 1 and t
using weights for year t, and chain these year-on-year REER changes together to generate a
level series for each index.30
    As a benchmark for comparison, we combine gross sales weights and CPI price changes to
compute an Armington-REER index with time-varying weights (using the same chain index
procedure). Because both weights and prices differ between the value-added and conventional
REER indexes, we first discuss how these components compare over time, and then proceed
to discuss the historical REER indexes.

REER Weights over Time In Section 4.1, we compared VAREER and IOREER weights
to Armingtion-REER weights for a single, representative year. While the cross-sectional
  29
     The reason that countries look more open in value-added than gross terms is that double-counting is
more prevalent in domestic than cross-border transactions. As a result, total gross output is inflated by
more relative to total value added (GDP) than gross exports are inflated relative to value-added exports.
Put differently, the ratio of value-added exports to GDP tends to be larger than the ratio of gross exports
to gross output. This is reflected in comparisons of Si to TViiA .
  30
     This follows the Federal Reserve Board’s approach to time-varying weights, described in Lorentan (2005).


                                                     25
section patterns we highlighted there carry over to other years, differences between value-
added and conventional REER weights are larger now than in the past. To illustrate this,
we compute the ‘city-block distance’ between VAREER and Armington-REER weights as:
                                 Armington
dVit AREER = j wijt V AREER
              P
                             − wijt        , where wijt denotes the weight attached by country
i to partner j in year t for each index. We also compute the distance between IOREER and
VAREER weights: dIOREER−V        AREER             IOREER      V AREER
                                           P
                       it                = j wijt          − wijt       .
      Figure 7 plots these distance measures from 1970-2009 for Germany, Japan, and the
United States, along with the cross-country median in each year. In the left panel, we see
that the distance between VAREER and Armington-REER weights increased slowly during
the 1970-1990 period and then rose more rapidly from 1990-2010.31 In contrast to the left
panel, there are no obvious trends in the distance between IOREER and VAREER weights
in the right panel. That is, low elasticities in production generate important deviations
between IOREER and VAREER weights throughout the sample period.
      To understand why the trends differ between the left and right panel, it is helpful to
know that the share of inputs in trade has not changed much over time [Chen, Kondratowicz
and Yi (2005)]. As discussed above, IOREER weights are dominated by the share of inputs
in bilateral trade, and so inherit its stability.32 In contrast, the extent of vertical specializa-
tion (i.e., the use of imports to produce exports) has risen over time. This rise in vertical
specialization drives changes in value-added versus gross exports, and so leads to rising gaps
between VAREER and Armington-REER weights over time.

Value-Added vs. Consumer Prices Turning from weights to prices, we now compare
GDP deflators and consumer price indexes. In Figure 8, we plot the proportional difference
between the GDP deflator and CPI for several representative countries.33 The takeaway is
that there are large and persistent differences in the alternative price measures, and that
these differences will account for some of the gap between our value-added indexes and the
CPI-based Armington-REER. To conserve space, we relegate more detailed discussion of
  31
      The turning point around 1990 is consistent with evidence that the value-added content of trade started
falling rapidly around 1990, after not changing much in the earlier period [Johnson and Noguera (2014)].
   32
      Changes the input share for particular countries, or changes in the bilateral pattern of input trade for a
given country, can generate sizeable changes in IOREER versus VAREER weights. For example, the large
movement in the distance between Japan’s IOREER and VAREER weights in the right panel of Figure 7 is
explained by changes in the share of inputs in Japanese trade.
   33
      For each country, we normalize the relative price of value added to consumer prices to be one in 2000,
so the axis should be read as the cumulative percentage change in value added relative to consumer prices
from 2000 levels. Though country detail is not important for our general message, we note that in Japan and
the United States the price of value added falls relative to consumer prices over the period, though relative
prices level off for the United States after 2000. Spain and the United Kingdom see rising prices of value
added relative to consumer prices. Finally, South Korea sees value added prices first rise then fall relative
to consumer prices.


                                                      26
these differences to Appendix B.3.

Historical REER Indexes Putting these pieces together, we plot the VAREER, IOREER,
and Armington-REER indexes for several important, much-discussed exchange rates over the
1995-2011 period.34 Figure 9 features selected Eurozone countries, and Figure 10 includes
the United States and China.
    Starting with Figure 9, there are large differences between value-added and conventional
REERs in Eurozone countries. Starting with Germany, the VAREER and IOREER both
depreciate more strongly than does the Armington-REER. In contrast, the VAREER and
IOREER appreciate more strongly than the Armington-REER in the Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, and Spain (GIIPS). As such, the value-added indexes indicate larger gains in
German competitiveness, and correspondingly larger losses in competitiveness in the GIIPS
group, than does the conventional index. For example, while Germany’s value-added REER
depreciated by 15 percentage points post-2000, the German Armington-REER was little
changed. These value-added competitiveness changes are consistent with the conventional
narrative underlying the build up of imbalances within the Eurozone, which set the stage for
current policy conflicts.
    Turning to Figure 10, we also see large differences between value-added and conven-
tional REERs for China and the United States. While there is no obvious trend in China’s
Armington-REER, its VAREER and IOREER appreciate by over 20 percentage points dur-
ing the 2000’s. Again here, the value-added perspective paints a dramatically different pic-
ture of Chinese price competitiveness than the conventional approach, one in which China
experienced a substantial real appreciation despite actively managing its nominal exchange
rate. The United States is a mirror reflection of these relative price movements. Like China,
the US value-added and conventional REERs diverge after 2000, but the United States sees
a larger depreciation in the VAREER than is picked up by the conventional REER.
    The divergence between value-added and conventional REERs in these important cases
speaks to the “value added” by the value-added perspective on competitiveness; it contains
useful information on price developments not captured by conventional REERs. The differ-
ences we highlight here are broadly representative of the larger sample. To illustrate this,
consider the absolute gap between year-on-year     changes in the IOREER and Armington-
                   IO              Armington          Armington
REER: REERit − REERit
            \              \                   /REERit
                                                 \               . For the countries in Figures
9 and 10, the quartiles of this statistic are {0.13, 0.37, 1.06}. For all available countries,
the quartiles are {0.16, 0.42, 1.25}. Thus, if anything, differences between the IOREER and
  34
    REER series for all countries, based on both the WIOD and Johnson-Noguera input-output data are
included in our online data set.



                                                27
Armington-REERs are slightly larger in the full data. Similar results hold for the VAREER
versus Armington-REER.

Weights versus Prices Digging below the surface, we now examine the role that dif-
ferences in weights versus differences in prices play in explaining deviations between value-
added and conventional REERs.      To do so,let us write changes in the value-added REERs
            x             
as: REERit = j6=i wijt p̂it − Êi/j,t − p̂vjt , for x = {V AREER, IOREER}, where wijt
                        x    v                                                                x
                 P
     \
denotes year-t weights and hats denote log changes from year t − 1 to t.35 Similarly, changes
                                       Armington   P       Armington [
                                                                                              
in the Armington-REER are: REER \ it             = j6=i wijt         CP I it − Êi/j,t − CP
                                                                                         [I jt .
Then we decompose the difference between the value-added and conventional indexes as:
                   x            Armington       X              Armington
                                                                                                     
          \ it − REER                                     x                        v                v
          REER   \ it                       =            wijt −wijt              p̂it − Êi/j,t − p̂jt
                                                j6=i
                                                |                            {z                       }
                                                                    weight differences
                                                X                   h                              i       (27)
                                                        Armington
                                            +          wijt              p̂vit − CP
                                                                                 [I it − p̂vjt − CP
                                                                                                 [I jt .
                                                j6=i
                                                |                              {z                          }
                                                                         price differences


  We compute this decomposition for each year from 1970 to 2009 for the VAREER and
IOREER. In Table 2, we report the median share of the weight differences in explaining
     x        Armington
 \ it − REER
REER     \ it           . In the first column, we report medians at the one year horizon.
In the second column, we aggregate the decomposition for overlapping 10 year horizons,
cumulating the role of weight differences, and report corresponding medians across the thirty
10-year intervals in the sample.36
   In Panel A, we see that weight differences play a small role in explaining differences
between the VAREER and Armington-REER for the median country at both horizons. There
are important exceptions, however. Weight differences play a significant role in explaining
short run differences for several large countries, such as Germany, France, and the U.S. In
general, however, deviations between the VAREER and Armington-REER are mostly driven
by the shift from using consumer prices to value-added prices.37
  35
     In contrast to previous formulas, we make the currency conversion in bilateral value-added price com-
parisons explicit here, for comparability to the Armington-REER.                                               
                                                                       Pt+10             x            Armington
  36
     To be clear, the cumulated 10-year change in the exchange rate is t       REERit − REERit
                                                                                \               \                 ,
                                                 Pt+10 P  x         Armington
                                                                                             
and the cumulated role of weight differences is t        j6=i wijt −wijt         p̂vit − p̂vjt . For each 10-year
interval, we take the ratio between these two, and then take medians across all intervals in the sample.
  37
     One reason for this is that for most of the sample period, VAREER weights are similar to Armington-
REER weights. As we pointed out in Figure 7, large differences between VAREER and conventional weights
only emerge late in the sample period. This suggests that VAREER weight differences might matter more



                                                           28
    In contrast, we see in Panel B that weight differences play a significant role in explaining
differences between the IOREER and Armington-REER at both short and long horizons. At
the one year horizon, weight differences account for 30% of the gap between IOREER and
Armington-REER changes for the median country. The larger role for weight changes here
reflects the fact that weight differences between the IOREER and the Armington-REER
are themselves larger than for the VAREER versus the Armington-REER. Over the longer
10-year horizon, weight differences account for about 15% of the median gap.
    While weight differences are important, price differences account for more than half
of deviations between the value-added and conventional REERs. To explain why shifting
weights do not play a larger role, we highlight three issues.
                                                                       P  x          Armington
                                                                                                
    First, the reassignment of weights is a zero sum exercise (i.e., j6=i wij     − wij           =
0). As a result, uniform devaluations induce identical changes in the value-added and Arm-
ington REERs. While exactly uniform depreciations are rare, it is common to see a country
depreciate against many partners simultaneously, and this dampens differences between the
VAREER, IOREER, and Armington-REER.
    Second, even if bilateral price changes are heterogeneous across partners, there must be
systematic variation between weight     reassignments and changes in relative prices for the
                                          x     Armington
reassignment to matter. That is, wij        − wij           must be correlated (either positively
                                      
or negatively) with p̂vi − Êi/j − p̂vj . In the historical data, this correlation turns out to be
small for many countries.
    Third, focusing on long horizons, trend differences in value-added versus consumer prices
tend to assert themselves more strongly over the longer run. This explains the lower long run
relative to short run role for weights in explaining the IOREER versus Armington-REER
differential.


5.2     Value-Added Expenditure Switching
While the real effective exchange rate measures multilateral price competitiveness, what
matters in the end is how price competitiveness influences demand for value added. This
depends on both how strongly demand responds to prices – the elasticity of demand for value
added – and how open the economy is. In this section, we therefore discuss how changes in
value-added REERs are linked to demand for value added.
                                                                                            IO
   For the IOREER case, demand for value added is given by V̂iIO = −˜i (σ, ρ, γ)TViiA REER
                                                                                       \i .
                                                    VA
In the VAREER case, we have V̂iV A = −TViiA REER
                                             \ i , where we have imposed  = 1 as
above. Comparing these cases, we see that low production elasticities will influence de-
prospectively than they have historically.


                                                29
                                                   IO                           VA
mand for value added both because REER        \ i deviates from REER    \ i , but also because
˜i (σ, ρ, γ) 6= 1. To illustrate the role of each factor separately, we construct a hybrid measure
of demand for value added by combining the change in the IOREER with a value-added
                                                                                      IO
elasticity equal to one, as in the VAREER case: V̂iIO (˜ = 1) = −TViiA REER    \ i . Comparing
V̂iIO (˜ = 1) to V̂iV A demonstrates the role of shifting the REER measure, while comparing
V̂iIO (˜ = 1) to V̂iIO illustrates the role of the value-added elasticity.
      In Figure 11 we present V̂iV A and V̂iIO for actual price changes in 2005 in the left panel,
with countries ordered by the size of deviations between the two measures. The first thing to
note is that changes in demand for value added, as implied by our parameterized framework,
can be sizable. For example, in case of Korea, demand for value added in 2005 decreased
by 3.0-3.5 percentage points, depending on the demand measure used. At the same time,
demand for value added in Germany increased by 1.6 percentage points.38 Next, the gap
between the two demand measures – VbitIO and VbitV A – can be sizable as well, on the order of
-0.9 (Turkey) or 0.7 (Brazil) percentage points in the largest cases. Further, in Hungary and
Taiwan V̂iIO and V̂iV A actually move in opposite directions.
      In the right panel of Figure 11, we plot deviations V̂iIO (˜ = 1) − V̂iV A and V̂iIO − V̂iIO (˜ =
1) to decompose the differences between V̂iV A and V̂iIO . Differences in IOREER versus
VAREER changes are captured by V̂iIO (˜ = 1) − V̂iV A , and these play an important role
in explaining deviations between V̂iV A and V̂iIO . For example, in case of China, both the
IOREER and VAREER appreciated in 2005, but the IOREER appreciated by more, implying
VbitIO − VbitV A < 0 . The right panel of Figure 11 quantifies the negative demand impact of
the larger IOREER appreciation for China at -0.35 percentage points. In addition to REER
deviations, differences in value-added elasticities, captured by V̂iIO − V̂iIO (˜ = 1), also play
an important role in some countries. For example, a value-added elasticity greater than one
amplifies the decline in demand for value added in Turkey, while an elasticity of less than
one attenuates the decline in demand for value added in Brazil.
      In Appendix B.4 we pursue a more systematic examination of these elasticity effects
and find that elasticity deviations across countries account for 1/2 of deviations between
V̂iIO and V̂iV A for the median sample country over 1970-2009. These results highlight that
measuring price competitiveness is necessary, but not sufficient, to evaluate how demand for
value-added is changing. We also need information on the elasticity of demand for value
added.
      In making these comparisons, we have thus far ignored value-added openness. This is
because TViiA is embedded in both V̂iV A and V̂iIO , so it plays no role in comparisons across
  38
  If GDP is entirely demand determined, then this would correspond to the change in equilibrium GDP.
When supply matter, then actual GDP changes differ from the change in demand.


                                                   30
elasticity parameterizations for a single country at a given point in time. However, changes
in value-added openness do play a large role in determining how the value-added REER
indexes map into demand at different points in time. In particular, value-added openness is
rising over time in our data. To illustrate this, we plot the median value of TViiA over time in
Figure 12. We see it nearly doubles from 1970 to the present, rising from 0.26 to 0.42. What
this means is that a given change in the VAREER or IOREER indexes is twice as influential
today in terms of its ultimate effect on demand for value-added as it was in the past. This
point is typically forgotten by users of REER indexes, but worth emphasizing given that the
purpose of REER indexes is to measure changes in demand.


6    Conclusion
This paper updates the conceptual foundations for assessing the impact of price changes on
demand for domestic value added to allow for global supply chain linkages across countries.
Input linkages open new channels that allow countries to benefit from improvements in
the competitiveness of supply chain partners, which counterbalance standard beggar-thy-
neighbor channels. Further, by distinguishing gross and value-added concepts, our framework
emphasizes that what matters in the end is how changes in international relative prices induce
expenditure switching over value added from different source countries.
    Reflecting these insights, the framework yields new real effective exchange rate formulas,
in which bilateral aggregation weights depend on both the global input-output structure and
relative elasticities in production versus demand. The framework also delivers new results
about how REERs are linked to changes in demand for value added. Specifically, one needs
to measure both value-added elasticities and openness to map REER changes into demand.
Given observed input linkages, these conceptual insights are important quantitatively.
    To conclude, we point out several avenues for future work. First, we have studied in-
put linkages in partial equilibrium. More work is needed to incorporate input linkages into
general equilibrium models (e.g., new open economy macro-models) in order to study input
linkages as conduits for identified shocks. Second, we have relied heavily on Armington-CES
foundations, following the bulk of the international macroeconomic literature. New concerns
would arise in models that relax the Armington-CES assumptions to allow markups to be
time varying and/or depart from the roundabout production structure. Third, from a quan-
titative perspective, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the true value of substitution
elasticities, particularly in production. We have demonstrated that these elasticities matter
for understanding price spillovers. Therefore, better elasticity estimates could contribute to
improving macroeconomic policy.

                                              31
References
Ambler, Steve, Emanuela Cardia, and Christian Zimmerman. 2002. “International
 transmission of the business cycle in a multi-sector model.” European Economic Review,
 46: 273–300.

Antràs, Pol. 2014. “Global Production:        A Contracting Perspective.” Unpublished
 Manuscript, Harvard University.

Armington, Paul. 1969. “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
 Production.” IMF Staff Papers, 16(1): 159–178.

Artus, Jaques R., and Rudolf R. Rhomberg. 1973. “A Multilateral Exchange Rate
 Model.” IMF Staff Papers, 20(3): 591–611.

Atalay, Enghin. 2014. “How Important are Sectoral Shocks?” Unpublished Manuscript,
 University of Wisconsin.

Backus, David, Patrick Kehoe, and Finn Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of the Trade Bal-
 ance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” The American Economic Review, 84(1): 84–
 103.

Bayoumi, Tamim, Sarma Jayanthi, and Jaewoo Lee. 2006. “New Rates from New
 Weights.” IMF Staff Papers, 53(2): 272–305.

Bems, Rudolfs. 2014. “Intermediate Inputs, External Rebalancing, and Relative Price
 Adjustment.” Journal of International Economics, 94(2): 248–262.

Bems, Rudolfs, and Robert C. Johnson. 2012. “Value-Added Exchange Rates.” NBER
 Working Paper No. 18498.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010. “Demand Spillovers and
 the Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 295–326.

Black, Stanley W. 1976. “Multilateral and Bilateral Measures of Effective Exchange Rates
  in a World of Traded Goods.” Journal of Political Economy, 84(3): 615–622.

Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai Nayar. 2015. “Input Linkages
 and the Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the Tōhoku Earthquake.”
 Unpublished Manuscript, University of Michigan.

Bruno, Michael. 1984. “Raw Materials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown.” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(1): 1–30.

Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar. 2008. “Trade, production shar-
 ing, and the international transmission of business cycles.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 55: 775–795.




                                          32
Bussière, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Guila Sestieri, and Nori-
 hiko Yamano. 2013. “Estimating Trade Elasticities: Demand Composition and the Trade
 Collapse of 2008-2009.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 118–151.
Chen, Hogan, Matthew Kondratowicz, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2005. “Vertical Specialization
 and Three Facts about U.S. International Trade.” North American Journal of Economics
 and Finance, 16: 35–39.
Chinn, Menzie D. 2006. “A Primer on Real Effective Exchange Rates: Determinants,
 Overvaluation, Trade Flows and Competitive Devaluation.” Open Economies Review, 115-
 143: 115–143.
Corden, W. Max. 1960. “The Geometric Representation of Policies to Attain Internal and
 External Balance.” The Review of Economic Studies, 28(1): 1–22.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti. 2001. “Welfare and Macroeconomic Interde-
 pendence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 421–445.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, Nouriel Roubini, and Cèdric Tille. 2000. “Com-
 petitive Devaluations: Toward a Welfare-Based Approach.” Journal of International Eco-
 nomics, 51: 217–241.
De Clercq, Maarten, Michael Fidora, Bernadette Lauro, Christina Pinheiro,
 and Martin Schmitz. 2012. “Revisting the Effective Exchange Rates of the Euro.” ECB
 Occasional Paper Series No. 134.
Desruelle, Dominique, and Alessandro Zanello. 1997. “A Primer on the IMF’s Infor-
 mation Notice System.” IMF Working Paper 97/71.
Dietzenbacher, Erik, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, Marcel Timmer, and Gaaitzen
 de Vries. 2013. “The Construction of World Input-Output Tables in the WIOD Project.”
 Economic Systems Research, 25(1): 71–98.
Di Giovanni, Julian, and Andrei Levchenko. 2010. “Putting the Parts Together:
 Trade, Vertical Linkages and Business Cycle Comovement.” American Economic Jour-
 nal: Macroeconomics, 2(2): 95–124.
Durand, Martine, Jacques Simon, and Colin Webb. 1992. “OECD’s Indicators of
 International Trade and Competitiveness.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers
 No. 120.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2011. “Trade
 and the Global Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16666.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1998. “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
  Global Economy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(4): 31–50.
Huang, Kevin X. D., and Zheng Liu. 2007. “Business Cycles with Staggered Prices and
 International Trade in Intermediate Inputs.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 1271–
 1289.

                                          33
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
 Specialization in World Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 54: 75–96.

Johnson, Harry. 1958. International Trade and Economic Growth. London:Allen & Unwin.

Johnson, Robert C. 2014. “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comove-
  ment.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4): 39–83.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012a. “Accounting for Intermediates:
  Production Sharing and Trade in Value Added.” Journal of International Economics,
  86(2): 224–236.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012b. “Proximity and Production Frag-
  mentation.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3): 407–411.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2014. “A Portrait of Trade in Value
  Added over Four Decades.” Unpublished Manuscript, Dartmouth College.

Klau, Marc, and San Sau Fung. 2006. “The New BIS Effective Exchange Rate Indices.”
 BIS Quarterly Review, March: 51–65.

Lane, Philip R., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2010. “Financial Exchange Rates and Inter-
  national Currency Exposures.” The American Economic Review, 100(1): 518–40.

Lorentan, Mico. 2005. “Indexes of the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar.” Federal
  Reserve Bulletin, 91: 1–8.

McGuirk, Anne. 1987. “Measuring Price Competitiveness for Industrial Country Trade in
 Manufactures.” IMF Working Paper No. 87/34.

Neary, Peter. 2006. “Measuring Competitveness.” The Economic and Social Review,
 37(2): 197–213.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 2001. “International Macroeconomics: Beyond the Mundell-Fleming
 Model.” IMF Staff Papers, 47(Special Issue): 1–39.

Patel, Nikhil, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. “Global Value Chains and Effective
 Exchange Rates at the Country-Sector Level.” NBER Working Paper No. 20236.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1996. “Imperfect Competition and the
 Effects of Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity.” Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, 28(4): 549–577.

Thomas, Charles, Jaime Marquez, and Sean Fahle. 2008. “Measuring U.S. Interna-
 tional Relative Prices: A WARP View of the World.” Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper Series, Number 917.

Tille, Cèdric. 2001. “The Role of Consumption Substitutability in the International Trans-
  mission of Monetary Shocks.” Journal of International Economics, 53: 421–444.


                                            34
Turner, Philip, and Jozef Van’t dack. 1993. “Measuring International Price and Cost
 Competitiveness.” BIS Economic Papers No. 39.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?”
 Journal of Political Economy, 111: 52–102.




                                        35
                   Table 1: Differences in REER Weights in 2005, by Region
                  Panel A: VAREER Weight minus Armington-REER Weight
                                                         Partner Region
            Source Region         Asia            EU              NAFTA           Other
            Asia                  -5.9            3.1             2.7             0.1
            EU                    1.5             -4.7            2.6             0.6
            NAFTA                 0.6             2.3             -3.6            0.7


                  Panel B: IOREER Weight minus Armington-REER Weight
                                                         Partner Region
            Source Region         Asia            EU              NAFTA           Other
            Asia                  -15.7           10.3            8.5             -3.1
            EU                    3.8             -5.7            2.2             -0.4
            NAFTA                 3.4             2.0             -5.3            -0.1

Note: Each entry records the total difference in trade weights (e.g., in Panel A VAREER weights - Armington-
REER weights) for partners in each destination region, average across source countries within each region.
Changes in weights are expressed in percentage points. Columns might not sum to zero due to rounding.
Data from Johnson and Noguera (2014).




                                                    36
Table 2: Contribution of Weights to Differences Between Value-Added and Armington
REERs.
                                   VAREER minus              IOREER minus
                                  Armington-REER            Armington-REER
                      Horizon    1-year      10-year        1-year     10-year
                      AUS          0.00        0.04           0.13        0.17
                      AUT          0.21        0.19           0.82        0.39
                      BEL          0.24        0.08           0.66        0.25
                      BRA         -0.01       -0.02          0.01        -0.04
                      CAN         -0.06        0.07           0.05        0.18
                      CHE          0.09       -0.03          0.27         0.05
                      CHN         -0.01        0.00           0.01        0.05
                      DEU          0.33        0.00           0.47       -0.02
                      ESP          0.03        0.13           0.28        0.24
                      FRA          0.27        0.05           0.60        0.30
                      GBR          0.08        0.06           0.20        0.20
                      IND          0.00        0.02           0.22        0.21
                      ITA         -0.01        0.00          0.31         0.03
                      JPN          0.03        0.09           0.45        0.19
                      KOR          0.01        0.01           0.29        0.11
                      MEX         -0.03        0.01          -0.02       -0.10
                      NLD          0.04       -0.01           0.47        0.13
                      SWE          0.10        0.13           0.55        0.44
                      TUR         -0.01       -0.03           0.01       -0.02
                      USA          0.08        0.04           0.37        0.15
                      Median      0.03        0.03           0.28        0.16

Note: Decomposition based on Equation (27). Each column contains the median contribution of REER
                                       x       Armington
                                   \ it −REER
weight differences, as a share of REER    \ it           for x ∈ {V A, IO} over 1970-2009. Values at the
10-year horizon are computed based on 30 overlapping 10-year intervals. Data from Johnson and Noguera
(2014).




                                                  37
        Figure 1: Three Country Example


                Country 2

                           ,   ,




                                    Country 3
Country 1
                                           ,    ,




                      38
                 Figure 2: REER Weights Assigned to Germany, 2007
           Weight assigned to DEU                          Differences between weights

AUT                                              AUT
CZE                                              CZE
POL                                              POL
HUN                                              HUN
SVK                                              SVK
SVN                                              SVN
NLD                                              NLD
 BEL                                              BEL
FRA                                              FRA
  ITA                                              ITA
ESP                                              ESP
GBR                                              GBR
SWE                                              SWE
TUR                                              TUR
GRC                                              GRC
  IRL                                              IRL
CHN                                              CHN
USA                                              USA
KOR                                              KOR
 JPN                   IOREER                     JPN
                       VAREER                                  IOREER-VAREER
                       Armington REER                          VAREER-Armington REER
    0         0.1        0.2        0.3             -0.1     -0.05       0       0.05      0.1

Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}. Data
from WIOD.




                                               39
Figure 3: Differences in REER Weights Assigned to Germany versus Bilateral Trade Com-
position with Germany, 2007
                                    VAREER-Armington REER                                                          IOREER-VAREER
                         0.1                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                              IRL
   Weight differences




                                                                              Weight differences



                        0.05                                                                       0.05                                 GRC
                                                                                                                                       TUR
                                                                                                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                      NLD   CHN
                                                                                                                             ITA    USA
                                                                    USA JPN
                                                  IRL       CHN KOR                                                      GBR
                           0                      SWE TUR
                                                        ESP
                                                      ITA
                                                            GRC
                                                          GBR
                                                                                                      0             SWE
                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                    FRA
                                        SVKSVN
                                           BEL NLD                                                             BEL
                                  HUN          POL                                                                SVKSVN
                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                 POL
                                                                                                                HUN
                        -0.05           CZE                                                        -0.05
                                              AUT


                                                                                                             CZE
                         -0.1                                                                       -0.1
                            0.2           0.4      0.6      0.8           1                            0.2      0.3      0.4       0.5     0.6
                                           VAX ratio with DEU                                            Final cons. share of trade with DEU

   Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
   IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}. Bilateral
   final consumption share of trade with Germany includes both exports and imports. VAX ratio
   defined as bilateral trade in value added, relative to bilateral gross trade flows. Data from WIOD.




                                                                              40
         Figure 4: REER Weights Assigned to China and South Korea, 2004
           Weights assigned to CHN                            Weights assigned to KOR

TWN                                                 CHN
KOR                                                  JPN
 JPN                                                 PHL
MYS                                                 VNM
VNM                                                  IDN
 PHL                                                TWN
SGP                                                 AUS
 IDN                                                SGP
THA                                                 MYS
AUS                                                 USA
USA                                                 THA
 IND                                                 IND
BRA                                                 BRA
DEU                                                 TUR
GBR                                                 DEU
CAN                                                 GBR
  ITA                                               CAN
FRA                                                   ITA
                        IOREER                                             IOREER
ESP                     VAREER                      FRA                    VAREER
TUR                     Armington REER              ESP                    Armington REER
          0    0.05   0.1   0.15    0.2                 0     0.02     0.04    0.06     0.08

Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {2.9, 0, 0}. Data
from GTAP.




                                               41
Figure 5: Cross-Country Deviations in Effective Value-Added Elasticities with Inflexible
Global Supply Chains, 2004                                                         CYP

                       Deviations                                              Deviations vs. trade composition

   USA
                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                   ITA
   TWN                                                                 0.1                                           ESP
                                                                                                                  TUR
   TUR                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                             JPN DEU PRT
   PRT                                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                               GBR
   MEX                                                                                                          DNK
   KOR                                                                     0
                                                                                                             CAN
    JPN
     ITA                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                          POL
                                                                                                               SVN
     IRL
                                                         ̃ −  ( = 1)



                                                                                                       MEX   LTU
    IDN                                                             -0.1                             CHN
                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                     SWE
   HUN
                                                                                               IND     ROM
   GRC                                                                                               NLDLVA
                                                                                                         EST
   GBR
   FRA                                                              -0.2                BRA
                                                                                                     BEL MLT
                                                                                           KOR
     FIN                                                                                             BGR
                                                                                                      SVK
   ESP
                                                                                                 HUN
   DEU                                                                                 RUS      CZE
                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                         ROW
   CZE                                                              -0.3               FIN

   CHN
   BRA                                                                                 TWN
                                                                                 IDN
   AUS
                                                                    -0.4
       -0.4         -0.2            0         0.2                      0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4
                      ̃ −  ( = 1)                                    Final consumption share of trade

   Note: Effective elasticities based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}.
   Final consumption share of trade includes both exports and imports. Data from WIOD.




                                                                           LUX




                                                    42
            Figure 6: Value-Added and Gross Measures of Openness, 2004

  IRL
HUN
CZE
TWN
  FIN
DEU
MEX
PRT
KOR
GBR
FRA
ESP
GRC
 IDN
  ITA
TUR
CHN
AUS
BRA
USA                                                                  Gross openness
 JPN                                                                 Value-added openness
     0           0.1          0.2         0.3          0.4          0.5          0.6          0.7

Note: Value-added openness defined as TViiA [Equation (23)] and gross openness defined as Si [Equa-
tion (26)]. Data from WIOD.




                                                43
                                    Figure 7: Reassignment of REER Weights over Time, 1970-2009
                                      VAREER-Armington REER                                                       IOREER-VAREER
                            0.2
Distance between weights




                                                                        Distance between weights
                                                                                                    0.3
                           0.15
                                                                                                   0.25

                                                                                                    0.2
                            0.1
                                                                                                   0.15

                                                                                                    0.1
                           0.05
                                                                                                   0.05

                             0                                                                       0
                             1970     1980    1990     2000     2010                                 1970   1980      1990    2000   2010

                                                     Median country                                DEU      JPN        USA


Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {2.25, 0, 0}.
Distances between REER weights are measured using the city-block metric: dVit AREER =
P     V AREER      Armington       IOREER−V AREER         P      IOREER      V AREER
  j wijt       − wijt        and dit                   =    j wijt        − wijt      , where wijt
denotes the weight attached by country i to partner j in year t for each index. Data from Johnson
and Noguera (2014).




                                                                       44
                       Figure 8: Difference between GDP and CPI Price Deflators, 1990-2009
                   0.08


                   0.06


                   0.04


                   0.02
ln(PGDP / PCPI )




                      0


                   -0.02


                   -0.04


                   -0.06
                                                          Germany
                                                          Spain
                                                          United Kingdom
                   -0.08                                  Japan
                                                          South Korea
                                                          United States
                    -0.1
                      1990   1992   1994    1996   1998        2000   2002   2004   2006   2008

Note: Log relative price of GDP to CPI is normalized to zero in 2000. Data from IMF’s World
Economic Outlook database.




                                                          45
   Figure 9: Real Effective Exchange Rates for Select EMU Countries, 1995-2011
                        Germany                                           Spain
      0                                                 0.25

   -0.05                                                 0.2

    -0.1                                                0.15

   -0.15                                                 0.1

    -0.2                                                0.05

   -0.25                                                  0

    -0.3                                            -0.05

                                                        -0.1
      1995       2000         2005        2010            1995    2000             2005   2010



                        Ireland                                            Italy
     0.3                                                 0.3
    0.25
                                                        0.25
     0.2
                                                         0.2
    0.15
     0.1                                                0.15

    0.05                                                 0.1
      0
                                                        0.05
   -0.05
                                                          0
    -0.1
                                                    -0.05
      1995       2000         2005        2010          1995      2000             2005   2010



                        Greece                                           Portugal
    0.25                                                0.15

     0.2
                                                         0.1
    0.15

     0.1                                                0.05

    0.05                                                  0
      0
                                                    -0.05
   -0.05

    -0.1                                                -0.1
      1995       2000         2005        2010            1995    2000             2005   2010

                                  Armington-REER         VAREER      IOREER


Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}. The
level of the log REERs is normalized to zero in 1995. Data from WIOD.




                                                   46
 Figure 10: Real Effective Exchange Rates for China and United States, 1995-2011
                    China                                             USA
0.5                                                 0.3


0.4                                                 0.2


0.3                                                 0.1


0.2                                                  0


0.1                                              -0.1


 0                                               -0.2
 1995        2000           2005      2010         1995       2000          2005      2010

                             Armington-REER     VAREER          IOREER


Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}. The
level of the log REERs is normalized to zero in 1995. Data from WIOD.




                                               47
Figure 11: Changes in Demand for Value Added and Contributing Factors to Deviations,
2005
                    ̂ and ̂                      Decomposition of ̂ − ̂  deviations

   BRA                                    ̂      BRA             .̂ (̃ = 1) − ̂ 
   KOR                                    ̂      KOR             ̂ − ̂ (̃ = 1)

   CZE                                               CZE
   MEX                                               MEX
    JPN                                               JPN
    IDN                                               IDN
   GBR                                               GBR
   FRA                                               FRA
   USA                                               USA
   DEU                                               DEU
   AUS                                               AUS
     ITA                                               ITA
     IRL                                               IRL
   PRT                                               PRT
   ESP                                               ESP
   GRC                                               GRC
   HUN                                               HUN
   CHN                                               CHN
   TWN                                               TWN
     FIN                                               FIN
   TUR                                               TUR

           -4      -2         0             2                -2         -1         0             1
                  Percentage points                                  Percentage points

   Note: V̂iV A denotes changes in demand for value added when final demand and production elasticities
   are set to {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}. V̂iIO denotes changes in demand for value added when final demand
   and production elasticities are set to {σ, γ, ρ} = {3, 0, 0}. Decomposition components, V̂iIO (˜  =
          VA        IO     IO
   1)− V̂i and V̂i − V̂i (˜     = 1), capture correspondingly contributions from deviations in IOREER-
   VAREER and contributions from deviations in effective value-added elasticities. Data from WIOD.




                                                   48
               Figure 12: Value-Added Openness over Time, 1970-2009

 0.44


 0.42


  0.4


 0.38


 0.36


 0.34


 0.32


  0.3


 0.28


 0.26


 0.24
    1970      1975      1980       1985      1990       1995      2000       2005      2010


Note: Value-added openness defined as TViiA [Equation (23)]. The line records the cross-country
median for each year. Data from Johnson and Noguera (2014).




                                              49
A      Framework Appendix

In this appendix, we provide supplemental results related to Sections 1 and 2. The first
part provides algebraic details underlying special case with equal elasticities, leading to
Equation (22). The second part discusses demand for value added in three special cases of
the framework with restricted input trade.

A.1     Demand for Value Added with Equal Elasticities
This section sketches the derivation of the VAREER, as a special case of the general frame-
work in Section 1.
   When  ≡ γ = ρ = σ, then the price level of inputs falls out of Equation (13), so it
reduces to:                              h                        i
                         Q̂ = SF F̂ + SX −M1 p̂ + M2 p̂ + M2 Q̂) .                    (28)

Using Equation (4) to replace F̂, and noting that (SF + SX )M1 = I, then:

                   Q̂ = −p̂ + (SF M2 Wf + SX M2 )p̂ + SX M2 Q̂ + SF M2 F̂ ,                   (29)

where (SF M2 Wf + SX M2 )p̂ summarizes the effective aggregate gross output price that each
country facts on the world market, and SX M2 Q̂ + SF M2 F̂ summarizes the level of demand
for gross output. Going one step further, we can re-write demand for gross output as:

                          Q̂ = −p̂ + [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 Wf p̂ + F̂ w ,                      (30)

with F̂ w defined as in the main text.
   To convert demand for gross output into demand for real value added, we use the pro-
duction side of the framework. Combining Equation (16) with (30) yields:

            V̂ = −p̂ + [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 Wf p̂ − [diag(sxi /svi )](I − Wx )p̂ + F̂ w
                                                                                                (31)
               = −[I − Ω0 ][diag(svi )]−1 p̂ + [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 Wf p̂ + F̂ w ,

where the second line follows because I + [diag(sxi /svi )] = [diag(svi )]−1 and diag(sxi )Wx = Ω0 .
   Finally, we substitute out for gross prices, using Equation (18). Canceling terms in the
resulting expression yields:
                                   
                  V̂ = − p̂v − P̂ w + F̂ w
                   with P̂ w ≡ [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v              (32)
                   and F̂ w ≡ [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 F̂ .

   The perceived world prices of value added (P̂ w ) are weighted averages of price changes for
value added (p̂v ) originating from all countries. The first component is Wf [I −Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )].
This combines Equations (5) and (18) to compute changes in the final goods price level in


                                                  50
each destination (P̂F ). The second component, [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF M2 , aggregates P̂F into the
perceived world price of value added (P̂ w ). Specifically, each ij element of [I −SX M2 ]−1 SF M2
records the share of gross output from each source country i used directly or indirectly to
produce final goods absorbed in destination j. These weights are          equal to the share of value
                                                                    pvi Vij
added from source i embodied in final goods in destination j: pv Vi . That is, they are value-
                                                                      i

added export shares. The same weighting scheme applies in computing F̂ w . Recognizing
this, we arrive at Equation (22) in the main text, the Armington-CES model that is the
basis for the VAREER.

A.2     Demand for Value Added with Restrictions on Input Trade
To aid in understanding the value-added REER formulas, we discuss three special cases. The
first case has no intermediate inputs in production. The second case assumes that domestic
inputs are used in production, but there is no input trade. The third case allows for input
trade, but assumes imports are used to produce exports for only one bilateral pair and that
elasticities are equal throughout the model.

A.2.1    Case I: no intermediate inputs
Suppose that we modify the framework to remove intermediate inputs entirely, so that
{SX , Ω} and sX                                                                              v
               i are zeros. Then, Equation (19) can be written as: V̂ = −η [I − SF M2 Wf ] p̂ +
SF M2 F̂ , where we recognize that sVi = 1 and SF M1 = I. Setting F̂ to zero and re-writing
this in summation notation using results from Section 2.1, we arrive at:
                                  X  pv Fij                 X  pv Fkj 
                            v          i                              k
                 V̂i = −σ p̂i + η       v
                                               P̂j with P̂j =                p̂vk .       (33)
                                  j
                                      p i Vi
                                                               k
                                                                     P j F j


    Note that exports consist entirely of final goods in this case, so we can replace pvi Fij
with gross exports EXij . This leads to a straightforward interpretation. This formula is a
double export weighted index of bilateral relative value-added prices. The weights are based
on exports as a share of GDP and/or final expenditure, because exports are comparable to
GDP when not inputs are used in their production.
    An alternative interpretation is as follows. Note that value added equals gross output in
this special case, so Qi = Vi and pi = pvi . Together with the fact that pvi Fij = EXij , then we
can re-write Equation 33 as:
                                 X  EXij                     X  EXkj 
                V̂i = −σ p̂i + η              P̂j with P̂j =                   p̂k .         (34)
                                 j
                                      p i Q i
                                                                k
                                                                      P j F j


That is, we can trivially re-write Equation (33) to look like it involves gross prices, exports,
and output, because there is no distinction between final goods, gross output, and value
added in this case.
   It follows that one couldP  define a value-added REER as in Equation (26), by defining
EXij = Salesij and Pj Fj = k Saleskj . This provides a possible rationale for interpreting


                                                 51
conventional REERs as describing demand for value added. However, we believe this inter-
pretation is problematic – and therefore do not advance it – for three reasons. First, it rests
on an obviously counterfactual assumption – that no inputs are used in production. Second,
this special case provides no guidance about how to construct REERs in practice. Given
this view, one would go out to data and observe differences between value added and gross
variables in the real world, and have no way of deciding which to use in building the REER.
In contrast, our framework makes the mapping from model to data crystal clear. Third,
this interpretation is not consistent with the Armington product-based approach on which
conventional REERs are based.

A.2.2    Case II: domestic inputs only
Let us now assume that domestic inputs are used in production, but there is no input
trade. In this case, Ω is a diagonal matrix with elements ωii equal to the share of domestic
intermediates in gross output in each country (i.e., ωii = sX i ). Then, Equation (19) can be
written as just as in the previous case: V̂ = −σ [I − SF M2 Wf ] p̂v + SF M2 F̂ . Thus, we arrive
at Equation (33) in this case as well, despite the introduction of intermediates.
    One way to understand this is that Equation (33) can be re-written as:
                           X  (1 − ωii )−1 pi Fij                  X  pk Fkj 
                     v
          V̂i = −η p̂ + η                            P̂j with P̂j =                 p̂vk .   (35)
                            j
                                      p  Q
                                        i i
                                                                      k
                                                                           P  F
                                                                             j j

                                                                                    P pF
Gross output equals final goods plus domestic intermediates, which implies that j pii Qiji < 1.
The (1 − ωii )−1 adjustment in the formula above takes final goods and converts them into
the amount of gross output needed to produce those final goods. Then the weights on
individual destination markets records the amount of gross output needed to produce final
goods shipped to a given destination (1 − ωii )−1 pi Fij as a share of gross output pi Qi . Noting
that the ratio of value added to gross output is 1 − ωii , then these shares are equivalent to
the share of value-added exports in total value added.

A.2.3    Case III: restricted input trade and homogeneous elasticities
We now turn to a case in which there are no domestic intermediates, but there is restricted
trade in inputs. We assume that country 1 exports inputs to country 2, and no other
country exports or imports inputs. Put differently, Ω12 > 0 is the only non-zero element of
Ω. Further, let us also assume that elasticities are equal throughout the framework, so we
are in the Armington value-added case. This means that Equation (22) describes demand
for value added, so we are interpreting that formula here in a special case.
    Starting with destination price indexes (P̂j ), computing Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )] yields the
weights to attach to value added prices. These can be written in the form:
                                                                                   
                  p1 F1j + p2 F2j Ω12     v     p2 F2j (1 − Ω12 ) v X pk Fkj
          P̂j =                         p̂1 +                      p̂2 +                  p̂vk . (36)
                         Pj F j                       Pj F j             k6=1,2
                                                                                  P  F
                                                                                    j j


Here the weight on p̂v1 is adjusted upwards and the weight on p̂2 is adjusted downward


                                                 52
relative to the share of final goods imported from each country by j. This reflects the fact
that country 1 ships inputs to country 2 that are embodied in final goods shipments F2j .
Therefore, the fraction Ω12 of F2j is value added originating in country 1.
    These price indexes get weighted by [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 in con-
structing the hypothetical world price index. For country 1, demand for real value added
can be written as:
                                           X  p1 F1j + Ω12 p2 F2j 
                                     v
                          V̂1 = −η p̂1 + η                           P̂j ,                (37)
                                           j
                                                      p 1 Q 1


where P̂j is given by Equation (36).
    How do we interpret the destination weights? Note that p1 Q1 = pv1 V1 and p1 F1j +
Ω12 p2 F2j = pv1 V1j for country 1, so these destination weights are simply equal to the share of
                                                               pv V
value added from country 1 consumed in country j (i.e., p1v V1j1 ). Some of the value added from
                                                                 1
country 1 (pv1 V1j ) is consumed directly in final goods shipped from country 1 (p1 F1 j), and
some of it is consumed indirectly embodied in final goods shipped from country 2 (Ω12 p2 F2j ).
    Turning to country 2, demand for real value added can be written as:
                                              X  p2 F2j 
                                        v
                             V̂2 = −η p̂2 + η               P̂j ,
                                              j
                                                   p2 Q 2
                                              X  (1 − Ω12 )p2 F2j                          (38)
                                        v
                                 = −η p̂2 + η                         P̂j .
                                              j
                                                   (1 −   Ω12 )p 2 Q2


From the first to the second line, we simply multiply and divide the destination      weight by
                                              p F                             pv V
1 − Ω12 to convert the gross output share p22 Q2j2 into a value added share p2v V2j2 . So these
                                                                               2
weights also equal the share of value added from country 2 consumed in j.
    In both cases, destinations are weighted by value-added trade shares, which means that
these shares tell us how important destination j is as a source of demand for country i.
Further, the share of value added from i in final spending in j captures how important price
changes in i are in determining the price level in j. The takeaway from this example is trade
measured in value added terms captures how production linkages influence evaluations of
competitiveness. When inputs are traded, neither final goods shipments nor gross exports
suffice to evaluate competitiveness.


B     Empirical Appendix

This appendix provides supplemental empirical results. Section B.1 explores how sensitive
value-added elasticities and REER weights are to different elasticity parameters. Section
B.2 compares results from our framework with Leontief final demand to results from the
main text with Leontief production. Section B.3 examines the sources of deviations between
value-added deflators and consumer price indexes (CPIs). Finally, Section B.4 quantifies the
role that effective value-added elasticities play in explaining deviations in demand for value
added between the heterogeneous and homogeneous elasticity cases.


                                               53
B.1      How Sensitive are Value-Added Elasticity and REER Weights
         to σ, γ and ρ?
This section examines the relative importance of each elasticity – σ, γ and ρ – in the key
building blocks of our framework: the value-added elasticity and bilateral REER weights.
   Referring to Equation (25), the value-added elasticity is a country-specific weighted av-
erage of the primitive gross elasticities:

                                                 Tσii   Tρii   Tγii
                                 ˜i (σ, γ, ρ) = ii σ + ii ρ + ii γ.                                      (39)
                                                TV A   TV A   TV A

   Bilateral REER weights also depend on the elasticities. For country i, the bilateral REER
                                          ρ      γ
                                   σ
                                                   
weight assigned to country j is σTij + ρTij + γTij /Tii (σ, γ, ρ). Therefore, by construction

                                     X −(σTijσ + ρTijρ + γTijγ )
                                                                 = 1.
                                     j6=i
                                           Tii (σ, γ, ρ)

We can regroup these N − 1 bilateral weights according to contributions attached to each
elasticity as follows:
                         P           σ
                                          P           γ    P           ρ
                            j6=i −Tij        j6=i −Tij        j6=i −Tij
                       σ               +γ               +ρ               = 1,
                         Tii (σ, γ, ρ)    Tii (σ, γ, ρ)    Tii (σ, γ, ρ)

where terms multiplying each elasticity summarize the Poverall sensitivity of REER weights
in country i to each elasticity. Finally, we note that j Tijx = 0 for x = {σ, γ, ρ}. This
is because final demand, the demand for the composite input, and input demand are each
homogeneous of degree zero in prices. With this insight, we can write:

                               Tσii           Tρii           Tγii
                          σ ii         + γ ii         + ρ ii         = 1.                                 (40)
                           T (σ, γ, ρ)    T (σ, γ, ρ)    T (σ, γ, ρ)

      Examining Equations (39) and (40) reveals that the same three diagonal elements of
T-matrices – Tσii , Tρii and Tγii – determine how sensitive the value-added elasticity and REER
weights are to the three elasticity parameters.39 In Figure 13, we plot the relative size of
Tσii , Tρii , and Tγii for selected countries in 2005. The weight attached to ρ is the largest, with
a median value of 0.52 in the full sample. The weight attached to σ has a country median
of 0.29, while the weight attached to γ accounts for the remainder with median value of
0.17. This means that the value-added elasticity and REER weights are most sensitive to
the choice of ρ – the elasticity of substitution among inputs. At the same time, γ – the
elasticity of substitution between domestic value added and inputs – is least important.
      What explains the relative size of Tσii , Tρii and Tγii ? The economic forces that determine the
size of Tσii and Tρii are essentially identical. Both terms capture substitution between domestic
and imported goods in correspondingly final demand and among inputs in production. Tρii
  39
     Note that differences in the common denominator – Tii (σ, γ, ρ) versus TViiA – do not affect relative size
of elasticity weights.



                                                      54
has twice the impact on demand for value added simply because trade in inputs is twice the
trade in final consumption goods.
     The contribution of Tγii is considerably smaller because there are two opposing effects at
work. First, there is substitution effect between value added and inputs in production: if
the price of domestic value added increases, it is substituted for inputs. As a result, demand
for value added falls. Second, domestic value added is itself a major component of inputs
used in production, so that substituting towards inputs increases demand for value added.
     More formally, one can identify these opposing effects by examining Equation (17),
where the direct substitution effect is captured with −γ[diag(sxi /svi )](I − Wx ) (which has
a negative sign), while the off-setting effect is captured by γ[I − SX M2 ]−1 SX M2 (I − Wx )
(which has a positive sign). We can then decompose Tγii into Tγii = Tγii,V + Tγii,X , where
Tγii,V ≡ [diag(sxi /svi )](I −Wx ) and Tγii,X ≡ [I −SX M2 ]−1 SX M2 (I −Wx ). Looking at these two
terms empirically, we find that values for the median sample country are Tγii,V /TViiA = 0.57
and Tγii,X /TViiA = −0.40. Thus, the role of the substitution effect between value added and
inputs, Tγii,V , is comparable to the role of the substitution effect among inputs, Tρii . This is
to be expected, as both value added and inputs are important components of production.
However, the off-setting effect, Tγii,X , is also sizable, because domestic inputs are a major
component of overall inputs. Putting these together, the overall sensitivity of REER weights
and effective value-added elasticity to γ is muted, consistent with Figure 13.

B.2     Leontief Final Demand: σ = 0 and γ = ρ > 0
This appendix examines how low final demand elasticities, as in Leontief final demand (σ =
0), alter the building blocks of the framework and historical value-added REERs. Given this
restriction we set γ = ρ = 1.50 to make the global, GDP-weighted value-added elasticity
equal to 1 over the 1995-2009 period in the WIOD data (similar to what we did in the
Leontief case in Section 3). Rather than replicating all our results for this case, we focus on
a few key results with this alternative parametrization.
    In Figure 14, we present bilateral REER weights attached to Germany when σ = 0, and
compare them to the VAREER and Armington-REER weights. The main finding is that
IOREER weights with Leontief demand tend to undo the adjustment we see in VAREER
relative to Armington-REER weights. That is, Leontief demand moves us back toward
conventional REER weights. The economics underlying this case are symmetric to the
case of low production elasticity. When final demand elasticity is low, bilateral partners
with larger final goods share in trade are assigned increased weights, while partners with
larger input trade share are assigned smaller weights. Consequently, the correlation between
input trade intensity and IOREER-VAREER weight differences is negative, as reported in
the lower right panel of Figure 14. In the Leontief production case, this correlation was
positive. Figure 15 confirms this result for bilateral weights attached to China and Korea as
well. For most countries, the IOREER weights under Leontief demand are very close to the
Armington-REER weights.
    Figure 16 examines value-added elasticities in the Leontief demand case. Again, the re-
sults and economic logic are symmetric to the Leontief production case. Recall that Leontief
production reduced value-added elasticities for countries with large input shares in their
trade. Leontief demand generates the opposite result: value-added elasticities are lower for

                                               55
countries that have higher final goods shares in trade, as depicted in Figure 16. Further,
the overall magnitudes for deviations of the value-added elasticity from 1 are about half as
large with Leontief final demand as they were with Leontief production. This reflects the
fact that input trade shares are twice as large as final goods trade shares in the data.
    Finally, we compare deviations between IOREER and VAREER indexes for the Leontief
production versus Leontief final demand cases in Figure 17. The main takeaway again is the
symmetry in the results. For example, consider the figure for China. Figure 10 showed that
IOREER with Leontief production generated a smaller appreciation than VAREER, and this
is reflected in the dashed line in the top-left panel in Figure 17. In contrast, the IOREER
with Leontief demand generates a smaller appreciation than the VAREER, the mirror image
of the Leontief production case. This basic results extends throughout the country sample.
This finding should come as no surprise, given the results regarding REER weight differences
and value-added elasticities above.

B.3      Deviations Between Prices of Value Added and CPI
In Section 5.1, we observed that there are large and persistent differences between GDP
deflators and consumer price indexes. To interpret these differences, it is instructive to
decompose them into (a) differences between value added versus gross output prices (p̂v − p̂),
and (b) differences between gross output and consumer prices (p̂ − pbCP I ):

                                 p̂v − p̂cpi =       p̂v − p̂        + p̂ − pbcpi .                          (41)
                                                     | {z }            | {z }
                                                 VA terms of trade     approximation


    The first component (p̂v − p̂) captures differences between gross output and value-added
prices. Because gross output prices are a cost-share-weighted average of value-added prices,
then p̂v − p̂ captures changes in the value added terms of trade. The second component
p̂ − pbcpi captures differences between each country’s gross output price and its consumer
prices. Because conventional REER measures use consumer prices rather than gross output
prices for pragmatic reasons (e.g., data availability), we think of this price gap as simply
reflecting approximation error – i.e., consumer price changes are typically a bad proxy for
gross output price changes.40 Together, these two components lead relative consumer prices
to deviate from value-added prices, and this will account for part of the gap between our
value-added indexes and currently published (CPI-based) REER indexes.
    To illustrate how the gap between value added and consumer prices breaks down in
practice, we plot the components of Equation (41) in Figure 18, focusing on the same six
countries depicted in Figure 8.41 Both components are important in explaining differences
between value added and consumer prices, though the relative importance of each component
  40
      There are several reasons why we might expect consumer price changes to be a bad proxy for gross
output price changes. First, the terms of trade factor in here as well. Consumer prices are weighted averages
of gross output prices from all countries (i.e., P̂ = Wf p̂), so changes in the gross output terms of trade drive a
wedge between consumer prices and a country’s own gross output price. Second, the CPI measures consumer
prices rather than supply-side prices. So, further deviations can be attributed to differences in weights that
the CPI assigns to components of total demand. For example, CPI assigns zero weight to expenditures on
nonresidential investment.
   41
      We take gross output price indexes from the EU KLEMS database (http://www.euklems.net/).


                                                         56
differs across countries. For example, gross output and value added prices track each other
closely in Germany, but growth in consumer prices persistently outstrips growth in either
prices for value added or output over this period. Other countries like Spain see the exact
opposite pattern, where gross output and CPI prices track each other, and the gap between
value added and gross output prices is large.
    Overall, this evidence points to both the distinction between gross output and value
added, as well as the approximation of output prices with consumer prices, as important
in understanding gaps between value added and consumer prices. Explaining differences in
price measures in detail for individual countries lies outside the scope of this paper.

B.4      Quantifying the Role of Value-Added Elasticities
In Section 5.2, we described how differences in country-specific value-added elasticities in
the IOREER case influence demand for value-added, relative to the VAREER case with a
homogeneous elasticity. To study this more systematically, we can decompose V̂itIO − V̂itV A
as follows:
                                    IO     V A               IO
      VbitIO − VbitV A = Tiit
                           VA   \ it − REER
                                REER     \ it + TiitVA \
                                                       REERit (˜it (σ, ρ, γ) − 1) .    (42)
                         |            {z       } |                {z
                                                           Elasticity effect
                                                                                 }
                                   REER effect

The first term captures differences between IOREER and VAREER changes, which we label
the REER effect. The elasticity that governs how the IOREER influences demand is fixed
here at ˜it = 1. The second term accounts for the effect of the country-specific value-added
elasticity on demand for value added. The contribution of this Elasticity effect to deviations
in demand for value added depends on interaction of deviations in ˜it across countries and
the change in the IOREER. To translate aggregated price changes into changes in demand
for value added, both terms are adjusted for country-specific openness.42
    Figure 19 provides a more systematic evidence about the Elasticity effect, using the
decomposition reported in (42). On x-axis in the left panel we plot the absolute size of the
median Elasticity effect for each sample country over 1970-2009. The value of 0.1 implies
that the Elasticity effect in a given year contributes 0.1 percentage points to demand for
value added. The resulting statistic shows that the Elasticity effect is large in economic
terms. For example, in Japan the median one-year contribution of the elasticity effect to
change in demand for value added is 0.13 percentage points. For some countries the impact is
considerably higher. We plot these contributions against median values of effective elasticities
                       it (σ, ρ, γ) − 1) to show that the Elasticity effect is larger in countries
in each country (i.e., e
in which there are more sizable deviations in the effective elasticity.
    The right panel of Figure 19 looks at the relative importance of Elasticity and REER
effects. The panel reports median contribution of the Elasticity effect to deviations in demand
for value added for each sample country over 1970-2009. We find, in line with results in Figure
11, that the contribution of the Elasticity effect varies considerably across countries and for
the median country is close to 0.5.
  42
    Note that the two decomposition terms are identical to the two contributing factors reported in the right
panel of Figure 11, but are expressed so as to highlight deviations in value-added REERs and value-added
elasticities.


                                                     57
Figure 13: Sensitivity of REER Weights and Effective Value-Added Elasticity to Elasticities
in Production and Final Demand, 2005

    BRA              Tii/TiiVA
     IDN
                     Tii/TiiVA
    AUS
      FIN            Tii/TiiVA
     JPN
    KOR
    USA
    CHN
    TWN
    MEX
    GBR
      ITA
    FRA
    DEU
    ESP
    GRC
    TUR
    CZE
    PRT
    HUN
      IRL

          0        0.1            0.2   0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.7       0.8        0.9        1

   Notes: Tρii /TViiA , Tσii /TViiA and Tγii /TViiA , where TViiA = Tρii + Tσii + Tγii , represent weights attached
   to the framework’s three margins of substitution: (i) among inputs from different source countries,
   ρ, (ii) among final goods from alternative sources, σ, and (iii) between domestic value added and
   inputs in production, γ. Data from WIOD.




                                                         58
Figure 14: REER Weights Assigned to Germany and Differences in REER Weights versus
Bilateral Trade Composition with Germany, 2007
                Weight assigned to DEU                                              VAREER-Armington REER
                                                                         0.1
   AUT




                                                   Weight differences
   CZE                                                                  0.05
   POL
   HUN                                                                                            IRL       CHN KOR
                                                                                                                    USA JPN
                                                                           0                      SWE TUR
                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                      ITA
                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                          GBR
   SVK                                                                                  SVKSVN
                                                                                           BEL NLD
                                                                                                    FRA

   SVN                                                                            HUN          POL
                                                                        -0.05           CZE
   NLD                                                                                        AUT

    BEL
   FRA                                                                   -0.1
                                                                            0.2           0.4      0.6      0.8                1
     ITA                                                                                   VAX ratio with DEU
   ESP
                                                                                              IOREER-VAREER
   GBR                                                                   0.1
   SWE
                                                   Weight differences




   TUR
                                                                        0.05
   GRC                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                            POLAUT
     IRL                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                         BELSVKSVN FRA
                                                                           0                  SWENLDGBR
                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                   KORCHN
   CHN                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                             ESP
                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                                                         IRL
   USA
                            IOREER                                      -0.05
   KOR                      VAREER
    JPN                     Armington REER
                                                                         -0.1
         0         0.1        0.2        0.3                                0.2      0.3      0.4       0.5     0.6
                                                                              Final cons. share of trade with DEU

   Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
   IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {0, 1.5, 1, 5}.
   Bilateral final consumption share of trade with Germany includes both exports and imports. VAX
   ratio defined as bilateral trade in value added, relative to bilateral gross trade flows. Data from
   WIOD.




                                                   59
          Figure 15: REER Weights Assigned to China and South Korea, 2004
             Weights assigned to CHN                        Weights assigned to KOR

 TWN                                                CHN
 KOR                                                 JPN
  JPN                                                PHL
 MYS                                                VNM
 VNM                                                 IDN
  PHL                                               TWN
 SGP                                                AUS
  IDN                                               SGP
 THA                                                MYS
 AUS                                                USA
 USA                                                THA
  IND                                                IND
 BRA                                                BRA
 DEU                                                TUR
 GBR                                                DEU
 CAN                                                GBR
   ITA                                              CAN
 FRA                                                  ITA
                          IOREER                                         IOREER
 ESP                      VAREER                    FRA                  VAREER
 TUR                      Armington REER            ESP                  Armington REER
      0      0.05   0.1    0.15    0.2                  0     0.02     0.04     0.06      0.08

Note: VAREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {1, 1, 1}.
IOREER weights are based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {0, 1.53, 1.53}.
Data from GTAP.




                                               60
Figure 16: Cross-Country Deviations in Effective Value-Added Elasticities with Inflexible
Global Supply Chains, 2004
                    Deviations                                                 Deviations vs. trade composition
                                                                              0.2
   USA                                                                              IDN
   TWN                                                                                    TWN

   TUR
   PRT                                                                       0.15         FIN
                                                                                           ROW
   MEX                                                                                    RUS    IRL
                                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                                   HUN
   KOR
    JPN                                                                                              SVK
                                                                                                    BGR
                                                                                             KOR
     ITA                                                                                   BRA
                                                                              0.1                   BEL MLT
     IRL
                                                           ̃ −  ( = 1)



                                                                                                        EST
    IDN                                                                                             NLDLVA

   HUN                                                                                           IND ROM
                                                                                                    SWE
   GRC                                                                                                 AUT
   GBR                                                                       0.05                    CHN

                                                                                                     MEX LTU
   FRA                                                                                                 POL
                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                     AUS
     FIN
   ESP                                                                                                     CAN

   DEU                                                                         0
                                                                                                              DNK
   CZE                                                                                                        GBR
   CHN                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                           JPNDEUPRT
   BRA                                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                               TUR
   AUS                                                                 -0.05                                     ESP
                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                FRA

       -0.1          0        0.1        0.2                                   0.2       0.3        0.4
                  ̃ −  ( = 1)                                             Final consumption share of trade

   Note: Effective elasticities based on final demand and production elasticities {σ, γ, ρ} = {0, 1.5, 1.5}.
   Final consumption share of trade includes both exports and imports. Data from WIOD.




                                                      61
Figure 17: Cumulative Deviations between IOREER and VAREER Indexes, 1995-2011

                        China                                              USA
   0.04                                             0.04

   0.02
                                                    0.02
     0
                                                       0
  -0.02

  -0.04                                             -0.02
      1995      2000            2005   2010             1995        2000           2005   2010

                       Germany                                             Spain
   0.04                                             0.01

                                                   0.005
   0.02
                                                       0
     0
                                                   -0.005

  -0.02                                             -0.01
      1995      2000            2005   2010             1995        2000           2005   2010

                       Greece                                              Italy
   0.15                                             0.04

    0.1
                                                    0.02
   0.05
                                                       0
     0

  -0.05                                             -0.02
      1995      2000            2005   2010             1995        2000           2005   2010
                        IOREER(=3;==0)-VAREER            IOREER(=0;==1.5)-VAREER



 Note: All log REER indexes normalized to zero in 1995. Data from WIOD.




                                              62
Figure 18: Decomposition of Differences Between GDP Deflator and CPI, 1995-2007
                           Germany                                                Spain
  0.1                                                    0.1



 0.05                                                   0.05



   0                                                       0



-0.05                                                   -0.05
                v                                                       v
               p -p                                                    p -p
                    cpi                                                     cpi
               p-p                                                     p-p
 -0.1                                                    -0.1
        1996   1998 2000        2002 2004   2006                1996   1998 2000     2002 2004   2006



                     United Kingdom                                               Japan
  0.1                                                    0.1



 0.05                                                   0.05



   0                                                       0



-0.05                                                   -0.05
               pv-p                                                    pv-p
                    cpi
               p-p                                                     p-pcpi
 -0.1                                                    -0.1
        1996   1998 2000        2002 2004   2006                1996   1998 2000     2002 2004   2006



                          South Korea                                         United States
  0.1                                                    0.1



 0.05                                                   0.05



   0                                                       0



-0.05                                                   -0.05
               pv-p                                                    pv-p
                    cpi
               p-p                                                     p-pcpi
 -0.1                                                    -0.1
        1996   1998 2000        2002 2004   2006                1996   1998 2000     2002 2004   2006

Notes: Log relative price is normalized to zero in 2000. Data from IMF World Economic Outlook
and EU KLEMS databases.



                                                   63
Figure 19: Absolute Size of the ”Elasticity Effect” and Its Contribution to Deviations in
Demand for Value Added, 1970-2009
                                           Absolute size                                     Median contribution

                                                                                  BEL
                                                                      IDN
                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                 CAN
               0.25                                             BEL
                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                 TUR
                                                 NOR                              JPN
                                                BRA
                      0.2                                                        CHE
                                                                                 CHN
   Median |̃ − |




                            IND     FIN
                                                                                 ESP
                                          ISR    CAN      CHL                    KOR
               0.15                               ROU

                                      KOR
                                                GRC                               IND
                                                        HUN                      USA
                                  NLDSWE
                                                                                 FRA
                      0.1         IRL
                                     ZAF
                                                                                 AUS
                                                TUR
                                 ARG
                                      JPN
                                           NZL VNM
                                                                                   ITA
                             DEU
                                  AUTMEX POL
                             USA                                                 SWE
                            PRT                                                  GBR
               0.05           DNK
                             THAGBR
                              AUS
                               ESP                                               DEU
                              ITA CHE
                                    CHN
                             FRA                                                 AUT
                                                                                 NLD
                       0
                        0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4                                              0          0.5            1
                         Median |elasticity effect|, in p.p.                                    Share of total

   Note: Size of the median elasticity effect for each country computed as median absolute value of
   elasticity effects, in percentage points, at 1-year horizon over 1970-2009. Median contribution of
   the elasticity effect computed from a decomposition that attributes deviations in demand for value
   added to deviations in effective elasticities and deviations in REERs (i.e., IOREER-VAREER).Data
   from Johnson and Noguera (2014).




                                                                            64
