                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GOOD RANKINGS ARE BAD:
                   WHY RELIABLE RANKINGS CAN HURT CONSUMERS

                                           Laurent Bouton
                                          Georg Kirchsteiger

                                         Working Paper 21083
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21083


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




We are grateful to Elena Arias Ortiz, Micael Castanheira, Thomas Gall, Alessandro Gavazza, Victor
Ginsburgh, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Andy Newman for insightful comments. We also benefitted from
the comments of the audiences at BU, ECARES, Université de Lausanne, and at the conference on
Gaming Incentive Systems in Bonn. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Laurent Bouton and Georg Kirchsteiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Good Rankings Are Bad: Why Reliable Rankings Can Hurt Consumers
Laurent Bouton and Georg Kirchsteiger
NBER Working Paper No. 21083
April 2015
JEL No. D8,L15

                                            ABSTRACT

Rankings have become increasingly popular on various markets, e.g. the market for study programs.
We analyze their welfare implications. Consumers have to choose between two goods of unknown
quality with exogenous presence or absence of an unbiased informative ranking. The existence of the
ranking might affect the welfare of all consumers negatively. With rigid prices, the ranking induced
change in demand can be detrimental to all consumers in markets featuring rationing or consumption
externalities. With perfectly flexible prices, the ranking might increase firms' market power, and hence
lead to losses for all consumers even in the absence of rationing and consumption externalities.


Laurent Bouton
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington,DC 20057
and NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com

Georg Kirchsteiger
ECARES, Université Libre de Bruxelles
Av. Roosevelt 50, CP 114/04
1050 Brussels
Belgium
gkirchst@ulb.ac.be
1        Introduction

You are a frequent patron of a little-known restaurant. While you and the intimate
gathering of fellow patrons enjoy good food, good service and a quiet atmosphere, the
rest of the dining-out crowd, who choose other establishments, su¤er mediocre food,
indi¤erent service and noise. After a few blissful months, disaster strikes: your restaurant
is reviewed in the local paper. The next time you visit, there is a line out the door.
When at last you are seated at one of the extra tables that has been crammed in next
to the restroom, the noise is insu¤erable, the overwhelmed waitsta¤ ignores you, and the
food, when it …nally arrives, is overcooked. On top of everything, prices have skyrocketed.
Obviously you are worse o¤, having lost your “private” restaurant. But what about all
the new patrons? After all, they left mediocrity behind, so surely they are better o¤ than
they were. Or are they?
    In the last twenty years, rankings1 have become increasingly popular. While restau-
rants and hotels have been ranked for a long time (the …rst red Michelin guide appeared
more than 100 years ago), rankings are now available for education institutions and pro-
grams (see e.g. US News and World Report’s rankings of colleges and graduate schools,
and the Financial Times’ ranking of MBA programs), wine (e.g. the famous Parker
guide), health insurances and health care providers (e.g. The National Committee for
Quality Assurance’s plan ratings). Furthermore, the internet provides rankings based on
consumers evaluation, e.g. in the …elds of gastronomy (Yelp.com), medical services, and
cars (cars.com).
    Most of the scienti…c research on rankings investigates their quality.2 In the context of
academic economic research, ranking methods have been discussed by Kalaitzidakis et al.
(2010), and Palacios-Huerta and Volij (2004) among others. There has been quite some
concern that …rms or other interested parties might manipulate the outcome of rankings
(Dranove et al. 2003 for a case with consumer-input technology, Glazer and McGuire 2006
and Glazer et al. 2008 for multi-tasking issues, and Sorensen 2006 for e¤ects on products
diversity) and that this might be harmful for consumers. But little research has been
    1
        In this paper, we use the word "ranking" in a very general sense. It encompasses any type of information
about the quality of a given set of goods.
   2
     See Dranove and Jin (2010) for a thorough review of the literature.


                                                         1
conducted on the welfare impact of (correct) rankings (see below for some exceptions).
The literature investigating the quality of rankings seems to be based on the implicit
assumption that rankings, if correct, are good for welfare –more information should not
hurt. This view is well summarized by Dranove and Jin (2010, p. 952): “One of the
purported bene…ts of disclosure is that it facilitates better matches between consumers
and products. Consumers may migrate towards higher quality sellers (‘vertical sorting’)
or to sellers whose product characteristics best meet their idiosyncratic needs (‘horizontal
sorting.’) Both vertical and horizontal sorting e¤ect could substantially increase welfare
even if product attributes remain unchanged.”
    If rankings were only used in individual decision problems, better information could
indeed never hurt. However, in many “real-world” markets where rankings play a role,
agents’ choices are not adequately described as individual decision problems. Consider
education programs. Students learn from their peers, and the network generated at a
school is crucial for future professional success. Or consider restaurants: for many cus-
tomers the value of a dinner is in‡uenced by the identity of the other customers of the
restaurant. In other words, these markets are characterized by consumption externalities.
Furthermore, in some markets, prices are not perfectly ‡exible, leading to rationing. A
prototypical example are again education programs, where good programs are oversub-
scribed and hence schools choose among applicants. Finally, in markets with fully ‡exible
prices and without externalities, …rms’price-setting behavior is in‡uenced by the demand,
and hence agents’choices are not adequately described as individual decision problems.
    To analyze the impact of rankings generated by rationing, externalities, and market
power, we use a stylized framework with two goods that di¤er in quality. It is not known
ex ante which good is the better one. We compare situations with and without rankings.
Since we do not deal with the question of a ranking’s credibility, we assume that the
ranking - if it exists - always re‡ects the true qualities. There are two types of consumers
who di¤er in terms of appreciation for the goods, and in terms of the externalities they
in‡ict on other consumers of the same good. Importantly, consumers take the ranking
into account when choosing which good to consume.3 For …xed prices, we show that,
   3
       The empirical literature shows that consumers’choices are in‡uenced by information on product quality (see
e.g. Jin and Leslie 2003, Pope 2009, Luca 2011, and Luca and Smith 2012).


                                                        2
without consumption externalities and without capacity constraints, the existence of a
ranking makes all types of consumers weakly better o¤ and, for some parameters, leads
to a strict Pareto improvement. By contrast, in the presence of externalities or capacity
constraints, a ranking may lead to a Pareto deterioration - the expected utility of both
types of consumers is strictly lower with than without the ranking. These harmful e¤ects
are more likely the less the rationing procedure selects of one type and the more important
the quality of the good and the consumption externalities are.
   If one allows for ‡exible prices, the existence of a ranking might hurt consumers even in
markets without capacity constraints and consumption externalities. Flexible prices allow
for an additional reason why rankings can hurt consumers: the ranking might increase
the market power of …rms. This detrimental e¤ect is more likely the more important the
quality di¤erences between the goods are. In other words, the more consumers care about
the quality di¤erence re‡ected by the ranking, the more likely it is that all consumers
su¤er from the presence of the ranking.
   Our analysis assumes that the quality of goods is given, i.e. …rms cannot choose
the quality of their goods. While this assumption is clearly a simpli…cation, it is quite
plausible for many goods. The competence of a particular medical doctor is to a large
extent determined by his education and his talent, it is not at his discretion. The quality
of wine re‡ects soil and climate, factors di¢ cult if not impossible to change. Developing
new cars is a long and very costly process. Changing the quality of a large institution
like a university or a health care provider takes many years, even decades. The quality of
other goods like restaurant food or health insurance can be changed more easily. Due to
tractability reasons, we have not analyzed the impact of rankings on markets when the
quality of the goods can be easily changed. But we suspect that, in the case of ‡exible
qualities, the e¤ect of rankings would be similar to that in the case of ‡exible prices.
With ‡exible qualities, rankings would allow for more product di¤erentiation and hence
increase …rms’market power. This in turn could be detrimental for all consumers.
   It has been argued in the literature that (correct) rankings can hurt some consumers.
Yet, as far as we know, our paper is the …rst showing that rankings can hurt all consumers.
Gavazza and Lizzeri (2007) analyze the impact of rationing on the overall surplus of con-



                                             3
sumers. In particular, they show that more information about school quality reduces
overall surplus when slots for oversubscribed schools are distributed randomly. Unlike
our paper, no form of Pareto-e¢ ciency with respect to the di¤erent types of students is
considered, and the impact of consumer’s externalities and ‡exible prices is not analyzed.4
Morris and Shin (2002) analyze the impact of public information in a setting in which
(i) there is strategic complementary in agents’actions, and (ii) agents hold private infor-
mation. They show that increased precision of public information may be harmful. The
reason is that because of coordination motivations, agents disregard their private (and
more precise) information, and are thereby more likely to make “mistakes”. Though also
driven by the coordination e¤ect of public information, our results are fundamentally dif-
ferent. First, in our setting, agents do not have private information to disregard. Second,
in our paper, public information has a coordination e¤ect because it reveals that one prod-
uct is better than the other, not because it indirectly reveals what other agents are going
to do. Both in the rationing and in the consumption externality cases, the coordination
e¤ect of public information leads to collateral damages that exist because of the strategic
complementaries in consumers’ actions. In the context of ‡exible prices, Anderson and
Renault (2000) show that uninformed consumers can exert a positive externality on oth-
ers. Thus, information acquisition by consumers might be socially excessive. By contrast,
in our model, all consumers hold the same information about a good’s quality. Finally,
Anderson and Renault (2009) also show that better information might decrease consumer
surplus. But this result is derived within a matching framework, where the information
refers to horizontal aspects of the good and not to its quality.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the setup. Section 3 analyzes
the e¤ect of rankings under the assumption that prices are given and equal to marginal
costs. We identify two features of markets that may make rankings undesirable: capacity
constraints and consumption externalities. Section 4 relaxes the assumption of exogenous
prices. It shows that rankings may a¤ect …rms’market power through an increase in prod-
uct di¤erentiation. Rankings thus a¤ect prices and may ultimately diminish consumers’
welfare. Section 5 concludes. All proofs are relegated to the Appendix.


   4
       They actually suggest that such a negative e¤ect does not hold when prices are ‡exible.


                                                         4
2         Setup

We consider a market with two goods of unknown quality. Each consumer acquires one
unit of one of the goods. If a ranking exists, it provides perfect information about the
goods’quality.
     Goods. There are two goods5 , m 2 M = fe; cg. Both goods are produced by the same
constant returns to scale technology with marginal costs that we normalize to be zero.
The price for good m in ranking situation                   is fm ( is de…ned more precisely below). In
Section 3, prices are …xed with fe = fe > fc = fc 8 , whereas in Section 4, …rms compete
in prices, and the prices chosen by the …rms depend on the ranking situation.
     One of the two goods is of high quality, the other one of low quality. With a commonly
                                        0
known ex ante probability                   > 0:5; good e has the higher quality. Quality is measured
such that it is proportional to the direct utility gained from consuming the good.
     Ranking. If a ranking exists, it is published before consumers decide which good
to request. It resolves the uncertainty about the quality of the good.6 There are three
possible ranking situations, and we use superscript                     2 f0; 1; 2g to identify them:            =0
                                                                                                                  0
refers to a situation without ranking, in which the consumers’ beliefs are given by                                   ;
                                                                                                             1
    = 1 when good e is better and ranked higher (con…rmative ranking), and hence                                 = 1;
                                                                                                 2
    = 2 when good c is better and ranked higher (surprise ranking), with                             = 0.
     Consumers. There is a continuum [0; 2] of consumers, each one acquiring one unit of
one good. There are two types of consumers, t 2 T = f1; 2g. The consumers’population
is composed of equal fractions of these two types. We denote by bht (blt ) the evaluation
by a type t consumer of the quality of a good when this quality is high (low), with
bht > blt . Denote by           bt = bht      blt the relative gain of consumer type t from consuming
the high quality good. We name the types such that                        b1 >     b2 . The overall utility of a
consumers depends on the quality of the good consumed, on the price, on possible capacity
constraints and the resulting selection mechanisms (see section 3.1), on externalities (see
section 3.2), and on idiosyncratic preferences of the individual consumers for the di¤erent
     5
         The two goods should be viewed as close substitutes, e.g. dinner in two di¤erent restaurants, study programs
in the same …eld at two di¤erent universities, etc.
    6
      In a previous version of the paper, we allowed the ranking to be imperfect. All of the main results can be
derived within such a framework, but the analysis is considerably more complicated.


                                                           5
goods (see Section 4). The utility functions are speci…ed in the respective sections.
    All consumers decide simultaneously which good they request to buy. The set of pure
strategies of consumer i is given by: si = (s0i ; s1i ; s2i ) 2 fe; cg3 ; where si = m means that
consumer i wants to buy good m in ranking situation . We denote by x1 (x2 ) the fraction
of type 1 (2) consumers wanting to buy good e in situation .
    Welfare criteria: To investigate the welfare impact of a ranking, we compare the
equilibrium utilities of both types of agents with and without the ranking. This Pareto
comparison might refer to the agents’expected utilities before the outcome of the ranking
is known. Or it refers to the agents’utilities for both ranking outcomes. Denote by Ut
the utility a type t consumer i can expect in ranking situation .7 We use the following
e¢ ciency notions:

De…nition 1 i) The absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its presence if for t 2
f1; 2g:
                                                   0              0
                                          Ut0 >        Ut1 + (1       )Ut2 :                                (1)



ii) The presence of the ranking ex ante dominates its absence if for t 2 f1; 2g:

                                                   0              0
                                          Ut0 <        Ut1 + (1       )Ut2 :

iii) The absence of the ranking ex post dominates its presence if for t 2 f1; 2g:

                                              Ut0 > max(Ut1 ; Ut2 ):

iv) The presence of the ranking ex post dominates its absence if for t 2 f1; 2g:

                                              Ut0 < min(Ut1 ; Ut2 ):

    Obviously, ex post dominance implies ex ante dominance.



    7
        With consumption externalities (Section 3.2) the equilibrium, and hence Ut , need not be unique. But all
the welfare results of Section 3.2 refer to parameter constellations where the equilibrium is unique. To save on
notation, we do not take explicitly the potential multiplity of equilibria into account when de…ning the welfare
criteria.


                                                           6
3        Fixed Prices: Capacity Constraints and Externalities

In this section, we study the case where prices are …xed, with good e being more expensive
than good c (i.e. fe > fc ). We denote the price di¤erence by                   f = fe   fc .
    Without capacity constraints and externalities, the consumers face an individual de-
cision problem. The expected utilities from choosing si = e (si = c) are given by

                                    ut (e) =       bht + (1       )blt   fe ;                            (2)

                                    ut (c) =       blt + (1      )bht    fc :                            (3)

Hence, Ut = ut (e) i¤ (2              1) bt >      f . Otherwise Ut = ut (c). Using this, we obtain
the following result:8

Proposition 1 For all types of consumers, t 2 f1; 2g; the presence of the ranking ex
ante dominates its absence. Moreover, there is an open set of parameter values such the
presence of the ranking ex post dominates its absence.

Proof. See Appendix A1.
    But in the presence of either capacity constraints or consumption externalities, the
existence of a rankings can lead to an ex ante Pareto deterioration. We …rst turn to the
analysis of capacity constraints.


3.1        The Welfare Implications of Capacity Constraints

For simplicity, we assume that the supply of both goods is the same and denoted by
z 2 (1; 2).9 This guarantees that, together, both producers can serve the whole market.
Any demand for a particular good below z is served. But the provider of a particular
good has to select among its potential consumers whenever more than z consumers want
to buy his good. We assume that those consumers who cannot buy their preferred good
are willing to buy the other good - it is always better to consume one of the two goods
rather than none of them. Formally, we denote by nt (x1 ; x2 ) the mass of consumers of

    8
        For all results in this paper, we focus on generic parameter values.
    9
        Allowing for di¤erent supplies would considerably complicate the notation without changing any of our
results.


                                                       7
type t who get good e when x1 type 1 and x2 type 2 consumer want good e. This function
is assumed to be continuous. For simplicity, we assume that both types of producers use
the same selection process. This implies that nt (x1 ; x2 ) = 1           nt (1   x1 ; 1   x2 ).
    In case of rationing, we have to distinguish between rationing schemes that perfectly
discriminate in favor of one type, and those that do not discriminate perfectly (or do not
discriminate at all).

De…nition 2 (Perfect Discrimination) A rationing scheme discriminates perfectly in
favor of type t^ if, for all (x1 ; x2 ) 2 [0; 1]2 ; all type t^ customers who want the good get it,
i.e. nt^(x1 ; x2 ) = xt^.

De…nition 3 (Imperfect Discrimination) A rationing scheme discriminates imper-
fectly if, for all t and for all (x1 ; x2 ) 2 [0; 1]2 with x1 + x2 > z, the mass of selected type t
customers, nt (x1 ; x2 ), is strictly increasing in xt and strictly decreasing in xt0 .

    With perfect discrimination all customers of the favored type are served, even if the
good is rationed. But with imperfect discrimination, this is not the case. The reason
might be imperfect observability of the type of a customer (e.g. in case of admission to
university programs) or a rationing scheme that does not take the type into account at
all (e.g. rationing on a …rst come-…rst serve basis).
    For the welfare analysis, we will not take into account which of the individual agents
consumes which good. Rather, we will look at the average payo¤ each type can expect
in equilibrium before the rationing scheme selects the actual customers (and before the
true quality is revealed if the ranking is absent). Recall that the mass of both types of
consumers is one. Hence, nt is the portion of type t customers consuming good t. Denote
by x     = (x1 ; x2 ),       2 f0; 1; 2g, the equilibrium. The average equilibrium payo¤ of a
consumer of type t is:

 Ut = nt (x1 ; x2 )         bht + (1   ) blt   fe + (1   nt (x1 ; x2 ))       blt + (1      ) bht   fc :

    To see that the capacity constraint can hurt both types of consumers, we need the
following Lemma:



                                                  8
                                                                                     0
Lemma 1 There exists an open set of parameter values blt , bht ; fe , fc ;               , z, n1 (1; 1), and
n1 (0; 0) that satisfy the following conditions:
S1)     b2 > f ;
               0                                          0
S2)     b1 2        1 >      f>           b2 2                 1 ;
      (2 z n1 (0;0))( b2 + f )            0               (1 n1 (0;0))( b1 + f )
S3)     (z n1 (1;1))( b2  f)
                                 >   (1       0
                                                  )
                                                      >   (1 n1 (1;1))( b1   f)
                                                                                 .

Proof. See Appendix A1.

   Using this Lemma we obtain the following result:

Proposition 2 If conditions S1-S3 of Lemma 1 are ful…lled, and if the rationing scheme
selects imperfectly, the following holds:
i) The unique equilibrium is given by x01 = 1; x02 = 0; x11 = x12 = 1; and x21 = x22 = 0;
ii) The absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its presence.

Proof. See Appendix A1.

   If S1 and S2 hold, the capacity constraint is binding only when the ranking exists (see
the proof of the proposition). Without the ranking, the consumers of each type request
di¤erent goods. They can therefore all buy the good they request. With the ranking, all
consumers request the same good: e in case of the con…rmative ranking, and c in case
of the surprise ranking. Due to imperfect discrimination, some consumers of both types
cannot buy the good they request.
   If e is the high quality good, type 1 consumers lose on average. In this case the ranking
induces all consumers to demand good e: Hence, some of the type 1 consumers no longer
get the high quality good, whereas without the ranking, only type 1 consumers would
have demanded good e and all of them would have received it. On the other hand, if
c is the high quality good, type 1 consumers gain on average from the existence of the
ranking, because with the ranking all of them try to avoid the low quality good e, and
some of them succeed.
   For type 2 consumers, the impact of the ranking for the di¤erent quality distributions
is the opposite of that of consumers of type 1. If e is the high quality good, all consumers of
type 2 try to avoid the low quality good c, and some of them succeed. Hence, on average,

                                                                     9
they gain for this ranking outcome. If c is the high quality good, they face competition
from all the type 1 consumers, and hence some type 2 consumers have to consume the
low quality good e: Therefore, in this case, type 2 consumers lose on average.
   As a result, for each ranking outcome, one type of consumer loses on average and the
other one gains. But, when condition S3 (in Lemma 1) is satis…ed, the expected losses are
larger than the expected gains for both types of consumers. In expectation, the ranking
is thus bad for consumers of all types.
   When are conditions S1-S3 ful…lled? When can we expect that the ranking is welfare
decreasing? First, the quality must be important for both types of consumers, more
important than the price di¤erence (see S1 and remember that                            b1 >   b2 ). Second, the
ex ante uncertainty must be in the middle range: Small enough that without the ranking
it pays for the type 1 consumers to go for the expensive good, and high enough that it
does not pay for type 2 consumers (see S2). Such a middle range ex ante uncertainty
is also needed for the condition S3 to be satis…ed. Finally, in case of a binding capacity
constraint any discrimination in favor of one of the two types should be limited. If there
                                                                           z                       z
is no discrimination in favor of a type, i.e. if n1 (1; 1) =               2
                                                                               and n1 (0; 0) = 1   2
                                                                                                     ;   it is always
                (2 z n1 (0;0))( b2 +f )       (1 n1 (0;0))( b1 +f )
the case that     (z n1 (1;1))( b2 f )
                                          >   (1 n1 (1;1))( b1 f )
                                                                    .   Therefore, there always exists a level
of ex ante uncertainty such that S3 is ful…lled. On the other hand, if there is perfect
discrimination in favor of one type, the existence of the ranking cannot be dominated by
its absence.

Proposition 3 When the rationing scheme discriminates perfectly in favor of one type,
the absence of the ranking can neither ex ante nor ex post dominate its presence.

Proof. See Appendix A1.
   We have seen the possibility that both types of consumer are strictly better o¤ without
the ranking when there are capacity constraints and discrimination is imperfect. Without
capacity constraints but with externalities, a similar result can be obtained. This is the
focus of the following section.




                                                          10
3.2      The Welfare Implications of Consumption Externalities

Consumption may lead to (positive or negative) externalities. Since there are no capacity
constraints, all consumers get the good they want. Denote by q m (x1 ; x2 ) the externality
experienced by a consumer of good m when x1 (x2 ) type 1 (2) consumers consume good
e. To simplify, we assume that the externalities depend only on the composition of actual
consumers, and neither on the price nor on the quality of the good, i.e. q e (x1 ; x2 ) = q c (1
x1 ; 1       x2 ). We assume that type 1 consumers provide more positive externalities (or less
negative externalities) than type 2 consumers. More speci…cally, denote by                                           q(x1 ; x2 ) =
q e (x1 ; x2 )     q c (x1 ; x2 ), i.e. the externality di¤erence between consuming the two goods for
a given allocation of consumers over the goods. We assume that the externality di¤erence
between consumers of good e and c is largest when all type 1 consumers choose e and all
type 2 consumers choose c. Formally

                                           q(1; 0) > max( q(1; 1); q(0; 0)):

Since        q(0; 1) =        q(1; 0) and           q(1; 1) =            q(0; 0) this implies

                                           q(0; 1) < min( q(1; 1); q(0; 0)):

Such an externality structure re‡ects, for example, a situation where the goods are study
programs and the type 1 consumers are better students.
     Again, denote by x              = (x1 ; x2 ),              2 f0; 1; 2g, the equilibrium. The equilibrium
payo¤s are given by

Ut = xt            bht + (1        ) blt    fe + q e (x1 ; x2 ) +(1 xt )               blt + (1         ) bht        fc + q c (x1 ; x2 )

To see that both types of consumers might be better o¤ without a ranking we need:

                                                                                                                0
Lemma 2 There exists an open set of parameter values blt , bht ; fe , fc ;                                          , q e (x1 ; x2 ),
x1 ; x2 2 f0; 1g, that satisfy the following conditions:
E1) minf b2 +               q (1; 1) ; b1 +            q (0; 1)g >           f > maxf            b2 +   q (0; 0) ;            b1 +
  q (1; 0)g;
                   0                                                     0
E2)      b1 2           1 +      q (0; 0) >         f>         b2 2          1 +    q (1; 0) ;
                                             0
E3) q e (1; 0)         q e (1; 1) > 1              ( f+         b1 ) ;
         0
E4)          ( f        b2 ) > q e (1; 1)        q e (0; 1):

                                                                 11
Proof. See Appendix A1.

   Using this Lemma we obtain the following result:

Proposition 4 If conditions E1-E4 of Lemma 2 are ful…lled, it holds that:
i) The unique equilibrium is given by x01 = 1; x02 = 0; x11 = x12 = 1; and x21 = x22 = 0;
ii) The absence of the ranking ex ,ante dominates its presence.

Proof. see Appendix A1.

   If E1 and E2 hold, there exists a unique equilibrium where, without the ranking, the
consumers of each type request di¤erent goods, while with the ranking all buy the higher
ranked good.
   Type 1 consumers are hurt by the ranking because, for both ranking outcomes, they
experience worse consumption externalities than without the ranking. For the surprise
ranking this negative e¤ect is mitigated by the avoidance of the low quality good e, but for
some parameter constellations, this positive e¤ect is insu¢ cient to overcome the negative
one.
   With a ranking, type 2 consumers bene…t from better consumption externalities for
both ranking outcomes. Yet, in case of a con…rmative ranking, they can be stuck in a
kind of prisoners’dilemma. The price di¤erence of the goods can be such that even if e
is the high quality good, type 2 consumers would be better o¤ if all of them were buying
good c (and all type 1 consumers good e) instead of all of them buying good e (and all
type 1 consumers good e). At the same time, each individual type 2 has an incentive to
buy good e for any distribution of consumers over the goods. As a result, a con…rmative
ranking leads to a worse outcome for type 2 consumers than no ranking at all.
   For each ranking outcome one type of consumer loses on average and the other one
gains. But with E3 and E4, the expected losses are larger than the expected gains for
both types of consumers. In expectation, the ranking is thus bad for consumers of all
types.
   When are E1-E4 ful…lled? When can we expect that the ranking is welfare decreasing?
E1 and E2 require that the price di¤erence is in a middle range - large enough that,
without rankings, only type 1 consumers buys the expensive good, but low enough that,

                                            12
with a ranking, both types buy the high quality good. For the same reason, the ex ante
uncertainty about the goods’quality has to be in a middle range. E3 and E4 imply that
the presence of the ranking leads to a Pareto deterioration. E3 states that the externality
becomes much worse when type 2 peers are added to type 1 consumers. On the other
hand, type 2 consumer su¤er little when type 1 consumers are removed as their peers (see
E4).
     We have seen that for …xed prices, capacity constraints and externalities might induce
rankings to harm consumers.10 One might suspect that this result disappears with ‡exible
prices. Yet the following section shows that ‡exible prices might actually allow for an
additional detrimental e¤ect of rankings.


4         Price Competition

In this section, we analyze the e¤ects of rankings on consumers’welfare when two …rms
compete in prices. We consider markets without externalities and without capacity con-
straints. We show that rankings may a¤ect consumers’welfare either positively or neg-
atively. The reason for the negative e¤ect is that more accurate information changes
consumers’perception of product di¤erentiation. This increases the market power of the
…rms and a¤ects consumer welfare negatively. Our results also suggest some general con-
ditions under which these e¤ects are su¢ ciently strong to dominate the positive e¤ects of
information.
     Firms set prices simultaneously. If there is a ranking, they …x prices after the ranking
has been published but before consumers choose which good to request. In order to con-
centrate on the impact of rankings, we assume that there is no asymmetric information
about the quality of the goods. When making their choices, …rms have the same infor-
                                                                                                            0
mation as consumers. Without a ranking they know only the ex ante probability                                   that
the expensive good is the one highly appreciated by the consumers. With a ranking, they

    10
         If externalities and capacity constraints are present at the same time, the existence of a ranking might be
even more harmful to the consumers. In a previous version of the paper we show that in this case the ranking
might even be ex post dominated by its absence. This result requires an imperfect ranking that does not fully
reveal the true qualities of the goods.


                                                          13
know the qualities of the goods. Since there is no asymmetric information, prices do not
signal any private information hold by the producers. Hence, prices depend only on the
identity of the …rm and on the ranking situation. Remember that fm denotes the price of
good m in ranking situation .


4.1     Equilibrium Analysis

To ensure the existence of an equilibrium, we need continuous demand functions. Indi-
vidual consumers are assumed to have an idiosyncratic inclination for one of the goods.
For ranking situation , the expected utility of a consumer i of type t who buys good e is

                               Ut;e =     bht + (1        )blt + yi      fe ;

whereas the expected utility of buying c is

                                 Ut;c =     blt + (1        )bct      fc :

Hence, yi measures the idiosyncratic inclination of consumer i for good e compared to
good c. For each type t, yi is uniformly distributed on                  and      with   > 0.
    For the equilibrium analysis, we have to distinguish between two sets of parameter
values: (i) parameters values implying that in equilibrium both goods are requested by
consumers of both types in all ranking situations (heterogeneous demand), and (ii) pa-
rameters values implying that in equilibrium there is at least one ranking situation in
which all consumers of one type request the same good (non-heterogeneous demand). Let
    = (2        1) ( b1 +   b2 ). As proven in Appendix A2, demand is heterogenous when

3
        bt (2     1) 2 (    ; ) 8t; , and non-heterogeneous otherwise. This implies that for
a generic combination of the other parameters there exists a                    > 0 such that for all   <
the demand is non-heterogeneous.


4.1.1    Heterogeneous Demand

The following proposition characterizes equilibrium prices and the demand for goods e
and c when, in equilibrium, both types of consumers request both types of goods:




                                                     14
Proposition 5 When                3
                                           bt (2      1) 2 (           ; ) 8t; , equilibrium prices are

                             fe ; = +              > 0; and fc ; =                             >08 :
                                              6                                            6
In equilibrium, the demand for good e is:
                                                               ;
                                                          f
                                  de (fe ; fc ) = 1                    +          2 (0; 2) 8 ;
                                                                            2
and the demand for good c is:
                                                               ;
                                                          f
                                  dc (fe ; fc ) = 1 +                             2 (0; 2) 8 :
                                                                            2

Proof. See Appendix A2.

      For the ranking situation ; we can compute the expected utility of a randomly selected
type t consumer given the equilibrium prices (fe ; ; fc ; ):
         Z f;    bt (2 1)                     Z
                                  ;  1                                                                                         1
  Ut =                    (Lt fc ) dyt;i +                                                          (Ht + yt;i        fe ; )     dyt;i ;
          0                         2             f      bt (2                                 1)                              2

with Lt =         blt + (1            )bht and Ht =     bht + (1                  )blt .
      This boils down to
             Lt      fc ;         ;                                        Ht ;        fe ;                   ;
 Ut     =                   ( f            bt (2      1) + ) +                                  (         f       +     bt (2         (4)
                                                                                                                                     1))
                 2                                            !                   2
               1        2
                             ( f       ;
                                              bt (2      1))2
             +                                                  :
               2       2                      2

      As already mentioned, the case of heterogeneous demand requires that is not too low.
If the idiosyncratic inclinations are important enough, consumers of both types demand
both goods in equilibrium.


4.1.2       Non-Heterogeneous Demand

The main di¤erence with the previous case concerns equilibrium prices. There are many
potential combinations of t and                    for which       3
                                                                                  bt (2             1) 2
                                                                                                       = (        ; ): The analysis
of the di¤erent cases is very similar. To avoid redundancies, we detail (in Appendix
A3) only two of these cases (those that will be used in Proposition 7). In case (A),
equilibrium prices are such that all type 1 consumers request good e when the ranking

                                                          15
is con…rmative (i.e.               = 1). For any other ranking situation (i.e.         = 0 or 2), type 1
                                                                                1
                                                                                                1
consumers request both types of goods. Case (A) arises when                     3
                                                                                       b1 (2          1) <   ;
and   3
                  bt (2       1) 2 (    ; ) for all other    and t: In case (B), equilibrium prices are
such that all type 1 consumers request good c when the ranking is surprising, and both
                                                                            2               2
goods for all other ranking situations. Case (B) arises when               3
                                                                                    b1 (2           1) > ; and

3
          bt (2           1) 2 (    ; ) for all other   and t:
    We are now in a position to analyze the welfare implications of rankings when …rms
are competing in prices.


4.2   Welfare Analysis

In this section, we analyze the e¤ect of rankings on consumers’welfare for ‡exible prices.
The bene…t of a ranking is to reduce uncertainty about the quality of the two goods. But
when …rms compete in prices, the ranking can have a negative e¤ect on consumer welfare
through its e¤ect on …rms’market power. In a certain sense, the ranking increases the
di¤erentiation of the two goods, and allows …rms to enforce higher prices. We identify
conditions under which one or the other e¤ect dominates.
    The net e¤ect of the ranking is always positive when demand is heterogeneous, i.e.
when, in equilibrium, consumers of both types consume both goods (Proposition 6). The
net e¤ect of the ranking can be negative when the information provided by some ranking
outcome induces non-heterogeneous demand, i.e. when all consumers of (at least) one
type consume the same good (Proposition 7). In particular, this happens when type 1
consumers, who care relatively more about the quality of the good, exhibit only small
idiosyncratic inclinations towards a good. In this case the …rm who produces the highest
ranked good can increase its price at the margin without losing any its type 1 consumers.
The ranking thus signi…cantly increases the market power of that …rm.
    The following proposition shows that the ranking always has a positive e¤ect on con-
sumers’welfare when the demand is heterogeneous.

Proposition 6 If, in equilibrium, both types of consumers request both types of goods for
all ranking situations, the presence of the ranking ex ante dominates its absence.

Proof. see Appendix A2

                                                        16
     With non-heterogeneous demand, the ranking may have a negative e¤ect on consumer
welfare even when evaluated after the result of the ranking is known (i.e. ex post).

Proposition 7 With ‡exible prices, there is an open set of parameter values ; blt , bht ; and
 0
     such that the absence of the ranking ex ante as well as ex post dominates its presence.

Proof. see Appendix A2

     The ‡exibility of prices does not solve the problem of rankings as identi…ed in the pre-
vious section. On the contrary, with ‡exible prices the ranking might create an additional
problem for the consumers because it could increase the market power of the …rm who
“wins”the ranking. As Proposition 6 shows, this can only happen for non-heterogeneous
demand. To see the intuition behind this result, consider parameters such that the demand
is heterogeneous in absence of the ranking, but, with the ranking, all type 1 consumers
demand the “winning” good. In absence of the ranking, any marginal increase in the
price leads to a marginal decrease in the demand of both types of consumers. But with
the ranking, a marginal increase of the price of higher ranked good has no impact on
its demand by type 1 consumers. Hence, the ranking substantially increases the market
power of the winning …rm when it induces non-heterogeneous demand. But if the demand
is heterogeneous for all ranking situations, this cannot happen. Therefore, the ranking
induces a larger increase in the winning …rm’s market power with non-heterogeneous than
with heterogeneous demand.
     Obviously, it is more likely that demand is non-heterogeneous the lower       is. Recall
that a low      means that the idiosyncratic inclinations of the consumers are relatively
unimportant compared to the quality of the good. Ironically, when the information pro-
vided by the ranking is very important for the consumers, and when the market is in
principle rather competitive, it is most probable that the ranking will hurt consumers. In
this case the outcome of a ranking leads to a big shift in demand, leading to an increase
of the market power of the “winning”…rm and hurting all types of consumers in the end.




                                              17
5   Conclusion

In this paper we have demonstrated that the existence of rankings can be harmful to all
consumers when the good is rationed, when there are consumption externalities, and/or
when …rms have market power. These harmful e¤ects are more likely the less discrimina-
tory the rationing scheme is, the more important consumption externalities are, and the
more important the good’s quality is relative to the consumers’idiosyncratic inclinations
for a particular good. It seems plausible that rationing, externalities, and quality play
an important role in markets for education programs. The same holds, e.g., for medical
services. Hence, in these markets, it is a priori unclear whether rankings are bene…cial for
consumers. But of course the analysis of the existence and the size of harmful e¤ects of
rankings for a particular market is left for future empirical research.


References

 [1] Anderson, S., and R. Renault (2000), Consumer Information and Firm Pricing: Nega-
    tive Externalities from Improved Information, International Economic Review, 41(3),
    721-742.

 [2] Anderson, S., and R. Renault (2009), Comparative Advertising: Disclosing Horizon-
    tal Match Information, RAND Journal of Economics, 40(3), 558-581.

 [3] Dranove, D., and G. Jin (2010), Quality Disclosure and Certi…cation: Theory and
    Practice, Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4), 935-963.

 [4] Dranove, D., D. Kessler, M. McClellan, and M. Satterthwaite (2003), Is More Infor-
    mation Better? The E¤ects of "Report Cards" on Health Care Providers, Journal of
    Political Economy, 111(3), 555-588.

 [5] Gavazza, A., and A. Lizzeri (2007), The Perils of Transparency in Bureaucracies,
    American Economic Review, 97(2), Papers and Proceedings, 300-305.

 [6] Glazer, J., and T. McGuire (2006), Optimal Quality Reporting in Markets for Health
    Plans, Journal of Health Economics, 25, 295-310.


                                             18
 [7] Glazer, J., T. McGuire, Z. Cao, and A, Zaslavsky (2008), Using Global Ratings of
     Health Plans to Improve the Quality of Health Care, Journal of Health Economics,
     27(5), 1182-1195.

 [8] Jin, G. and P. Leslie (2003), The E¤ects of Information on Product Quality: Evidence
     from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 409-
     51.

 [9] Kalaitzidakis, P., T. Mauneas, and T. Stengos (2010), An updated ranking of acad-
     emic journals in economics, mimeo.

[10] Luca, M. (2011), Reviews, Reputation, and Revenue: The Case of Yelp.com, Harvard
     Business School Working Paper, 12-016.

[11] Luca, M. and J. Smith (2012), Salience in Quality Disclosure: Evidence from the U.S.
     News College Rankings, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, forthcom-
     ing.

[12] Morris, S., and H.S. Shin (2002), Social Value of Public Information, American Eco-
     nomic Review, 92(5), 1521-1534.

[13] Palacios-Huerta, I., and O. Volij (2004), The measurement of intellectual in‡uence,
     Econometrica, 72, 963-977.

[14] Pope, D. (2009), Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from ’America’s Best Hospitals’,
     Journal of Health Economics, 28(6), 1154-1165.

[15] Sorensen, A. (2007), Bestseller Lists and Product Variety, Journal of Industrial Eco-
     nomics, 55(4), 715-738.



Appendices

Appendix A1: Proofs of Section 3

Proof of Proposition 1.            In a situation with …xed prices, no capacity constraints, and no
externalities, the “game” is actually an individual decision problem. Therefore, the …rst part of the
proposition is trivially true.

                                                 19
                                                                                                                   0
     For the proof of the second part, let fc = 0; fe = 2; bl1 = bl2 = 1, bh1 = 5, bh2 = 4, and                        = 0:7.

Because of the equilibrium condition, it holds in equilibrium that x01 = x21 = 0, x11 = 1 and x02 = x22 = 0;

x12 = 1. This gives U10 = 2:2, U11 = 3, U12 = 5, and U20 = 1:9, U21 = 2, U22 = 4. These equilibrium payo¤s

ful…ll the condition that the presence of the ranking for ex post dominates its absence. Furthermore,

all di¤erences of equilibrium payo¤s are strictly positive. Hence, there is an open neighborhood of these

parameter values such that the presence of a ranking ex post dominates its absence:


Proof of Lemma 1.                   Take the parameter values fc = 0; fe = 2; bl1 = bl2 = 1, bh1 = 5, bh2 = 3:2,
 0
     = 0:85, and z = 1:2. These values ful…ll the conditions S1-S3 with strict inequality. Since the conditions

are continuous in the parameters, there exists on open set of parameters ful…lling these conditions.

Proof of Proposition 2. The proof consists of three parts. First, we analyze the properties of the
probability of an agent to be able to buy a particular good. Second, we prove that the stated behavior
is indeed the unique equilibrium. Third, we show that the absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its
presence.
1. The probability of an agent to be able to buy a particular good: This probability depends
on his type, his strategy, and the strategy distribution of the whole population. Denote by pm
                                                                                             t (si ; x1 ; x2 )

the probability of an agent of type t to buy good m when his strategy is si and (x1 ; x2 ) is the strategy
distribution of the whole population. Since the whole market can be served by both producers together
                                                                     0
and each agent gets one good, pm                      m                           0
                               t (si ; x1 ; x2 ) = 1 pt (si ; x1 ; x2 ) for m 6= m . Hence, we simplify notation

by setting pet (si ; x1 ; x2 ) = pt (si ; x1 ; x2 ). In order to further characterize nt (x1 ; x2 ) and pt (si ; x1 ; x2 )
we have to distinguish between three cases: (i) x1 + x2 > z; (ii) z                          max(x + x2 ; 2   x1   x2 ), and
(iii) 2   x1     x2 > z.
     (i) If x1 + x2 > z; there is excess demand for good e. Since the good is sold up to the capacity
constraint, it holds that n1 (x1 ; x2 ) = z n2 (x1 ; x2 ). Since the selection process is not perfect, x1 > n1 > 0;
x2 > n2 > 0, and if x1 strictly increases and x2 is constant, n1 strictly increases and n2 strictly decreases.
If x2 strictly increases and x1 is constant, n1 strictly decreases and n2 strictly increases. The probability
of getting good e is given by:
                                                 n1 (x1 ; x2 )                      z      n1 (x1 ; x2 )
                           p1 (e; x1 ; x2 )    =               ; p2 (e; x1 ; x2 ) =                      ;
                                                      x1                                    x2
                           p1 (c; x1 ; x2 )    = p2 (c; x1 ; x2 ) = 0:

     (ii) If z    max(x1 + x2 ; 2             x1    x2 ), there is no excess demand for any of the goods, and each
consumer gets the good he wants. This implies that n1 (x1 ; x2 ) = x1 and n2 (x1 ; x2 ) = x2 : Furthermore

                                              p1 (e; x1 ; x2 )   = p2 (e; x1 ; x2 ) = 1;

                                              p1 (c; x1 ; x2 )   = p2 (c; x1 ; x2 ) = 0:

                                                                   20
    (iii) If 2      x1     x2 > z; there is excess demand for good c, and 1                     n1 (x1 ; x2 ) = z      (1         n2 (x1 ; x2 )).
Since the selection process is the same for both types of producers, 1                               nt (x1 ; x2 ) = nt (1        x1 ; 1   x2 ).
The mass of consumers of type 1 who consume good c, 1                             n1 (x1 ; x2 ), strictly increases in the number of
type 1 applications for c, 1           x1 , and strictly decreases in the number of type 2 applications for c, 1                             x2 .
The probability of getting good e is given by

                 p1 (e; x1 ; x2 )   = p2 (e; x1 ; x2 ) = 1;
                                           n1 (1 x1 ; 1 x2 )                                         n2 (1    x1 ; 1   x2 )
                 p1 (c; x1 ; x2 )   = 1                      ; p2 (c; x1 ; x2 ) = 1                                           :
                                                   1 x1                                                      1 x1

    Note that for all three cases, n1 (x1 ; x2 ) strictly increases in x1 and weakly decreases in x2 . Conversely,
n2 (x1 ; x2 ) strictly increases in x2 and weakly decreases in x1 . Furthermore, pt (e; x1 ; x2 ) > pt (c; x1 ; x2 )
- the probability of getting good e is higher when one applies for e than when one does not. The same
holds for good c.
2. The unique equilibrium: We have to show that x01 = 1; x02 = 0; x11 = x12 = 1; and x21 = x22 = 0
is the unique equilibrium. From the …rst part of the proof, we know that the likelihood of getting
a particular good is strictly higher when demanding this good than when demanding the other good.
Hence, for generic parameter constellations a consumer will demand good m i¤ the expected payo¤ from
consuming m is larger than that of consuming m0 .
    Denote by ut (m) the payo¤ of a consumer of type t choosing m in ranking situation . Consider
ranking situation 0. From (2) and (3), we have that

                                                                                  0
                                          u01 (e) >         u01 (c) i¤    b1 (2          1) >   f
                                                                                  0
                                          u02 (c) >         u02 (e) i¤    b2 (2          1) <   f:

These conditions are S2, and hence in any equilibrium it must hold that x01 = 1; x02 = 0:
    Next, consider ranking situation 1. From (2) and (3) ; we have that

                                               u11 (e) >         u11 (c) i¤       b1 >     f

                                               u12 (e) >         u12 (c) i¤       b2 >     f:

Since by the de…nition of the types,              b1 >        b2 , these conditions are satis…ed if S1 is satis…ed. Thus, in
any equilibrium it must hold that           x11   =   x12    = 1:
    Finally, consider ranking situation 2. From (2) and (3) ; we have that

                                             u21 (c) >         u21 (e) i¤     b1 +       f >0

                                             u22 (c) >         u22 (e) i¤     b2 +       f >0

These conditions are of course always satis…ed. Thus, in any equilibrium it must hold that x21 = x22 = 0:



                                                                     21
3. The absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its presence: In ranking situation 0; the
equilibrium payo¤s are given by:

                                                            0                              0
                                      U10    =                      fe + bh1 + 1                   fe + bl1 ]
                                                            0                              0
                                      U20    =                      fc + blt + 1                   fc + bht ]

In ranking situation 1, they are given by:

                                 Ut1 = nt (1; 1)                fe + bht + (1         nt (1; 1))           fc + blt :

In ranking situation 2, they are given by:

                                 Ut2 = nt (0; 0)                fe + blt + (1         nt (0; 0))           fc + bht

                                0                       0
    The condition U10 >             U11 + (1                )U12 boils down to
                                                    0
                                                                    (1       n1 (0; 0)) ( b1 +         f)
                                                            0   >
                                              1                     (1       n1 (1; 1)) ( b1           f)
                                               0                         0
    Similarly, the condition U20 >                 U21 + (1                  )U22 boils down to
                                                                                               0
                                                    n2 (0; 0) ( b2 +               f)
                                                                                      >            0                                         (5)
                                                    n2 (1; 1) ( b2                 f)   1
From n1 (0; 0) = 1          n1 (1; 1) we get n2 (0; 0) = 1                       (z   (1       n1 (0; 0))) = 2          z   n1 (0; 0): Given that
n2 (1; 1) = z       n1 (1; 1); condition (5) boils down to
                                                                                                       0
                                            (2 z n1 (0; 0)) ( b2 + f )
                                                                       >                                    0:
                                              (z n1 (1; 1)) ( b2  f)     1

Therefore, the absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its presence when condition S3 of Lemma 1 is

ful…lled (on top of S1 and S2).


Proof of Proposition 3.                        Let t^ be the type of consumers which is favored. This implies every

consumer of type t^ gets the good he wants, i.e. nt^ = xt^ . Therefore, these consumers face an individual

decision problem. Hence, for each possible ranking outcomes their payo¤ is weakly larger than their

expected payo¤ without the ranking. Therefore the absence of the ranking can neither ex ante nor ex

post dominate its presence.


Proof of Lemma 2.                      Take the parameter values fc = 0; fe = 0:35; bl1 = bl2 = 1, bh1 = 1:54,
                0
bh2 = 1:3,          = 0:9, q e (1; 0) = q c (0; 1) = 0:8, q e (1; 1) = q c (0; 0) = 0:71; q e (0; 0) = q c (1; 1) = 0:65,

and q e (0; 1) = q c (1; 0) = 0:7. These values ful…ll the conditions E1-E4 with strict inequality. Since

the conditions are continuous in the parameters, there exists on open set of parameters ful…lling these

conditions.

                                                                              22
Proof of Proposition 4.                              The proof proceeds in two steps. First, we show that the unique
equilibrium is indeed as stated in the proposition, Then, we prove the welfare properties.
1. The unique equilibrium: We have to show that x01 = 1; x02 = 0; x11 = x12 = 1; and x21 = x22 = 0
is the unique equilibrium. Denote by ut (m) the payo¤ of a consumer of type t choosing m in ranking
situation . For any x1 , x2 it holds that

                                                                            0
                                       ut (e)        ut (c) =      bt (2          1) +      q(x1 ; x2 )         f

Since     b1 >       b2 , u1 (e)     u1 (c) > u2 (e)         u2 (c) for         2 f0; 1g and u1 (e)           u1 (c) < u2 (e)         u2 (c) for    = 2.
In equilibrium, it cannot happen that either                      x01   = 0;     x02   = 1, or    x11   = 0;   x12    = 1, or   x21    = 1;   x22   = 0.
    Consider …rst the ranking situation 0. Fixing the choice of the other consumers at their equilibrium
value of x01 = 1 and x02 = 0, the equilibrium conditions for consumers of type 1 and type 2 are given by

                                                                            0
                                   u01 (e)           u01 (c) i¤    b1 (2           1) +     q(1; 0)           f; and
                                                                            0
                                   u02 (c)           u02 (e) i¤    b2 (2           1) +     q(1; 0)           f;

respectively. Since             q(1; 0) >        q(0; 0) both conditions are met due to E2. To show that in any equi-
librium x01 = 1; x02 = 0 holds, we still have to exclude x01 = x02 = 0 and x01 = x02 = 1 as part of an
                                                     0
equilibrium. If x01 = x02 = 0,               b1 (2         1) +      q(0; 0)           f: But this is excluded by E2. If x01 = x02 = 1,
          0
  b2 (2       1) +      q(1; 1)          f: But this excluded by E2 since                        q(1; 0) >         q(1; 1).
    Next, consider the ranking situation 1: Fixing the choice of the other consumers at their equilibrium
value of x11 = x12 = 1, the equilibrium conditions for consumers of type 1 and type 2 are given by

                                         u11 (e)           u11 (c) i¤      b1 +        q(1; 1)          f; and

                                         u12 (e)           u12 (c) i¤      b2 +        q(1; 1)          f;

respectively. Since             q(1; 1) >        q(0; 1) these conditions are guaranteed by E1. To show that in any
equilibrium x11 = x12 = 1 holds, we still have to exclude x11 = x12 = 0 and x11 = 1; x12 = 0 as part of an
                                                                                                                                 0
equilibrium. If x11 = x12 = 0,               b1 +        q(0; 0) <      f . But this is excluded by E2 since                          < 1. If x11 = 1;
x12 = 0, we need          b2 +      q(1; 0)          f . But, given             q(1; 0) >     q(1; 1); this excluded by E1.
    Finally, consider the ranking situation 2: Fixing the choice of the other consumers at their equilibrium
value of x21 = x22 = 0, the equilibrium conditions for consumers of type 1 and type 2 are given by

                                       u21 (c)            u21 (e) i¤            b1 +    q(0; 0)          f , and

                                       u22 (c)            u22 (e) i¤            b2 +    q(0; 0)          f;

respectively. Since             q(1; 0) >        q(0; 0), these conditions are guaranteed by E1. To show that in any
equilibrium    x21    =   x22    = 0 holds, we still have to exclude x21 = x22 = 1 and x21 = 0; x22 = 1 as part of an
equilibrium. If x21 = x22 = 1,                b1 +       q(1; 1)           f: But, given          q (1; 0) >         q (1; 1) ; this is excluded by


                                                                           23
E1. If x21 = 0; x22 = 1, we need                   b2 +       q(0; 1)          f . But, given                q(0; 1) <     q(0; 0); this is excluded
by E1.
2. Conditions for the ex ante dominance of the absence of the ranking:
      Without the ranking, we have x01 = 1 and x02 = 0; giving

                                      0                                                0
                       U10   =            fe + bh1 + q e (1; 0) + 1                               fe + bl1 + q e (1; 0) , and
                                      0                                                0
                       U20   =            fc + bl2 + q c (1; 0) + 1                              fc + bh2 + q c (1; 0) :

For the con…rmative ranking, we have x11 = x12 = 1, leading to

                                                        Ut1 =        fe + bht + q e (1; 1):

For the surprise ranking, we have x21 = x22 = 0, implying

                                                        Ut2 =        fc + bht + q c (0; 0):

                                                                                                          0                 0
      Taking into account that q c (0; 0) = q e (1; 1); the condition U10 >                                   U11 + (1           )U12 becomes

                                                                                   0
                                          q e (1; 0)         q e (1; 1) > 1                ( f+           b1 ) :

                                                                                                                                       0
Taking into account that q c (1; 0) = q e (0; 1) and q c (0; 0) = q e (1; 1); the condition U20 >                                          U21 (n1 ) + (1
 0
     )U22 becomes
                                                   0
                                                       ( f        b2 ) > q e (1; 1)            q e (0; 1):

Therefore, the absence of the ranking ex ante dominates its presence when condition E3 and E4 of Lemma

2 are ful…lled (on top of E1 and E2).



Appendix A2: Proofs of Section 4

Proof of Proposition 5.                        We solve the game backward. Ignoring for the moment the fact that
demand cannot be below zero and above 2, the demand for good e is:
                                           f            b1 (2           1) +                                   f         b2 (2         1) +
       de (fe ; fc )   =          1                                                        +         1
                                  |                     {z2                    }                     |                   {z2                   }
                             Fraction of typ e-1 with y1         f       b1 (2     1)          Fraction of typ e-2 with y2         f       b2 (2   1)

                                      f
                       =     1            +        :                                                                                                    (6)
                                               2
Similarly, the demand for good c is:
                                                                                   f
                                                       dc (fe ; fc ) = 1 +                          :                                                   (7)
                                                                                                2
There are parameters values such that de (fe ; fc ) and/or dc (fe ; fc ) 2
                                                                         = (0; 2): But we will show that in
equilibrium de (fe ; fc ) and dc (fe ; fc ) 2 (0; 2) whenever                      3              bt (2         1) 2 (     ; ) 8t; .

                                                                          24
      Given these demand functions, we can derive the best responses of both …rms to the strategy of the
other by maximizing pro…ts, denoted by                    m   (fe ; fc ). For good e, we have the following best response
function:
                                                                               fc
                                                     fe (fc ) =            +      +   :                                                                   (8)
                                                                      2         2   4
For good c, we have:
                                                                               fe
                                                     fc (fe ) =            +                          :                                                   (9)
                                                                      2         2                4
Using (8) and (9), we …nd the equilibrium prices:

                                                          fe ;       =         +             ;                                                           (10)
                                                                                         6
                                                          fc ;       =                       :                                                           (11)
                                                                                         6

      Using equilibrium prices, we can compute de (fe ; ; fc ; ) and dc (fe ; ; fc ) ; the demand for good e
and c when prices are (fe ; ; fc ; ). We obtain that de (fe ; ; fc ; ) and dc (fe ; ; fc ) 2 (0; 2) whenever

3           bt (2      1) 2 (    ; ) 8t; . This means that both types of consumers request both types of goods.
      It remains to show that the prices as stated by (10) and (10) are always positive. From                                                               =
(2          1) ( b1 +     b2 ) ; we have that    3          bt (2              1) 2 (                ; ) 8t;          implies

                                                                           ( b1 +                         b2 )
                                           > (2            1)         bt                                          , and
                                                                                 3
                                                                     ( b1 + b 2 )
                                           > (2            1)                                              bt :
                                                                          3

For        = 0; 1, 2      1 > 0: Therefore, the maximum of the lower bound for                                                is

                                                                           2 b1                      b2
                                                  > (2               1)
                                                                                         3

For        = 2, the maximum is
                                                                                b2           2 b1
                                                  > (2               1)
                                                                                         3
                                                 0
                                            (2        1)( b1 + b2 )                                       0           2 b1         b2
      If     = 0; then fe0; > fc0; =                     6                 and           > (2                    1)       3             : To prove that prices
are positive, it is enough to show that
                                                                                     0
                                            (2 b1             b2 )             2              1 ( b1 +                 b2 )
                                (2    1)                                                                                      > 0:
                                                      3                                          6

This boils down to
                                                          3 b1            3 b2
                                                                                     >0
                                                                     6
which is always true.

      Similarly, we can prove that prices are positive when                                  = 1 and when                     = 2.




                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                 0                          0
Proof of Proposition 6.                                              We need to show that Ut0 <                                      Ut1 + (1                   )Ut2 : First, to obtain the
expected utility of a randomly selected type t consumer in ranking situation 0; we plug the equilibrium
prices fe ; and fc ; (from Proposition 5) in (4). This gives:

                                                                      (2   0
                                                                                   1)( b1 + b2 )                                                                                             !
                   0 l                   0                                                                            0
                    bt    + (1               )bht               +                                )               2              1 ( b1 +            b2 )                     0
    Ut0       =                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                     bt (2       1) +             (12)
                                                          2                                                                        3
                                                                         (2        0
                                                                                        1)( b1 + b2 )                                                                                            !
                       0 h                    0                                                                                  0
                        bt    + (1                )blt                                     6          )                     2               1 ( b1 +             b2 )                0
                  +                                                                                                                                                     +    bt (2           1)
                                                               2                                                                               3
                          0                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                           1
                                                    0
                                             (2           1)( b1 + b2 )                                 0
                          B 2                                3                                  bt (2            1)        C
                      1   B                                                                                                C
                  +       B                                                                                                C:
                      2   @2                                                           2                                   A


                                              0                                 0
      Second, we compute                          Ut1 + (1                             )Ut2 similarly. After some simple algebraic manipulations, we
obtain:
                                                                               ( b 1 + b2 )
          0                   0                          blt           +                                     ( b1 +              b2 )
              Ut1 + (1            )Ut2       =                                       6
                                                                                                        +                                      bt                                                 (13)
                                                                           2                                      3
                                                                                       ( b1 + b 2 )
                                                               bht                          6                                   ( b1 +         b2 )
                                                        +                                                    +        bt
                                                                                   2                                                 3
                                                                     0                                                          2                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                ( b1 + b 2 )                                                            ( b1 + b 2 )
                                                               1 B         2
                                                                                                     3                     bt                                   bt           3               C
                                                                                           0                                                        0
                                                        +        @                                                                        (1            )                                    A
                                                               2   2                                         2                                                           2

      Finally, combining (12) and (13), we can show (after some simple but tedious algebraic manipulations)
                                  0                             0
that the condition                    Ut1 + (1                      )Ut2 > Ut0 boils down to

                                                                               0                0           b1 +       b2
                                                               0<2                     1                                             bt :
                                                                                                               3
                   0                                    b 1 + b2                           2
Given that             2 (0; 1) and                         3                      bt          > 0 8t (except if                 b1 = 2 b2 ; which is non-generic) this is

always satis…ed.

Proof of Proposition 7. Consider the parameter values = 0:455; bl1 = bl2 = 1, bh1 = 2:1, bh2 = 1:5,
                                                                                                                                        1
          0
and           = 0:9. For these values of the parameters, we have that                                                                 3         b1 =              0:567 <            =       0:455;
 2

3    +        b1 = 0:567 >              = 0:455; and                       3               bt (2            1) 2 (          ; ) in all other cases. We thus have that
the equilibrium prices are given by (10), (11), (18),(19) ; (24) and (25):

                                                         fe0         =         0:6683; fe1 = 1:2283; fe2 = 0:5917;

                                                         fc0         =         0:2417; fc1 = 0:5917; fc2 = 1:2283:

In equilibrium, the demand for good e under the di¤erent ranking situation is:

                                                                d0e = 1:4689; d1e = 1:3498; d2e = 0:6502:

                                                                                                      26
The demand for good c under the di¤erent ranking situation is:

                                       d0c = 0:5311; d1c = 0:6502; d2c = 1:3498:

    It remains to check that (i) Ut1 < Ut0 ; and (ii) Ut2 < Ut0 for all consumers:

                                          U10 = 1:3217;         U20 = 1:1473;

                                          U11 = 0:8717;         U21 = 0:3819;

                                          U12 = 0:8717;         U22 = 0:464:


So ex post both types of consumers are better o¤ without the ranking. Since all inequalities are strict

and the equilibrium expected utilities are continuous in the parameters, this holds for an open set of

parameters. And since ex post dominance implies ex ante dominance, the absence of the ranking also ex

ante dominates its presence for an open set of parameters.


Appendix A3: Non-Heterogeneous Demand

Case (A)

As we will show below, in equilibrium, all type 1 consumers (no matter the y1;i ) request good e when
          1
                          1
 = 1 if   3       b1 (2       1) <   : This implies that 1 F           f1          b1 = 1: Therefore, for the con…rmative
ranking       = 1; the demand for good e is

                                                           3      f1    b2
                                          de fe1 ; fc1 =             +     ;                                         (14)
                                                           2     2     2

whereas the demand for good c is

                                                           1    f1               b2
                                          dc fe1 ; fc1 =     +                      :                                (15)
                                                           2   2                2

For other ranking situations, i.e.       = 0; 2; the demand is given by (6) and (7) :
    Using (14) and (15), we …nd the best responses when                 = 1: for …rm e

                                                         3  f1   b2
                                            fe1 fc1 =      + c +    ;                                                (16)
                                                         2   2   2

and for …rm c
                                                         gc  f1             b2
                                             fc1 fe1 =      + e                :                                     (17)
                                                         2    2             2
For other ranking situations, i.e.       6= 1, the best response functions are given by (8) and (9) :
    To determine equilibrium prices, there are two cases to consider. First, the prices fe1; ; fc1;                 that
we get by using (16) and (17) are such that f 1;                b1 <        ; i.e. all type 1 consumers request good e
when the ranking is con…rmative. Second, the prices             fe1;   ; fc1;      that we get by using (16) and (17) are


                                                           27
such that f 1;        b1 2 (      ; ); i.e. type 1 consumers request both types of goods when the ranking is
con…rmative. Since Proposition 7 is based on the …rst case, we do not investigate the second one any
further.11
      In the …rst case, the demand for goods e and c are given by (14) and (15), respectively. Therefore,
equilibrium prices are:

                                                                                      7   b2
                                                            fe1;         =              +    ;                                      (18)
                                                                                      3   3
                                                                                      5   b2
                                                            fc1;         =                   :                                      (19)
                                                                                      3   3

We …nd those using (16) and (17) :
      For the ranking situation         = 1; we can also compute the expected utility of a randomly selected type
t consumer given the equilibrium prices fe1; ; fc1; :
                                            Z       f 1;        bt (2    1
                                                                                 1)
                                                                                                           1
                            Ut1     =                                               L1t          fc1;        dyt;i
                                                                                                           2
                                            |                                     {z                             }
                                                      =0 since           f 1;            bt (2   1   1)<
                                                Z
                                                                                                                     1
                                            +                                            Ht1 + y1;i          fe1;      dyt;i :
                                                     f 1;          bt (2     1    1)                                 2

This boils down to                          Z
                                                                                            1
                                  Ut1   =             Ht1 + yt;i                 fe1;         dyt;i = Ht1            fe1; :
                                                                                            2
For     = 0 and     = 2 the results are the same as those described in section 4.1.1. Equilibrium prices are
such that all type 1 consumers request good e when the ranking is con…rmative.


Case (B)
                                                        2
As we will show below, in equilibrium                  3    +          b1 > ; i.e. all type 1 consumers (no matter the yi ) request
                                                                   2
good c when       = 2. This implies that F                      f +              b1 = 1: Therefore, for the surprise ranking     = 2, the
demand for good e is:
                                                                                 1           f2          b2
                                                de fe2 ; fc2 =                                              :                       (20)
                                                                                 2          2           2
The demand for good c is
                                                                                 3    f2    b2
                                                dc fe2 ; fc2 =                     +     +     :                                    (21)
                                                                                 2   2     2
      Using (20) and (21), we …nd the best responses when                                            = 2: for …rm e

                                                                                         fc2          b2
                                                       fe2 fc2 =                     +                   ;                          (22)
                                                                             2            2           2

and for …rm c
                                                                             3  f2   b2
                                                      fc2 fe2 =                + e +    :                                           (23)
                                                                             2   2   2
  11
       The analysis of the second case is available upon request.


                                                                                 28
     For equilibrium prices, there are two cases to consider. First, the prices fe2; ; fc2;                that we get by
                                            2;
using (22) and (23) are such that       f        +      b1 > ; i.e. all type 1 consumers request good c when the
ranking is surprising. Second, the prices fe2; ; fc2;                     that we get by using (22) and (23) are such that
     2;
 f        +   b1 2 (   ; ); i.e. type 1 consumers request both types of goods when the ranking is surprising.
We only detail the …rst case because it is used in the welfare analysis (Proposition 7).
     In the …rst case, demand for goods e and c are given by (20) and (21) respectively. Therefore, the
equilibrium prices are:

                                                                      5   b2
                                                 fe2;       =                ;                                        (24)
                                                                      3   3
                                                                      7   b2
                                                 fc2;       =           +    :                                        (25)
                                                                      3   3

We …nd those using (22) and (23) :
     For the ranking situation     = 2; we can also compute the expected utility of a randomly selected type
t consumer given the equilibrium prices fe2; ; fc2;                   :
                                                        Z
                                                                                  1
                                       Ut2       =              L2t        fc2;     dyt;i
                                                                                  2
                                                 = L1t          fc1; :




                                                                 29
