                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                               ASPIRE

                                          Marcel Fafchamps
                                           Simon Quinn

                                        Working Paper 21084
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21084


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




We thank Anja Grujovic, Gertrude Mduda, Simon Franklin and Sourovi De for their excellent field
assistance implementing the experiment. Field support was provided by the Ethiopian Development
Research Institute in Ethiopia, the Economic Development Institute in Tanzania, and RuralNet in Zambia.
Financial support for this research project was provided by the World Bank and by the DFID-funded
iiG Phase 2 research project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marcel Fafchamps and Simon Quinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Aspire
Marcel Fafchamps and Simon Quinn
NBER Working Paper No. 21084
April 2015
JEL No. L26,O12,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

We gave US$1,000 cash prizes to winners of a business plan competition in Africa. The competition,
entitled ‘Aspire’, was intended to attract young individuals aspiring to become entrepreneurs. Participants
were ranked by committees of judges composed of established entrepreneurs. Each committee selected
one winner among twelve candidates; that winner was awarded a prize of US$1,000 to spend at his or
her discretion. Six months after the competition, we compare winners with the two runners-up in each
committee: winners are about 33 percentage points more likely to be self-employed. We estimate an
average effect on monthly profits of about US$150: an annual profit of 80% on initial investment. Our
findings imply that access to start-up capital constitutes a sizable barrier to entry into entrepreneurship
for the kind of young motivated individual most likely to succeed in business.


Marcel Fafchamps
Freeman Spogli Institute
Stanford University
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fafchamp@stanford.edu

Simon Quinn
Oxford University
simon.quinn@economics.ox.ac.uk
Aspire


1       Introduction

Does capital constrain entry into entrepreneurship by motivated young people? To answer this
question, we gave US$1,000 cash prizes to winners of a business plan competition in Africa.
The competition, entitled ‘Aspire’, is intended to attract young individuals aspiring to become
entrepreneurs. Participants were ranked by committees of judges composed of established en-
trepreneurs. Each committee selected one winner among twelve candidates. Each winner was
awarded a prize of US$1,000 to spend at his or her discretion. We compare winners with the two
runners-up in each committee and we find that winners are about 33 percentage points more likely
to be self-employed six months after the competition.


Our experiment is novel in two key respects. First, we choose our recipients by competition,
rather than by randomization. This means that we estimate the effects of seed grants on high-
potential recipients, rather than estimating the average effects across a wide range of potential
entrepreneurs.1 There exists a small literature that studies unconditional cash transfers to mi-
croentrepreneurs — whether those currently running a business (see, for example, McKenzie and
Woodruff (2008), De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2008), De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff
(2012) and Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn, and Woodruff (2014)) or those hoping to start one
(Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez, 2014; Blattman, Jamison, Green, and Annan, 2014). By construc-
tion, this literature estimates the Average Treatment Effect across a wide range of different en-
trepreneurs — from those with very high potential through to struggling ‘reluctant entrepreneurs’
(Banerjee and Duflo, 2011). This ATE is ideal for understanding the likely effects of policy de-
signed to target a large number of microenterprises — for example, a large-scale roll-out of micro-
finance (Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan, 2014).


In many situations, however, this Average Treatment Effect is not the policy parameter of interest.
1
    We use a discontinuity design to deal with any potential endogeneity arising from this selection mechanism.

                                                           2                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


This is particularly the case where we wish to understand the effects of targeted assistance to star
performers — for example, those who can persuade local bankers or investors of their potential,
rather than merely meeting a predefined set of eligibility criteria. For example, Fischer (2013)
reports on a series of lab-in-the-field experiments and urges more attention on the possibilities of
equity investment for small enterprises. To understand the likely effects of such venture capital,
we need a context in which recipients are chosen for their ability to impress local business experts
of their enterprise potential. This is exactly what our experiment achieves.


Second, our experiment is novel in the magnitude of the cash grant provided to entrepreneurs in
a developing country. To our knowledge, no previous research has provided sums approaching
US$1,000 to aspiring entrepreneurs.2 This provides a useful benchmark of the likely return to
venture capital for small enterprises in developing countries — where fixed costs of monitoring
mean that investors either want to make a sizeable investment or not to invest at all. The Aspire
competition provides a template on how this can be achieved at relatively modest cost. Similar
competitions have been organized in many countries. Although these competitions differ in their
details, our experiment provides a useful benchmark on the extent to which they promote self-
employment.


The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe our experimental design. Descriptive
statistics are presented in Section 3. The testing strategy is the focus of Section 4, which also
presents balancedness statistics and empirical results.
2
    Haushofer and Shapiro (2014) provide grants of US$1,520 to half of the participants in their sample of the general
    population in rural Kenya — a sample that is deliberately not limited to entrepreneurs. Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez
    (2014) provide grants averaging US$382 to aspiring entrepreneurs in Uganda.




                                                            3                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


2    The Aspire competition

In the summer of 2012, we organized business plan competitions entitled ‘Aspire’. The compe-
titions were run in three African countries: Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia. In each of them,
aspiring young entrepreneurs were invited to pitch a new business idea to experienced firm man-
agers, who acted as committee judges. Winners received a US$1,000 cash grant to spend at their
discretion. The competition was financed by a World Bank study on ‘African Competitiveness in
Light, Simple Manufactured Goods’.3 Funding for the endline survey of aspiring entrepreneurs
was provided by DFID, through Phase 2 of the iiG programme. We conducted the business plan
competitions ourselves with field support provided by local research institutions.4


In many developing countries, business plan competitions are now seen as an important tool for
identifying high-potential entrepreneurs. For example, TechnoServe has run business plan compe-
titions in Central America, Africa and India;5 the organisation is currently running the ENGINE
business plan competition in Ghana, with substantial support from the UK Department for Interna-
tional Development (DFID). Similarly, this general format has been used recently for the African
Innovation Prize (in Burundi, Rwanda and Sierra Leone), the Enablis Entrepreneurial Network’s
Business Plan Competition (in Ghana), the Darecha Business Ideas Competition (in Tanzania),
the SEED Awards (in Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa,
Tanzania and Uganda), the StartUp Cup (in Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda and Zambia) and
the YouWiN! competition (in Nigeria). Partly inspired by reality TV shows such as The Attic,
Dragon’s Den and Shark Tank in the US and UK, such competitions are occasionally even tele-
vised. For example, Project Inspire Africa was a reality television competition designed to test
3
  This project is summarised at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. The main report
  has been published as Dinh, Palmade, Chandra, and Cossar (2012).
4
  Field support was provided by the Ethiopian Development Research Institute in Ethipia, the Economic Development
  Institute in Tanzania, and RuralNet in Zambia.
5
  See Klinger and Schündeln (2011) for a discussion of TechnoServe competitions in El Salvador, Guatemala and
  Nicaragua.



                                                       4                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


and reward young African entrepreneurs in a variety of business-related challenges, with young
entrepreneurs from Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. Ruka Juu was a reality program that ran for 11
weeks in Tanzania in 2011, focusing on six young entrepreneurs.6 Similarly, Ghana’s Next Young
Entrepreneur launched on GhOne TV with a similar format in 2014.


In our competition, applicants are aspiring entrepreneurs aged between 18 and 25 (inclusive). They
were recruited through advertising by posters, radio and Facebook. Figure 1 shows an example of
a promotional poster.7 As part of the application process, aspiring entrepreneurs were required to
complete a detailed questionnaire about their business proposal, and to submit a three-page writ-
ten business plan. Competition judges then assessed these questionnaires and business plans, and
listened to an oral presentation by each of the contestants.




                                               < Figure 1 here. >




Most judging committees comprise five or six judges, who work together to assess candidates.
Each judging committee assesses 12 applicants.8 This involves holding three meetings, each as-
sessing four applicants. These meetings follow a clear protocol. Applicants enter the room one
at a time. Each applicant speaks for about 10 minutes, then answers questions from committee
judges for an additional 10 minutes. Judges then complete separate mark sheets, assessing differ-
ent aspects of the applicant’s performance and business idea. Committee members then discuss
the applicant for a few minutes, before calling the next applicant. At the end of each meeting, the
committee is required to reach a joint ranking of all of the candidates whom the committee has
6
    Bjorvatn, Cappelen, Sekei, Sørensen, and Tungodden (2015) report a randomised controlled trial in which treated
    secondary school students watched episodes of this show.
7
    We show the Zambian poster, which was in English; the Ethiopian and Tanzanian posters were respectively in
    Amharic in Swahili.
8
    The design is slightly different in Zambia, as we discuss shortly.


                                                         5                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


judged up to that point.9 Each committee is responsible for awarding one prize of US$1,000, given
to the committee’s highest-ranked candidate; this was paid privately in cash. At the conclusion
of the competition, we held a prize-giving ceremony in each country. These ceremonies were at-
tended by the committee judges and the competition winners. These ceremonies are designed to
thank participants and to congratulate the successful aspiring entrepreneurs.


Judges were drawn exclusively among managers of African manufacturing firms, and each com-
mittee judge received about US$25 per session. Judges were assigned to their tasks randomly.
Each judge attends the competition venue at an agreed time. To maximise participation, judges
were allowed to choose their preferred competition session. Having arrived at this session, judges
were then randomly assigned to join a specified judging committee.10 Contestants were similarly
assigned to a judging committee through random selection.


There are some differences in implementation between the three countries. In Zambia, we were
unable to find the originally planned number of contestants. As a result, we ran the competition
with half the number of contestants and half the number of winners. We did this by having 16
committees; among the 16 applicants ranked first, we awarded eight prizes, determined on the
basis of other judges’ assessment of the written business plans.11 Six months after the competition,
we conducted an endline survey of all the contestants we could locate. 83.4% of the contestants
could be found.
 9
     Thus, a committee ranks four candidates after its first meeting, eight candidates after its second meeting and 12
     candidates after its final meeting.
10
     Some judges were randomly assigned the role of non-committee judge for which they ranked written business
     proposals individually. While their assessment marks were provided to the relevant committee judges, it is unclear
     that they were taken into consideration. Non-committee judges are discussed more in detail in Fafchamps and Quinn
     (2014).
11
     There are 185 contestants in Ethiopia, 178 in Tanzania and 78 in Zambia.




                                                            6                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


3        Descriptives

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics from the questionnaire that contestants filled prior to the com-
petition. These questionnaires were filled in writing by the contestants themselves (either using pen
and paper or through an online form). While the response rate is high, we are not convinced that in-
formation was always filled in a fully accurate manner – possibly because contestants thought their
responses may affect the outcome of the competition. This is particularly true of questions about
age and education: being in a specific age range (18 to 25) was a condition of participation and,
given that the objective of the study was to investigate the effect of the competition on subsequent
employment, contestants were supposed to near the completion of their studies. Education and age
information were also collected in the endline survey (see the bottom of Table 3). The correlation
between education levels is 0.43 across the 372 subjects who answered both baseline and endline
education questions. Correlation is much higher for age, at 0.85. Nothing in our analysis depends
on the possible misreporting in the baseline survey.




                                                     < Table 1 here. >




From Table 1 we see that the average age of contestants is 22. Only four individuals report an
age outside the range allowed for contestants. The competition attracted mostly young men, but
over one fifth of contestants are female. Unsurprisingly, most contestants are unmarried and fewer
than 5% of them have children. Fewer than a quarter of the contestants have not (yet) completed
high school. (This proportion is slightly higher in the endline survey, suggesting that some contes-
tants over-reported their education level.) In the three study countries, 90% of contestants report
speaking English at baseline.12 One quarter of all contestants has traveled abroad at least once in
12
     The proportion is 88% in the endline survey, so this proportion is probably about right. It reflects the fact that, in all
     three countries, English is used extensively as language of instruction in high school and university.


                                                               7                  Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


their life, and almost 60% have parents who own a business. Half of the contestants are students at
baseline; a little over a quarter are employed.


Contestants were asked what they would do if they win the prize. Of those who answer the ques-
tion, 84% indicate that they would start or expand a business. Of those who say they would start or
expand a business, the average percentage of their winnings that they plan to invest is 80%. Some
60% of contestants claim to have identified one or two partners, and 75% report they would invest
some of the own funds into the business. Of course, these answers are partly wishful thinking, and
contestants may have (mistakenly) believed that they could improve their chances of winning the
prize by inflating their responses.


Data on the judging process is summarized in Table 2. Each committee of judges examined a non-
overlapping set of contestants. In Zambia, the target number of contestants per judging committee
was set to six. In Ethiopia and Tanzania, the target was 12. The committees were instructed to rank
contestants. This was done in several steps. First, each committee judge was asked to individually
score each contestant in writing. Judges first scored each contestant on eight Likert scales going
from 1 for ‘strongly agree’ to 5 for ‘strongly disagree’. Each score focuses on one aspect of the
contestant written proposal and oral presentation. Scores given by individual judges are averaged
for each judging committee. A low score is good, a high score is bad. There is considerable
variation in scores across contestants, with score averages centered around the middle mark of 3.
The correlation across average scores for the eight Likert scale questions is high – around 0.8 on
average, and never below 0.7.




                                         < Table 2 here. >




                                                  8            Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


There is quite a bit of variation in the way each individual judge scores each contestant. We
compute for each contestant the standard deviation of the scores given by individual judges. The
average of this standard deviation across all contestants is between a low of 0.83 (for question 6)
and a high of 0.94 (for question 5). This is a large value given that the lowest score is 1 and the
highest is 5. This suggests that there is considerable variation in judges’ opinion regarding the
value of the business ideas presented to them.


Next judges were asked to mark the growth potential of the contestant’s business idea on a scale
from 0 to 100. Here high is good, low is bad. The average mark is 62%, suggesting that commit-
tee judges were on average only moderately impressed with the contestants’ performance. Judges
were similar requested to rate on a scale from 0 to 100 their recommendation for others to invest
in the contestant’s business. The average mark is 59%, with much variation either way. The cor-
relation between the two marks is 0.7. There is also considerable variation in the marks given by
different judges to the same contestant: the average standard deviation in marks is 19 for the first
and 21 for the second.


Answers to the growth potential question are strongly correlated with answers to the eight Likert
scale questions; as expected, applicants performing better on the Likert scale questions received
higher scores on growth potential. The same is true for the investment recommendation ques-
tion. When we regress the growth potential score on the eight Likert scores together (clustering by
judging committee), we obtain an R2 of 0.67; all eight scores are individually significant, except
for financial viability and clarity of the written business plan (each of which is almost significant:
p = 0.131 and p = 0.154 respectively). When we regress the investment recommendation score
in the same way, three Likert scores are individually significant: the clarity of the written business
plan (p = 0.001), effectiveness of oral presentation (p = 0.013) and the applicant’s overall busi-
ness sense (p = 0.086). The growth potential score and investment recommendation score have a


                                                  9              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


positive correlation of 0.68.


After writing individual scores, each committee was asked to agree a common ranking of all the
contestants who appeared in front of them. This common ranking was achieved through discus-
sion among committee judges under the direction of a committee chair of their choosing. The best
contestant is given rank 1, the second best receives rank 2, and so on. The competition winner
selected by the judging committee is the contestant who was ranked #1. A high value of the rank
variable thus implies low performance. As expected, committee rankings are positively correlated
with the Likert scale questions – contestants who scored poorly on those questions were given a
higher ranking (i.e., less favorable). committee rankings are also negatively correlated with the
two 0 to 100 marks, as anticipated.


The written business plans that each contestant was asked to prepare were also independently
ranked by individual judges not in a committee. These judges were drawn at random from the
same population as the committee judges. The only difference is that they did not attend the oral
presentation the contestant made, and they were unable to ask questions. These rankings were then
averaged for each contestant. The correlation between committee rankings and averaged individ-
ual rankings is positive but low, at 0.23. Given how little a priori agreement there is among judges
regarding contestants, there is a considerable element of chance in determining which contestant
a committee ends up selecting as the winner. (This is directly consistent with Fafchamps and
Woodruff (2014), who run a business plan competition in urban Ghana; the authors find that expert
panels do reasonably well in predicting growth of microenterprises, but add very little explanatory
power to a simple model with several key observable covariates.)


In Table 3 we present descriptive statistics from the endline survey. The survey questionnaire was
answered by the contestants themselves in face-to-face interviews with enumerators. The survey


                                                10              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


questionnaire is adapted to the fact that contestants need not be the head of their household and
may not have control over their finances. Questions about employment, income, and time use are
individual-specific and are all specifically aimed at testing the effect of winning the competition
on business creation and self-employment.




                                                 < Table 3 here. >




The first part of Table 3 presents employment outcome variables. Self-employment and wage em-
ployment are dummies. Given the young age of respondents, it is perhaps heartening to note that
the overwhelming majority had some form of employment by the time of the endline survey. (Of
course, we should keep in mind that these percentages are not representative of all young people
in the studied countries: our study population is, by construction, a self-selected group of over-
achievers.) Hours worked come from time budgets collected for the day preceding the survey.13
We also collected information on the minimum wage that respondents require before accepting a
permanent employment position. There is considerable variation in this variable across the sample.


Conditional on being self-employed, information was collected on broad indicators of business per-
formance, such as total sales or revenues, total costs, profits and number of permanent employees.
Not surprisingly, the average number of employees is small. We present two profit measures. The
first one is monthly profits as reported by respondents. The second is calculated as the difference
between total sales and total costs. As is common in these kind of data, self-reported profits far
exceed calculated profits (e.g., Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn, and Woodruff (2012)). We suspect
that self-reported profits over-estimate actual profits because some respondents do not understand
the difference between profits and revenues. On the other hand, calculated profits are probably
13
     If the day preceding was a weekend, respondents were instead asked about the last weekday.


                                                          11                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


underestimates because respondents often under-report sales. For this reason, we use both in our
analysis.


Next we report income, expenditures and assets. All are presented in a US$ equivalent scale.
Earned income is the sum of reported profits and wage earnings. Because many respondents are not
head of household, we do not attempt to measure household consumption expenditures. Rather, we
focus on the respondent’s own expenditures, which we divide into three categories: expenditures
made by the contestant for own consumption; expenditures made by others for the contestant’s
consumption; and expenditures made by the contestant for someone else’s consumption. We focus
on combined expenditures for mobile phones, food and drink, cigarettes and tobacco, clothing, and
hair and beauty salons. These expenditure categories were selected because they are most relevant
for young people, most of whom are living with their parents. We also collected information about
durables such as appliances, electronics, and vehicles. Durables are measured at the level of the
household, given that they are often shared between several individuals in the household. Infor-
mation is also available about personal finances, notably outstanding debts, and the value of bank
account and cash held. We note that there is considerable variation in income, expenditures, and
assets across the sample.


To investigate whether the prize winnings were used to get married, we calculate the proportion
of individuals in the sample who got married between the end of the competition and the endline
survey. This proportion is very small, which is probably not entirely surprising given the relatively
young age of our study population. The last section of Table 3 presents variables that were also
collected at baseline. Since they have already been commented on when we discussed Table 1,
they need not be discussed further.




                                                 12             Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


4    Testing strategy

We wish to test whether winning the competition led to an increase in entrepreneurship among
contestants. To this effect, we compare competition winners with close runners-up from each
committee. Identification relies on the assumption that winners are no different from other highly
ranked contestants who did not win the prize money. This assumption allows identification via
a regression discontinuity design around the large transfer that winners receive. The estimating
equation is of the form:
                                       y i = α + β · W i + εi ,                                  (1)

where yi is an outcome variable of interest measured in the endline survey and Wi = 1 if individual
i won the competition.


In Ethiopia and Tanzania, the set of observations is limited to competition winners and the two
most highly ranked competitors in each committee. In Zambia, we use a slightly different counter-
factual pool: we use respondents who were ranked first but who did not receive a prize, and respon-
dents ranked second. Given endline attrition, this leaves us with 16 winners and 30 runners-up in
Ethiopia, 16 winners and 31 runners-up in Tanzania, and 7 winners and 21 runners-up in Zambia.
To verify the robustness of our results, we also estimate regression (1) with controls for variables
that are significantly unbalanced between winners and runners-up, and with judging committee
fixed effects. We cluster in all cases by judging committee. Our main outcome variable of interest
is whether winners are more likely to be self-employed in the endline survey than runners-up. We
also investigate the effect on expected microenterprise profits.


Contestants probably have higher ability and determination than the general population. This is es-
pecially for those who do well in the competition, such as winners and runners-up. Consequently,
they are more likely to be employed, either in self-employment or in a salaried position. A suffi-


                                                 13                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


ciently large unobserved ability difference between winners and runners-up could thus potentially
explain a higher likelihood of self-employment. But the same ability difference would also gener-
ate a higher likelihood of wage employment. As a placebo test to confirm our results, we verify
that winners are not more likely to be employed in a salaried occupation. In our study country, ob-
taining a salaried job depends, like self-employment, on ability and determination but presumably
does not require paying a large lumpsum.14


To check for robustness, we also use information from time budgets in the endline survey to con-
firm our findings regarding self-employment and wage employment. For the same reason, we
check for income and wealth effects. In particular we investigate whether winners enjoy a higher
ex post income and a higher consumption level, and we explore whether they are more likely to
get married after winning the competition. The relative young age and dependent status of the par-
ticipants, and the short interval between treatment and endline survey, nonetheless militate against
finding a statistically significant effect.


4.1       Balance and attrition

Since we rely on a comparison between competition winners and runners-up, we need to ensure
that winners are not, ex ante, any better than runners-up. To this effect, we regress all descriptive
statistics from the baseline questionnaire on winners and runners-up, and test whether the win-
ner dummy is significant. In Table 4 we regress characteristics collected at baseline on a winner
dummy, using only winners and runners-up in the comparison. The results suggest that winners
and runners-up are not different populations: only three of the 16 variables are significant at the
10 percent level (winners are less likely to have been married, less likely to have spoken English,
14
     Extra cash could facilitate job search, as shown for Ethiopia by Franklin (2014). But the prize winnings far exceed
     the cost of searching for a wage job in Addis Ababa. Cash could also facilitate international migration, something
     that we cannot rule out but we suspect would only affect a small proportion of our study population. We do not
     observe international migrants in our data since, by design, they do not respond to the endline survey. We revisit
     this issue when we discuss attrition.


                                                           14                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


and more likely to have parents who run a busineses).15 In the impact analysis below we use these
three variables as controls in one set of estimations, and show that this does not affect the results.




                                                   < Table 4 here. >




We have the scores given to each individual contestant by the committee judges. We perform the
same balancedness analysis on the average scores and rankings given by individual judges. To
recall, high scores to questions 1 to 8 indicate low performance while the opposite is true for ques-
tions 9 and 10. A low ranking means a better performance. The results are presented in Table
5. We see that winners are not significantly different from runners-up in any of questions 1 to 8,
nor are they ranked differently by judges as individuals. Winners perform better on the judges’
perception of the business growth potential, and the consequent recommendation to invest. In the
analysis that follows, we use as controls the answers to questions 9 and 10, and the individual
judge rankings.




                                                   < Table 5 here. >




We also conduct balancedness tests on time-invariant variables collected at endline. The reason
for this additional check is to protect against possible misreporting in the self-reported information
collected at baseline – notably age and education. We also include gender and an English speaking
dummy collected at endline, as well as household size and the number of children. Balancedness
test results are reported in Table 6. None of the variables is significantly different between winners
15
     To verify how strong this pattern is, we estimate the same regression on the entire contestant population. We find the
     same result for having been married, but the English speaking dummy is no longer significant, nor is the result on
     parents having run a business. (Additionally, we find that winners reported a significantly larger planned investment
     of their own funds.)

                                                             15                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


and runners-up.




                                                    < Table 6 here. >




Finally, we examine the data for signs of non-random attrition between winners and other contes-
tants. We consider two types of attrition: (i) between baseline and the competition, and (ii) between
the competition and the endline survey. The first column of Table 7 regresses having competed on
baseline characteristics. Individuals who filled at least the age question on the baseline question-
naire are regarded as part of the baseline population.16 There are 916 individuals at baseline, 442 of
whom participated in the competition and were ranked by committee judges. Many baseline indi-
viduals did not fully complete the questionnaire, however, so that the results in column 1 should be
interpreted as presenting correlates of attrition for those who filled most of the baseline questions.


We observe that individuals with children or who have travelled outside the country are less likely
to participate to the competition, conditional on having filled the baseline questionnaire; individu-
als who speak English were more likely. This is not too surprising: the time cost of competing is
more taxing for parents, and better travelled individuals probably have better outside options. Sim-
ilarly, English-speakers may have anticipated having a higher chance in the competition. Column
2 adds answers to a question that was not filled in by many candidates: the percentage investment
anticipated in a future business. This is highly significant in predicting competition participation.
Variables such as age, gender and education are not significant.




                                                    < Table 7 here. >


16
     Contestants are included as well, even if they did not fill in the age question.

                                                              16                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


Next we examine whether contestants who ranked highly and won the competition are less likely to
answer the enline questionnaire. Of the 442 contestants, 369 (83.4%) were interviewed at endline.
Column 3 regresses participating to the endline survey on a winner dummy and the contestant’s
final rank. We find no evidence that top contestants are more or less likely to answer the endline
questionnaire. In column 4 we repeat the analysis with baseline regressors.17 We find that the nine
contestants with children are, on average, less likely to answer the endline survey. Better educated
contestants and those who do not speak English are more likely to answer. Winning status and
committee ranking remain non-significant.18 From this we conclude that there is not differential
attrition by winning status, and more generally that attrition is not correlated with the performance
of contestants in the competition.


4.2       Empirical results

We now turn to our main results. Coefficients for equation (1) were estimated with the winner and
two runners-up from each committee in the competition. There are 39 winners and 82 runners-
up in all.19 Standard errors are clustered by judging committee throughout. Panel A of Table 8
presents estimation results using the winner dummy as sole regressor. Panel B adds unbalanced
baseline variables and committee scores as controls.20 Panel C omits those controls, but instead
includes judging committee fixed effects.


17
     As noted earlier, this leads to a loss of observations given that some baseline questions were not completed.
18
     For completeness, we also run regressions of the kind reported in Table 8, where the outcome variable is whether
     the respondent was interviewed at endline. In every case, the coefficient on winning is very small, and far from
     significant: for the specifications in Panel A, Panel B and Panel C successively, the estimates are -0.044 (p = 0.510),
     -0.058 (p = 0.412) and -0.007 (p = 0.908).
19
     In Zambia, we had half as many contestants as in either of the other two countries; additionally, there were three
     committees in Zambia with only two contestants. For these reasons, there are only 21 runners-up for the seven
     winners in Zambia.
20
     The complete list of controls is as follows: average marks for questions 9 and 10; the average of the ranks given
     to the contestant by individual judges; a dummy for whether the contestant is married; a dummy for whether the
     contestant’s parents have a business; and a dummy for whether the contestant speaks English. Because baseline
     information is missing for some contestants, including controls results in a loss of some observations.



                                                             17                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


                                          < Table 8 here. >




The first row of Table 8 presents the results for self-employment, which is our main dependent
variable of interest. The dependent variable takes value 1 if the respondent answers ‘yes’ to the
question “Do you derive an income from activities other than wage employment, i.e., are you self-
employed?”. We find that winners are 33 percentage points more likely to be self-employed than
runners-up six months after the competition; this is significant at the 1% level. Of the 32 winners,
24 were self-employed at follow-up (75%); of the 72 runners-up, 30 were self-employed at follow-
up (41.67%).


The second row presents a similar regression using data from time budget questions. The de-
pendent variable is the number of hours in self-employment reported for the preceding day. The
finding is similar: the point estimate is an extra 2.5 hours worked in self-employment, from a base
of 1.7 hours; this effect, too, is significant at the 1% level. Note that this is an average of 2.5 extra
hours worked in self-employment, across all winners. This implies that winners starting their own
business worked about 7.5 extra hours in that business on the preceding day; that is, it implies that
those starting their own business treat it as a full-time occupation.21


Panel B of Table 8 presents coefficient estimates obtained with unbalanced variables as controls;
Panel C includes judging committee fixed effects. Results are similar – virtually identical for hours
in self-employment, and slightly larger for the probability of being self-employed. From this we
conclude that our results are driven by the effect of the cash grant, rather than by any inherent
differences between winners and runners-up.


21
     That is, 7.5 ≈ 2.5/0.33.




                                                   18              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


In rows 3 and 4 we present similar results for wage employment. Among our study population
at endline, permanent wage employment is relatively common: of 380 respondents to the endline
survey, 40% answered ‘yes’ to the question “Do you have a regular wage job?”. We do not expect
a large lump sum transfer to increase the probability of being in wage employment – if anything,
it may even reduce this probability if winners slack on search intensity. If anything, this is what
we find: winners and runners-up are not significantly different in terms of the probability of have
a permanent wage job at endline, and on average they work slightly fewer hours in wage employ-
ment (though the difference is not statistically significant). Similarly, we find no effect on search
or on the monthly reservation wage.22 These findings are unaffected whether we include controls
or committee fixed effects.


Figure 2 illustrates these key outcomes against the committee ranking.23 Vertical lines denote
the winner (ranking 1) and the respondent rankings used in the regressions as counter-factuals in
Tanzania and Ethiopia (rankings 2 and 3). The graphs illustrate both the central idea behind the
identification strategy and the key results: outcomes are reasonably homogeneous for rankings 2
to 12, but are significantly different for winners’ probability of self-employment and hours spent
in self-employment.



                                                 < Figure 2 here. >



Next we investigate whether winning the prize affects firm performance. We examine five indica-
tors of firm performance: average sales over the last month, average costs, self-reported profits,
22
     We find that winners spend an average of 0.85 hours fewer each day on leisure (including washing and grooming);
     this is significant with p < 0.01. Aside from self-employment and leisure, we find no significant effect on any
     other category of time use (time in wage employment, time searching for work, time studying, time sleeping, time
     socialising and attending religious ceremonies, time doing chores and time on other activities).
23
     Specifically, the figure shows coefficients from a regression on dummy variables, with no controls. We cluster by
     judging committee and show 90% confidence intervals. For clarity, we drop the eight Zambians who were ranked
     ‘1’ but who did not include a prize; results are robust to including them.

                                                          19                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


profits calculated as sales minus costs, and number of permanent employees. To avoid sample se-
lection problems, we code each outcome as zero for respondents who are not self-employed; that
is, we estimate the effect of winning on the unconditional expectation of firm performance.


We find large and significant effects. In the basic specification (Panel A), four outcomes are sig-
nificant: total monthly sales, both measures of profits, and the number of permanent employees.
The pattern repeats as we add controls (Banel B) and then committee fixed effects (Panel C): co-
efficients remain remarkably stable, though the addition of controls improves efficiency. In Panels
B and C, we find significant positive effects on all measures of firm performance.


We then look at total income, expenditures, and assets. For total income, the point estimate is
positive — and is large in the Panel B and Panel C specifications — but it is not statistically signif-
icant, possibly because the variance of income is high.24 We get similar results for expenditures:
point estimates are positive, but not significant. Finally, assets similarly move in the expected di-
rection: winners have less debt and more savings in cash and in the bank by endline. The effect is
statistically significant at the 95% level for bank savings in the regression with controls and in the
regression with committee fixed effects. The magnitude of this effect is large: roughly a doubling
of bank savings among winners six months after the competition. We estimate the same regression
with combined personal wealth, defined as bank and cash savings minus personal debt. As could
be expected given our earlier results, point estimates are large; they are significant at the 90% level
in each specification.


Finally, we investigate whether winners are more likely to be married six months after the competi-
tion, conditional on not being married at baseline. Getting married costs money, and winners may
24
     In separate regressions (available on request), we use log(income) as a dependent variable. We find large estimated
     coefficients, although not significant: 0.581 for the Panel A specification (p = 0.145), 0.801 for the Panel B
     specification (p = 0.113), and 0.533 for the Panel C specification (p = 0.200).



                                                           20                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


have invested their winnings in paying for a wedding rather than investing in self-employment.
This is not what we find: there is no significant effect on the probability of being married. The
proportion of married individuals at endline is quite small, however (7%), suggesting that our study
population may be too young for an effect to be noticed.



5       Conclusions

Using data from a business plan competition that we organized in three African countries, we have
shown that a large transfer of funds to motivated aspiring entrepreneurs significantly increases
the likelihood that they start a business within six months of the competition — and, therefore,
increases expected sales and expected profits. Results are robust to the inclusion of controls for
performance on the judging committee, and to the inclusion of judging committee fixed effects. As
expected, we find that winners have higher personal wealth. We find no effect on wage employ-
ment and earnings.


A few simple ‘back-of-envelope’ calculations help to understand the magnitude of our estimates.
Our main result is that winners were 33 percentage points more likely than the runners-up to start
their own business; with 40 prizes distributed, this implies that we caused the birth of 13 new
businesses. Using a point estimate of two permanent employees on average per winner, we created
about 80 new wage jobs. Finally, we estimate an effect on monthly profits of about US$150. If we
make the simplifying benchmark assumption that this effect is sustainable, our estimates imply an
annual profit of 80% on initial investment.25 Were we investors, rather than academics, we could
have doubled our US$40,000 within about seven months — by using a business plan competition
25
     That is, US$150 per month × 12 months = US$1800 per year, caused by an initial grant of US$1000. This assump-
     tion of sustainability appears reasonable in many microenterprise contexts: see De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff
     (2012) and Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn, and Woodruff (2014).




                                                         21               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


to pick high-potential entrepreneurs.26 Of course, this kind of equity contract would require sub-
stantial monitoring; this remains an important topic for future research.


In sum, our findings imply that access to start-up capital constitutes a sizeable barrier to entry into
entrepreneurship for the kind of young motivated individual most likely to succeed in business. We
do not see our findings as implying that credit should be extended to these individuals. As the work
of Field, Pande, Papp, and Rigol (2013) and Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan (2014) indi-
cates, access to credit without grace period often fails to have the intended effect on small business
investment. Our results suggest that promoting start-up investments by young motivated people
can be achieved through grants. Combining our results with these earlier contributions suggests
that start-up investment may also be fostered through equity investment of the kind offered by
venture capital firms — given that such form of finance does require immediate repayment, and is
contingent on success (Fischer, 2013).


Similarly, we do not claim that our findings suggest finance should be offered indiscriminately
to all young individuals who express a desire to start a business. From the work of De Mel,
McKenzie, and Woodruff (2008, 2012) and Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn, and Woodruff (2014),
we know that grants to microenterprises do not always lead to investment and firm growth: many
small firms refrain from investing, possibly because they wish their enterprise to remain at a level
that they can manage and control, possibly because there are other, more urgent uses for available
funds. Selecting the right grant recipients is thus essential in order to achieve the desired effect
on enterprise development. Our experiment shows that this can be accomplished, at relatively low
cost, by running business competitions with the participation of the local business community.



26
     That is, US$1000 ÷ US$150 per month ≈ 7 months. This uses the very conservative assumption that the real interest
     rate is zero; of course, with a positive interest rate, compounding would shorten this time and would increase our
     estimated returns.

                                                           22                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


References
BANERJEE , A., AND E. D UFLO (2011): Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to
 Fight Global Poverty. PublicAffairs.
BANERJEE , A., E. D UFLO , R. G LENNERSTER , AND C. K INNAN (2014): “The Miracle of Micro-
 finance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic Journal: Applied.
B JORVATN , K., A. C APPELEN , L. H. S EKEI , S ØRENSEN , AND B. T UNGODDEN (2015): “Teach-
   ing Through Television: Experimental Evidence on Entreprenurship Education in Tanzania,”
   NHH Discussion Paper 3 2015.
B LATTMAN , C., N. F IALA , AND S. M ARTINEZ (2014): “Generating Skilled Self-Employment in
  Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129(2), 697–752.
B LATTMAN , C., J. JAMISON , E. G REEN , AND J. A NNAN (2014): “The Returns to Cash and
  Microenterprise Support Among the Ultra-Poor: A Field Experiment,” Working Paper.
D E M EL , S., D. M C K ENZIE , AND C. W OODRUFF (2008): “Returns to Capital in Microenter-
  prises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1329–
  1372.
         (2012): “One-time Transfers of Cash or Capital have Long-Lasting Effects on Microen-
  terprises in Sri Lanka,” Science, 335(6071), 962–966.
D INH , H., V. PALMADE , V. C HANDRA , AND F. C OSSAR (2012): Light Manufacturing in Africa:
   Targeted Policies to Enhance Private Investment and Create Jobs. World Bank Publications.
FAFCHAMPS , M., D. M C K ENZIE , S. Q UINN , AND C. W OODRUFF (2012): “Using PDA Consis-
  tency Checks to Increase the Precision of Profits and Sales Measurement in Panels,” Journal of
  Development Economics, 98(1), 51–57.
        (2014): “Microenterprise Growth and the Flypaper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized
  Experiment in Ghana,” Journal of Development Economics, 106, 211–226.
FAFCHAMPS , M., AND S. Q UINN (2014): “Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa: Results
  from a Randomized Field Experiment,” CSAE Working Paper 2014-25.
FAFCHAMPS , M., AND C. W OODRUFF (2014): “Identifying Gazelles: Expert Panels vs Surveys
  as a Means to Identify Firms with Rapid Growth Potential,” Working Paper.
F IELD , E., R. PANDE , J. PAPP, AND N. R IGOL (2013): “Does the Classic Microfinance Model
   Discourage Entrepreneurship Among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from India,” The Amer-
   ican Economic Review, 103(6), 2196–2226.
F ISCHER , G. (2013): “Contract Structure, Risk-Sharing, and Investment Choice,” Econometrica,
   81(3), 883–939.

                                              23             Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire


F RANKLIN , S. (2014): “Location, Search Costs and Youth Unemployment: The Impact of a Ran-
   domized Transport Subsidy in Urban Ethiopia,” Working paper.

H AUSHOFER , J., AND J. S HAPIRO (2014): “Household Response to Income Changes: Evidence
  from an Unconditional Cash Trasnfer Program in Kenya,” Working paper.

K LINGER , B., AND M. S CHÜNDELN (2011): “Can Entrepreneurial Activity be Taught? Quasi-
  Experimental Evidence from Central America,” World Development, 39(9), 1592–1610.

M C K ENZIE , D., AND C. W OODRUFF (2008): “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital and
  Access to Finance in Mexico,” The World Bank Economic Review, 22(3), 457–482.




                                            24            Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire




Figures and Tables




                     25   Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
Aspire




         Figure 1: Advertising for aspiring entrepreneurs: Zambian poster




                         ASPIRE
           Do you aspire to be a successful entrepreneur?
           Do you aspire to start your own business?
           Do you have a business idea that needs support?

           If so, apply for the chance to win US$1,000 to help you to start
           your own business!

           The Centre for the Study of African Economies (University of Oxford, UK) is interested in
           learning about the growth of new business ideas in Zambia. We are running a business
           ideas competition for aspiring young entrepreneurs, and we want you to apply!

          Who: Applications are open to any aspiring entrepreneur aged 18 – 25, male or female.
                (Note that you may be required to provide proof of your age.)
          What: In July and August, we will be running a competition to reward aspiring
                entrepreneurs. You can win the chance to present and explain your idea to a
                group of Zambian business leaders. Those with the best project win US$1,000!
           How: Apply online at www.csae.ox.ac.uk/aspire/zambia. There is no application cost.
          When: It’s with immediate effect and applications close on 22 July at 6pm.




                               TO WIN
                  US$1,000!!

                                                      26                   Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                Figure 2: Key Outcomes and Committee Ranking




                                                                                                                                                                  Aspire
                                             Probability of self-employment                                Probability of wage employment
27




                                                Hours in self-employment                                      Hours in wage employment
Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn




                                                     These graphs show coefficients from regressions on dummy variables, with no controls.
                                                              We cluster by judging committee and show 90% confidence intervals.
                                 For clarity, we drop the eight Zambians who were ranked ‘1’ but who did not win a prize; results are robust to including them.
Table 1. Baseline variables
Personal characteristics                                     N.obs.   Mean    St.Dev.   Min.   Max
      Age                                                      766    22.20       2.2    18     33
      Female                                                   774     0.21                0     1
      Married                                                  752     0.04                0     1
      Number of children                                       775     0.05       0.4      0     4
      Education scale (from 1=none to 7=university)            761     5.54       1.2      1     7
      Speaks English                                           759     0.90                0     1
      Has travelled abroad                                     743     0.25                0     1
      Parents have a business                                  745     0.59                0     1
Current employment status
      Student                                                  747     0.50               0      1
      Wage employed                                            747     0.16               0      1
      Self-employed                                            747     0.13               0      1
      Unemployed                                               747     0.14               0      1
If wins the prize:
      Would start or expand a business                         701     0.84               0      1
      Percentage of winnings would invest                      596    80.25     20.9      0    100
      Number of business partners would have                   706     0.86      0.8      0      2
      Log(own funds) would invest [in US$]                     714     5.08      3.2      0     14

Table 2. Average scores from panel judges
Did the contestant… (1=strongly agree 5=strongly disagree)   N.obs.   Mean    St.Dev.   Min.   Max
     Have a clear business concept                             481     2.88       1.1      1     5
     Understand the market                                     481     2.94       0.9      1     5
     Have a strategy for growth                                481     2.92       0.8      1     5
     Have a financially viable business idea                   480     3.01       0.8      1     5
     Have a clearly written business plan                      480     2.86       0.9      1     5
     Make an effective oral presentation                       455     2.81       0.9      1     5
     Respond well to questions from the judging panel          467     2.90       1.0      1     5
     Have a strong business sense overall                      471     2.95       1.0      1     5
On a scale from 0 to 100, what is…
    The growth potential of the contestant's business idea                 436       62.33         16          10       100
    Your recommendation to invest in the contestant's business             481       58.83         16           0       100
Ranking from 1=top to 13=bottom
    Panel ranking                                                          441        5.77         3.3          1        12
    Ranking by individual judges, averaged for each contestant             437        5.92         2.3          1        13
    Note: Except for panel rankings, which are decided collectively, all other variables are averaged within judging panels.
    In Zambia, the target number of contestants per judging panel was set to 6. In Ethiopia and Tanzania, the target was 12.


Table 3. Endline variables
Employment outcomes                                                   N.obs.      Mean      St.Dev.       Min.       Max
     Self-employed (yes=1)                                              380        0.38                      0         1
     Self-employment hours per day                                      356        2.05         3.6          0        15
     Wage employed (yes=1)                                              380        0.40         0.5          0         1
     Wage employment hours per day                                      356        2.96         4.1          0        15
     Hours searching for employment per day                             356        0.46         1.4          0        12
     Monthly reservation wage (US$)                                     372      460.78       1320           0     21768
Conditional on self-employment…
     Total sales (monthly average)                                       141     534.50       1856           0     18133
     Total costs (monthly average)                                       136     365.25       1186           0     12533
     Reported profit (monthly average)                                   140     404.01       1793        -183     19200
     Calculated profit = sales-costs                                     136     188.13        803        -877      6942
     Number of permanent employees                                       143       1.44         3.1          0        20
Income, expenditures and assets
     Earned income per month (in US$)                                    402     244.39       1122        -183     19200
     Expenditures by self on self                                        381      76.69         89           0       744
     Expenditures by others on self                                      381      25.67         54           0       784
     Expenditures by self on others                                      381      19.73         38           0       296
     Value of durable goods                                              381    1290.79       3754           0     59010
     Value of debt                                                       381     153.55       1489           0     27210
     Value of bank account                                               380     394.21       1921           0     32000
     Value of cash held                                                  381      68.24        188           0      2560
Marriage
    Got married since competition                   405    0.02         0    1
Time-invariant variables
    Age                                             399   23.74   2.7   16   39
    Female                                          405    0.20          0    1
    Married                                         381    0.05          0    1
    Number of children                              381    0.04   0.2    0    2
    Education scale (from 1=none to 7=university)   382    5.29   1.5    1    7
    Speaks English                                  405    0.88   0.3    0    1
Table 4. Balance on baseline characteristics
Personal characteristics                                                       Winner          t-value   Nber obs.
       Age                                                                       0.096        (0.244)     120
       Female                                                                    0.037        (0.429)     121
       Married                                                                 -0.037*        (-1.777)    120
       Number of children                                                        0.013        (0.474)     121
       Education scale (from 1=none to 7=university)                            -0.270        (-1.190)    118
       Speaks English                                                          -0.093*        (-1.781)    121
       Has travelled abroad                                                     -0.095        (-1.239)    118
       Parents have a business                                                  0.164*        (1.798)     119
Current employment status
       Student                                                                  -0.114        (-1.124)    121
       Wage employed                                                             0.042        (0.421)     121
       Self-employed                                                             0.058        (0.760)     121
       Unemployed                                                                0.059        (0.850)     121
If wins the prize:
       Would start or expand a business                                         -0.068        (-0.833)    118
       Percentage of winnings would invest                                      -3.257        (-0.720)    113
       Number of business partners would have                                   -0.157        (-0.879)    119
       Log(own funds) would invest [in US$]                                      0.117        (0.257)     109
Each row corresponds to a regression of the variable listed on the left on a winner dummy.
Only winners and runners-up are used in these regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 5. Balance panel scores and rankings
Did the contestant… (1=strongly agree 5=strongly disagree)                     Winner          t-value   Nber obs.
      Have a clear business concept                                             -0.021        (-0.199)    121
      Understand the market                                                     -0.119        (-1.096)    121
      Have a strategy for growth                                                -0.024        (-0.218)    121
      Have a financially viable business idea                                    0.042        (0.360)     121
      Have a clearly written business plan                                      -0.083        (-0.684)    121
      Make an effective oral presentation                                        0.089        (0.717)     121
      Respond well to questions from the judging panel                           0.098        (0.784)     121
      Have a strong business sense overall                                       0.042        (0.413)     121
On a scale from 0 to 100, what is…
      The growth potential of the contestant's business idea                   6.208**        (2.389)     109
      Your recommendation to invest in the contestant's business              6.869***        (3.102)     121
Ranking from 1=top to 13=bottom
      Panel ranking                                                           -1.293***      (-20.381)    121
      Average individual ranking                                                -0.504        (-1.250)    109
Each row corresponds to a regression of the variable listed on the left on a winner dummy.
Only winners and runners-up are used in these regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 6. Balance on time-invariant endline variables
                                                                               Winner         t-value   Nber obs.
      Age                                                                        0.190       (0.347)     109
      Female                                                                    -0.041       (-0.472)    111
      Married                                                                    0.084       (1.278)     105
      Number of children                                                         0.013       (0.474)     121
      Education scale (from 1=none to 7=university)                              0.212       (0.840)     106
      Speaks English                                                            -0.068       (-1.196)    111
Each row corresponds to a regression of the variable listed on the left on a winner dummy.
Only winners and runners-up are used in these regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 7. Attrition analysis
                                                              Surveyed
                                                                        Surveyed at Surveyed at
                                                             at endline
                                                                          endline      endline
                                           Competed Competed   (among
                                                                          (among       (among
                                                             competitor
                                                                        competitors) competitors)
                                                                  s)
                                             coef/t   coef/t    coef/t     coef/t       coef/t
Age (Years)                                    -0.012      -0.004                    0.013          0.009
                                             (-1.061)     (-0.315)                  (1.173)        (0.762)
Dummy: Male                                    -0.018      -0.009                    0.001          -0.016
                                             (-0.373)     (-0.182)                  (0.026)       (-0.318)
Highest level of education completed           -0.015      -0.014                   0.037**        0.039**
                                             (-0.821)     (-0.763)                  (2.001)        (2.096)
Dummy: Married                                 0.048       -0.031                    0.079          0.053
                                              (0.423)     (-0.281)                  (0.653)        (0.427)
Number of children                          -0.202***    -0.190**                 -0.381***      -0.418***
                                             (-2.615)     (-2.558)                 (-3.166)       (-3.373)
Dummy: Ever travelled abroad                -0.173***    -0.155***                   -0.051         -0.056
                                             (-3.666)     (-3.258)                 (-0.968)       (-1.058)
Dummy: Parents have a business                 -0.055      -0.033                    -0.018         -0.023
                                             (-1.329)     (-0.788)                 (-0.432)       (-0.541)
Dummy: Student (Omitted: "Other")              -0.347      -0.232                    -0.216         -0.268
                                             (-1.015)     (-0.522)                 (-0.825)       (-0.715)
Dummy: Employed (Omitted: "Other")             -0.422      -0.323                    -0.231         -0.273
                                             (-1.224)     (-0.724)                 (-0.867)       (-0.723)
Dummy: Unemployed (Omitted: "Other")           -0.458      -0.399                    -0.232         -0.275
                                             (-1.326)     (-0.894)                 (-0.870)       (-0.726)
Dummy: Business idea involves starting a
                                               -0.041       0.006                    -0.058         -0.078
new business
                                             (-0.754)     (0.115)                  (-1.064)       (-1.382)
Dummy: Would have a business partner?          -0.031      -0.002                    0.013          0.016
                                             (-1.270)     (-0.074)                  (0.520)        (0.636)
Dummy: Speaks English                         0.150**      0.132*                   -0.146*        -0.161*
                                              (2.073)     (1.739)                  (-1.847)       (-1.917)
Log(own money to be invested + 1)              0.006       -0.009                    -0.005         -0.004
                                              (0.943)     (-1.290)                 (-0.710)       (-0.574)
Percentage investment anticipated                        0.005***                                   -0.001
                                                          (5.215)                                 (-1.173)
Final panel ranking                                                    -0.007        -0.010         -0.011
                                                                     (-1.153)      (-1.481)       (-1.581)
Dummy: Winner                                                          -0.025        -0.052         -0.029
                                                                     (-0.367)      (-0.680)       (-0.364)
Constant                                     1.316***       0.743    0.878***       0.851**        1.110**
                                              (3.299)     (1.498)    (21.252)       (2.496)        (2.526)
Number of observations                       632         530          441         378            366
Adjusted R2                                  0.049       0.109       -0.001      0.023           0.030
All regressions are linear probability models. Standard errors are clustered by judging panel.
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 8. Impact evaluation
                                                         A. Basic specification                B. With additional controls (*)      C. With committee fixed effects
Employment outcomes                                      Winner       t-value    Obs.          Winner        t-value       Obs.     Winner           t-value       Obs.
    Self-employed (yes=1)                                  0.333***    (3.508)      104           0.423***       (3.715)    90         0.369***          (3.560)   104
    Self-employment hours per day                          2.509***    (2.849)          99        2.675***       (2.655)    85         2.966***          (3.401)    99
    Wage employed (yes=1)                                    -0.024 (-0.214)        104             -0.077      (-0.602)    90              0.009        (0.073)   104
    Wage employment hours per day                            -1.063 (-1.159)            99          -0.923      (-0.879)    85              -0.661       (0.669)    99
    Hours searching for employment per day                   -0.001 (-0.003)            99          -0.057      (-0.184)    85              -0.066       (0.203)    99
    Monthly reservation wage (US$)                         -74.986 (-0.167)         102          -238.504       (-0.345)    88          69.977           (0.782)   102
Firm performance
    Total sales (monthly average)                         277.249*     (1.919)      104         361.737**        (2.226)    90       313.459**           (2.154)   104
    Total costs (monthly average)                          147.526     (1.385)      104          209.231*        (1.755)    90        190.297*           (1.740)   104
    Reported profit (monthly average)                     149.103*     (1.808)      104         186.195**        (2.165)    90       201.377**           (2.370)   104
    Calculated profit = sales-costs                      128.092**     (2.265)      104         150.673**        (2.331)    90        121.281*           (2.403)   104
    Number of permanent employees                           2.035**    (2.281)      104           1.686***       (2.807)    90          2.117**          (2.395)   104
Income, expenditures and assets
    Toal earned income per month (in US$)                   10.541     (0.097)      108            50.050        (0.415)    95         161.187           (1.985)   108
    Expenditures by self on self                             2.032     (0.076)      105            18.959        (0.585)    91          29.241           (1.037)   105
    Expenditures by others on self                          19.184     (0.750)      105            26.845        (0.984)    91          36.787           (1.323)   105
    Expenditures by self on others                         -10.438 (-1.179)         105             -4.045      (-0.446)    91              7.119        (1.178)   105
    Value of durable goods                                 262.044     (0.407)      105           845.514        (1.212)    91         895.898           (1.478)   105
    Value of debt                                         -385.316 (-1.017)         105          -654.654       (-1.066)    91          -18.203          (0.403)   105
    Value of bank account                                  352.289     (1.497)      104         561.468**        (2.494)    90       547.270**           (2.758)   104
    Value of cash held                                      79.880     (1.205)      105            41.197        (0.794)    91          39.845           (0.474)   105
    Value of personal wealth (bank+cash-debt)             822.579*     (1.774)      104        1,263.256*        (1.904)    90        605.667*           (2.539)   104
Marriage
    Got married since competition                            0.027     (0.628)      111              0.005       (0.156)    97              0.040        (0.792)   111
Each row is a separate regression of the outcome variable on the left on a winner dummy. Only observations on winner runners-up are used.
Standard errors are clustered by judging panel. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
(*) The additional controls are: Q2, Q7, Q9 Q10, average individual rank, parents have a business, and speaks English.
