                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ARE PILOTS PROPERTY TAXES FOR NONPROFITS?

                                                 Fan Fei
                                          James R. Hines Jr.
                                            Jill R. Horwitz

                                         Working Paper 21088
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21088


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




The authors thank the Center for Local, State and Urban Policy at the University of Michigan for financial
support, seminar participants at the University of Michigan, UCLA, Stanford, University of Illinois,
and the National Tax Association annual conference for helpful comments, Lynn McClelland for research
assistance, and Daphne Kenyon for very useful discussions and data. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Fan Fei, James R. Hines Jr., and Jill R. Horwitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are PILOTs Property Taxes for Nonprofits?
Fan Fei, James R. Hines Jr., and Jill R. Horwitz
NBER Working Paper No. 21088
April 2015
JEL No. H25,L31

                                            ABSTRACT

Nonprofit charitable organizations are exempt from most taxes, including local property taxes, but
U.S. cities and towns increasingly request that nonprofits make payments in lieu of taxes (known as
PILOTs). Strictly speaking, PILOTs are voluntary, though nonprofits may feel pressure to make them,
particularly in high-tax communities. Evidence from Massachusetts indicates that PILOT rates, measured
as ratios of PILOTs to the value of local tax-exempt property, are higher in towns with higher property
tax rates: a one percent higher property tax rate is associated with a 0.2 percent higher PILOT rate.
PILOTs appear to discourage nonprofit activity: a one percent higher PILOT rate is associated with
0.8 percent reduced real property ownership by local nonprofits, 0.2 percent reduced total assets, and
0.2 percent lower revenues of local nonprofits. These patterns are consistent with voluntary PILOTs
acting in a manner similar to low-rate, compulsory real estate taxes.


Fan Fei                                            Jill R. Horwitz
Department of Economics                            University of California Los Angeles
University of Michigan                             School of Law
Lorch Hall                                         Box 951476
611 Tappan Street                                  Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                           and NBER
econfan@umich.edu                                  horwitz@law.ucla.edu

James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
343 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.       Introduction

         Nonprofit organizations are generally exempt from federal, state, and local taxes.1 Since
nonprofit organizations commonly generate little in the way of net income, one of the primary
benefits of their tax-exempt status lies in the exemption from local property taxes (Gentry and
Penrod, 2000). This exemption can distress cash-strapped towns and cities with significant
numbers of nonprofits. A tax-exempt nonprofit organization that locates in a town may deliver
valuable services, provide employment, and attract visitors and tax-paying residents, but its
ownership of local real estate lowers the property tax base and thereby reduces resources
otherwise available to town governments.

         In recent years, local governments have increasingly asked nonprofit organizations to
make payments in lieu of taxes, known as PILOTs. Although as a legal matter PILOTs are
voluntary – state property tax exemptions for charitable nonprofits are often guaranteed by
statute and, sometimes, by state constitutions – in practice they may not exhibit all of the
characteristics of truly voluntary transfers. Nonprofits benefit along with others from robust
fiscal conditions in their states and localities, and some nonprofits have collaborated with
municipalities to develop PILOT programs. But many nonprofits would not voluntarily divert
resources from their exempt purposes – indeed it is questionable whether they are permitted
legally to do so – in the absence of suasion by local governments. Unhappy governments can
make life difficult for nonprofits by limiting access to local public services, refusing to relieve
burdensome local regulation, or challenging tax exemptions on the basis of whether nonprofits
properly pursue their exempt purposes. In such environments nonprofits may feel pressure to
accede to local requests for PILOTs.




1
  Following convention, we use the term nonprofit to mean tax-exempt charities. Although the large majority of
nonprofit entities are exempt from federal and state taxes, not all nonprofits benefit from tax exemptions. The
Internal Revenue Code grants federal tax exemptions to the subset of nonprofits that have charitable purposes and
adhere to other requirements. The list of purposes includes “religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety,
literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports competition (but only if no part
of its activities involve the provision of athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty to children
or animals….” (Internal Revenue Code §501(c)(3)). State requirements for tax exemption vary. Some follow the
same requirements as the IRS; however, the definition of charity under state constitutional and statutory provisions
is often more stringent than the requirement for federal exemption.


                                                                                                                 1
       The purpose of this paper is to examine the determinants of PILOTs and the effect of
PILOTs on nonprofit activity. Since nonprofits are not required to disclose PILOTs on any
government filing, the available data consist of government financial disclosures identifying
PILOT receipts by town. Uniquely, the state of Massachusetts reports data on PILOT receipts by
its local jurisdictions, which the study analyzes to identify factors associated with PILOT
payments and their effect on the nonprofit sector.

       The evidence indicates that PILOT receipts by Massachusetts communities are positively
correlated with local property tax rates: a local property tax rate one percent higher is associated
with a 0.2 percent higher PILOT rate, controlling for values of taxable and exempt property in a
jurisdiction. This pattern suggests that PILOTs function as informal, low-rate substitutes for
property taxes to which taxable landowners would ordinarily be subject, and raises the possibility
that PILOTs might have other attributes of property taxes, including that they could discourage
nonprofit activity, particularly any activity associated with holding tax-exempt property. The
evidence from IRS Form 990 filings by Massachusetts nonprofits is consistent with this
interpretation of PILOTs, as higher PILOT rates are associated with reduced nonprofit assets and
revenues, and most dramatically, reduced real property holdings.

       Section 2 of the paper reviews the limited available evidence of the national scope of
PILOTs and their impact on the nonprofit sector. Section 3 presents a model of governmental
and nonprofit action that reconciles the voluntary nature of PILOTs with a potential effect of
PILOTs on nonprofit activity. Section 4 describes the Massachusetts PILOT data, and section 5
presents empirical estimates of the factors determining PILOTs and the effect of the resulting
payments on nonprofit activity. Section 6 concludes.




2.     PILOTs in Practice

       States and localities exempt nonprofits from taxation, thereby encouraging greater
nonprofit activity (Hansmann, 1987). In the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nonprofits that
are exempt from federal taxation under I.R.C. §501 are also exempt from Massachusetts excise
(income) taxes (Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, 2015). The board of assessors in each



                                                                                              2
Massachusetts municipality grants exemption from local property taxes according to state law,
and administers those exemptions. Roughly speaking, the property of religious entities
(Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, 2013a) and charities “established for literary,
benevolent, charitable, or temperance purposes,” and operated as such, are granted local property
and sales tax exemptions (Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, 2013a). Other categories of
nonprofits, such as country clubs that are not charities, may be exempt from property taxes under
other statutes. For example, statutes that use tax exemptions to protect open spaces are exempt
in Massachusetts (Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, 2013b). PILOTs provide a
mechanism for returning some of these foregone revenues to local governments.

         PILOTs have a long lineage, particularly in Massachusetts, where the Boston PILOT
program began in 1925 (Brody, 2010). Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, both tax-exempt, have made voluntary payments to the city of Cambridge since
1928. Although there are no comprehensive data on numbers of PILOTs or PILOT agreements
nationally, there is some evidence that the implementation of PILOTs is on the rise (Langley et
al., 2012).2 For example, Boston introduced a new PILOTs program in 2011 in which the city
requests payments from charities with property valued at more than $15 million, with the plan
that after a ramp up period these charities will make PILOTs equal to 25 percent of the full
amount a property owner would owe if the property were taxable; in addition, participating
charities may receive up to a 50 percent credit toward their PILOT for providing value in the
form of community benefits (Rakow, 2013). In fiscal year 2013 (July 1, 2012 – June 30, 2013),
Boston received $23.2 million in cash PILOTs out of $28.2 million requested; in fiscal year
2011, Boston received $15.2 million (City of Boston, 2013).

         Most recently, the Governor of Maine proposed a budget plan that would reduce
corporate and individual income taxes, repeal the estate tax, and eliminate state payments to
municipalities; municipalities would have some of these funds replaced by adhering to a
requirement to tax nonprofits, excluding churches and government-owned tax-exempt entities, at


2
  Leland (2002) reports the results of March 1998 surveys of municipal finance directors and community leaders in
73 cities, representing the 50 largest cities in the United States plus the largest cities in states that did not include one
of the top 50. Reliable information for 51 of these cities indicates that only seven solicited PILOTs in 1998, and
among these only Boston solicited PILOTs from a wide range of nonprofit organizations (for example, Boston
collected PILOTs from 38 organizations; Indianapolis only one). PILOTs have increased significantly since then.


                                                                                                                    3
fifty percent of the normal tax rate on assessed value over $500,000 in property (Halper, 2015;
Levitz, 2015). This proposal would require municipalities to include large nonprofits as part of
their tax bases, and is accompanied by withdrawal of state funds.

       Most PILOTs represent transfers from nonprofits to the relevant government authority,
and they can range greatly in size. In 2005, Harvard University agreed to a 50-year agreement
with Cambridge, under which it would pay $2.4 million to Cambridge in 2006, and increase that
amount by roughly three percent each year; MIT signed a similar 40-year agreement in 2004,
making a base payment of $1.5 million in 2005, with a 2.5 percent annual increase (Tartakoff,
2005). Some PILOTs are made from one level of government to another as compensation for
foregone taxes from public and charitable land. For example, the state of Connecticut
reimburses its municipalities for foregone taxes on state-owned land, including 100%
reimbursement for correctional facility land, some designated Mashantucket Pequot tribal land,
and for any town in which more than 50 percent of all property in the town is state-owned real
property; 65% for the Connecticut Valley Hospital facility; and 45% for all other property
(Connecticut Office of Policy & Management, 2014; Connecticut General Statutes Annotated,
2015a) and nonprofit-owned property (up to 77% for private, nonprofit hospitals and colleges)
(Connecticut General Statutes Annotated, 2015b). Massachusetts does not make such payments;
for example, in 1997 the Massachusetts legislature declined to pass a bill providing
municipalities PILOTs for property owned by nonprofit hospitals and institutions of higher
education (Massachusetts H.B. 624, 1997).

       State and local governments offer several justifications for their PILOT demands, the
primary one being the need for revenue. Removing charitable land from the property tax base
leaves local governments short on funds, which affects expenditures and shifts additional
financial burden onto other taxpayers (Deitrick and Briem, 2007). For example, in fiscal year
2013, 13.3 percent of the total property value of Andover, Massachusetts was tax exempt (Town
of Andover, 2013, pg. 2). According to estimates based on Ohio Department of Taxation data,
“[n]onprofit, government, tax-abated property accounted for 20.2 percent of the real property in
Cuyahoga County in Tax Year 2012,” and 44.9 percent of real property in Cleveland (Schiller
and Hileman, 2013). Removing property from the tax rolls is particularly consequential given
the importance of property taxes for state and local revenue. In 2010 property taxes accounted



                                                                                             4
for 35 percent of state and local tax revenues, and 18 percent of all state and local revenues
(Urban Institute Tax Policy Center Database) nationwide; in contrast, state and local individual
and corporate income taxes together accounted for only 16 percent of state and local tax
revenues.

       Given this reliance on property taxes, it is not surprising that estimates of foregone taxes
are also large. One estimate of foregone taxes from charitable property tax exemptions ranges
from $8 to $13 billion annually in 1997, or 1.3-2.1 percent of total U.S. nonprofit revenue
(Cordes et al., 2002). Similarly, Cordes et al. (2002) estimates that nonprofit property tax
exemptions in Philadelphia equal 6.2 percent of total nonprofit revenue. A Massachusetts
Department of Revenue Survey reported that in 2003 “the value of all exempt property,
governmental, religious, educational and charitable, was more than $87 billion,” or about twelve
percent of total property valued by municipalities (Massachusetts Department of Revenue, 2003,
p. 4). More specifically, the reported value of all tax-exempt educational and charitable
properties was more than $22 billion, or approximately three percent of the total property value
of the reporting communities. The same source estimates forgone property taxes of $505.8
million, or 5.8 percent of the total projected levy of Massachusetts communities in Fiscal Year
2003. And Cordes et al. (2002) estimates that for the more than 150,000 U.S. nonprofits with
greater than $500,000 of real property in 1997, the annual tax exemption was worth an average
of 19 percent of their total revenues.

       Aside from the practical need for revenues, some scholars have argued that it is
inequitable to offer tax exemptions to nonprofits that provide benefits to those who live
elsewhere, such as an urban hospital that provides services to suburban patients (Pomp, 2004;
Rokoff, 1973). Pomp (2004) notes that Connecticut makes payments to municipalities to offset
this apparent injustice.

       There are different ways to characterize PILOT payments. Some PILOTs take the form
of payments for services such as police or fire protection. Others are characterized as simple
donations, made for example to help a suffering locality get through a tough time, or investments
intended to make the locality more attractive and thereby improve the environment for the
nonprofit. And some PILOTs are made to forestall government actions that would impose costs




                                                                                               5
on nonprofits. These different characterizations have legal and perceptual effects that may affect
how willingly a nonprofit makes a payment.

       PILOTs are typically negotiated on an ad hoc basis, raising the problem that similar
charities are treated differently (Brody, 2012). This case-by-case negotiation makes it tempting
for localities to turn what are voluntary payments into semi-coerced payments. Charities have
complained to courts that tax authorities use PILOTs unfairly, threatening organizations in
impermissible ways, such as with challenges to their otherwise-valid tax exemptions or denials
of building permits if charities did not make financial payments or payments in kind to the
authority. In the 1940s, for example, the local school districts and township agreed to withdraw
their challenges to the proposed nonprofit incorporation of the Valley Forge Military Academy
Foundation if the Academy agreed to make PILOTs in the amount the Academy would have
ordinarily made in property taxes absent the exemption. (Radnor Township v. Valley Forge,
1970). Many years later, when the local government units sued the Academy for attempting to
cease payments, the court found for the school, explaining that a taxing body may not collect
taxes by contract and a government may not engage in “selling or bartering” its right to oppose
an organization seeking nonprofit status.

       There are many more recent examples of localities pressuring nonprofits for voluntary
payments. In one case, the plaintiff church complained that the town supervisor and
commissioners threatened to reject a request for a parking lot permit if the church did not make a
PILOT or donate a fire truck (Fortress Bible Church v. Feiner, 2010). In another case, tax-
exempt hospitals alleged that the government units were attempting to “coerce” or “force” tax-
exempt member hospitals to make payments in lieu of taxes by “indicat[ing] that those
[hospitals] which [did] not agree to such payments and/or agreement ‘in lieu of taxes’ [would]
have their tax exempt status challenged, [would] be likely to run into difficulties in obtaining
zoning approvals, and [would] not be offered the opportunity to provide services to the taxing
authority.” (Hospital Council v. City of Pittsburgh, 1991). In 2000, Northwestern University
filed a complaint against Evanston, Illinois alleging that the city imposed a historical district
ordinance on the university in retaliation for refusing to make PILOTs (Northwestern University
v. City of Evanston, 2001).




                                                                                               6
       Much of the previous empirical research on PILOTs is descriptive. In 1998, Leland
conducted a survey of public officials in 73 large cities, and identified PILOTs in only seven
cities and six states of the 51 respondents (Leland 2005). More recently, Kenyon and Langley
(2010) and Langley et al. (2012) report evidence of PILOTs and draw inferences about the
characteristics of localities that receive them. Using media accounts, government reports, other
sources, and a survey of 599 cities and towns with the largest nonprofit sectors (171
respondents), Langley et al. (2012) report that 218 localities in 28 states received PILOTs. They
find that PILOTs are concentrated in the northeastern part of the United States, with
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania communities accounting for more than half of the PILOT
recipients they identify. Universities and hospitals provide 92 percent of the measured PILOT
revenues, which is sensible given their considerable financial resources, though this may partly
reflect the survey method.




3.     Determination and Impact of PILOTs

       In the absence of external pressure nonprofit organizations are unlikely to provide
PILOTs to their local communities: despite their interest in the welfare of these communities,
nonprofits generally have much greater perceived need for resources than funds available to
satisfy those needs. Consequently, towns that seek PILOTs must offer nonprofits valuable
services in return, persuade nonprofits of the importance of making such payments, or suggest
the possibility of costly regulatory or other measures if they fail to provide PILOTs. Payments
received under threat of a worse alternative have much of the character of compulsory taxes, and
can be analyzed in a similar fashion.

       It is useful to consider the case in which a town approaches a nonprofit with a requested
PILOT that is expressed as  a  b   , in which a is a minimum payment that is possibly a

function of the nonprofit’s characteristics,  is the nonprofit’s property holding in the town, and
b is the extent to which PILOT requests rise with property holdings. The town encourages
compliance by making the nonprofit aware of the adverse consequences, to the nonprofit and to
the town, of failure to provide the PILOT. Failure to make a PILOT would thereby impede the



                                                                                              7
ability of nonprofits to pursue their missions, and would also be costly to the town, which
benefits from nonprofit services; but the town’s purpose is to encourage PILOT payments, not to
depress the quality of nonprofit performance. Other possible consequences of PILOT demands
are that some nonprofits may quit the town altogether, and others will respond by changing the
nature and scope of their operations, specifically by holding less real property either by scaling
back activities or by substituting into less property-intensive activities.

         Nonprofits that make PILOTs do not incur these costs, so the town benefits from the full
value of their services as well as from the PILOTs. There is nonetheless the consideration that
the nonprofit is still tax exempt, so the town loses the potential tax revenue that might otherwise
have been generated in the absence of the nonprofit. Consequently, the town’s value from
having a PILOT-paying nonprofit is given by:  a  b       , in which  is the value (to the

town) generated by a nonprofit, measured relative to the value of additional tax revenue, and 
is the foregone property taxes on the property held by the (tax-exempt) nonprofit. Alternatively,
a nonprofit that refuses to pay a PILOT and whose operations are thereby diminished by loss of
good will with (and value to) the community generates value for the town of       , in

which  reflects the loss of value (to the town) from soured relations with the nonprofit, and  is
property holding by a nonprofit that stays in town but does not make PILOTs. Nonprofits that
leave town or do not locate there in the first place because of the threat of pilots generate zero
value.

         An optimizing town chooses the parameters a and b of its PILOT demand to maximize
total value    :


(1)                              a  b       n1        n2 ,


in which n1 is the number of PILOT-paying nonprofits in the town and n2 is the number of

nonprofits that remain in town but do not pay PILOTs. Nonprofits differ in the extent to which
they are willing to accede to higher PILOT requests or will respond to higher requests by finding
alternative locations, reflecting the relative costs and benefits of alternative locations and the
differing costs of potential impairment to operations from uncomfortable relations with a town



                                                                                                8
whose PILOT request an organization refuses to meet. As a result, higher PILOT requests
discourage some of a town’s potential nonprofits from locating there, and dissuade a portion of a
town’s existing nonprofits from paying PILOTs. To capture a town’s incentives to demand
PILOTs it is not necessary to model explicitly a nonprofit’s benefits and costs of making PILOTs
or locating in different towns, as what matters for a town planner is the responsiveness of the
nonprofit sector as a whole.

          Differentiating the right side of (1) with respect to a and b produces:

                                                      n                 n
(2a)                           n1   a  b      1        2
                           a                           a                 a

                                                               n                 n
(2b)                   n1      b    n1   a  b      1        2 .
                  b          b                                   b                 b

The derivatives of n1 and n2 with respect to a and b on the right sides of (2a) and (2b) reflect the

impact of greater PILOT liability on the willingness of nonprofits as a group to locate in a
jurisdiction that requires PILOTs, and once there, to be willing to make PILOTs. From the
envelope condition, the burden of making a PILOT can be evaluated assuming that the nonprofit
does not change its ownership of real property in response, and the derivates of nonprofit activity
                          n1    n    n    n
should reflect this, so         1 and 2   2 . Making these substitutions, and
                          b     a    b    a
           
setting           0 produces:
          a   b

                                            
(3)                                             b    n1  0 .
                                            b

                                                            
          Since n1  0 , equation (3) implies either that       0 or that b   . If governments can
                                                            b
use two separate PILOT instruments (a and b) to extract resources from nonprofit organizations,
then as long as conditioning PILOT demands on property holdings effectively encourages
                                               
nonprofits to economize on real property      0  , towns have incentives to set b   . Real
                                          b     
property holdings by nonprofit organizations depress the local tax base, an effect that town


                                                                                                 9
governments can offset – for those nonprofits willing to make PILOTs – by imposing b   . The
                               
first-best characterized by           0 entails choosing the optimal combination of a and b to
                              a   b
generate a given total PILOT burden on nonprofits, but one challenge is that the optimum may
entail a < 0, since in setting b   a town might discourage nonprofits more than it wants to
unless it can offer an accompanying subsidy of the form a < 0.

       Are governments able to offer subsidies to nonprofits by making a < 0? If not, and
assuming that towns prefer total PILOT burdens to be below  , then PILOTs will be based
entirely on a nonprofit’s property holdings. The solution will be characterized by a = 0, the right
side of equation (2a) being negative, and the right side of equation (2b) being equal to zero. The
             n2
derivative       in equation (2b) is the change in the number of local nonprofits refusing to pay as
             b
a result of a change in a town’s PILOT demand. Since these organizations do not pay PILOTs,
the only reason why this derivative will have a nonzero value is that some of the nonprofits that,
at low PILOT rates, would make PILOTs and thereby avoid adverse relations with the town, no
longer do so as the PILOT rate increases. The nonprofits that stop making PILOTs either leave
the jurisdiction or stay and accept the consequences. Hence it is possible to
          n2     n
express         1 , in which 1    0 is the rate at which nonprofits that refuse to make
          b      b
PILOTs remain in a jurisdiction.

       With this definition of  , setting a and the right side of (2b) both equal to zero produces:


                                                               b    
                                                            1            
                                        1       b  
(4)                       b   1                                      .
                                                               n1 1
                                                                 
                                                                   a n1

Further simplification is available by defining




                                                                                                10
                                                  1
                                                 b 
(5)                                                   ,
                                                  n1 1
                                               
                                                  a n1

which together with (4) yields:

                                           
                                        
                                             1            1
(6)                        b   1                                   .
                                     1        1       
                                                                   n 1 1
                                                               a n1


       The left side of (6) is the PILOT rate (per value of real property) chosen by a government
that maximizes  . The first term on the right side of (6) indicates that higher property tax rates
are associated with greater PILOT demands, reflecting the costs that nonprofits impose on local
                                                                                     
governments in removing property from the tax rolls. Higher values of  , and of        , reduce the
                                                                                     
effect of local property tax rates on PILOT demands, since some nonprofits refusing to make
PILOTs will nonetheless remain in the community and thereby depress property tax collections.
Greater responsiveness of  to b, as measured by the semi-elasticity in the numerator of the right
side of (5), increases  and thereby (in (6)) increases b, reflecting the value of discouraging
nonprofits that make PILOTs from large holdings of otherwise-taxable property. A large semi-
elasticity of PILOT-compliant nonprofit activity with respect to a, which appears in the
denominator of the right side of (5), reduces  and thereby reduces b due to the potential effect of
high rates of b in discouraging nonprofit activity. The numerator of the second term on the right
side of (6) is a weighted average of  and  , with weights 1    on  , reflecting the potential

loss of nonprofit value if nonprofits leave a jurisdiction, and  on  , reflecting the cost of
soured relations with a nonprofit that defies the government’s request for a PILOT. Higher
values of  reduce the importance of these considerations for reasons similar to the effect of  on
the first term of the right side of equation (6). And the third term on the right side of (6)
indicates that greater responsiveness of the size of the nonprofit sector reduces PILOT demands.




                                                                                                  11
       Local jurisdictions with greater revenue needs will generally be more willing than others
to demand higher PILOTs at the expense of losing some nonprofit activity. There are two
aspects to this implication of the model. The first is that towns that perceive greater benefits of
government spending relative to private income will have higher property tax rates. Strictly
speaking,  , a and b are jointly determined, so the model should not be interpreted to deliver the
effect of changes in  on the values of a and b. As a practical matter, however, property tax
collections greatly exceed PILOT receipts, so  is a measure of local revenue needs, and one can
interpret the effect of  on PILOTs to reflect the impact of local revenue needs and the property
tax mechanism that towns are forced to use largely to meet these needs. The second sense in
which equation (6) captures the effect of revenue needs on PILOT demands comes from the
inclusion of  and  in the second term on the right side: lower values of  and  increase b.
Since  and  reflect a community’s valuation of nonprofit activity relative to its valuation of
tax revenue, greater absolute revenue needs translate into smaller values of  and  , and
therefore higher PILOT demands.

       The PILOT rate b in equation (6) therefore captures the effects of several potentially
competing considerations. If town governments had full information and the ability to commit
themselves to binding PILOT demands it would not be necessary to impose a PILOT schedule
that was a fixed linear function of nonprofit property holdings. Under those conditions a
government could instead design a system that discouraged property holding and incentivized
nonprofits to make PILOTs that, if they were any greater, would back the nonprofit into refusal.
In this scenario all nonprofits in a town would make PILOTs and none would remain as untaxed
entities with bad relations with the local government. It is the absence of some combination of
full information, ability to commit, and administrative coordination on the part of town
governments that makes actual PILOT demands resemble taxes, in that their actions are
insufficiently tailored to specific situations and are therefore apt to influence behavior in possibly
inefficient ways. Specifically, towns demanding PILOTs may scare away nonprofits that would
otherwise have provided valuable services to the community, and may have to live with the
consequences of sometimes soured relations with other nonprofits that stay in town but refuse to
make PILOTs.




                                                                                               12
4.      PILOTs Data

        Massachusetts communities are particularly successful in obtaining PILOTs from their
local nonprofits, and the Massachusetts Department of Revenue since 1995 has identified PILOT
receipts of each of its 351 local jurisdictions as part of the state’s annual financial reports.3
These financial reports also include information on local property tax levies, assessed values of
taxable and tax-exempt properties, and demographic and economic characteristics of local
Massachusetts jurisdictions that are culled by Massachusetts state agencies from information
reported in the 2000 Census. The demographic variables include total town population, race
(African-American and Hispanic populations), and education (numbers of adult residents with
high school degrees but no college education, some college education, and college graduates).
The economic variables include the town unemployment rate in 2000, sizes of youth (under 20)
and aged (over 65) populations, numbers of over-65 residents who live alone and in poverty,
numbers of households with annual incomes below $10,000, and numbers of households with
incomes above $50,000.

        Data on local nonprofit organizations, including their locations and financial information,
are based on Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings assembled by Guidestar and the National
Center for Charitable Statistics at the Urban Institute. Financial variables include the total assets
of a nonprofit organization, fixed assets (the sum of land, buildings, and equipment; this
information is available only since 1998), and total annual revenues. To avoid having the results
unduly affected by the crash of 2008 and subsequent recession, the analysis is restricted to 1995-
2007. The data provided by Guidestar and the NCCS were aggregated at the municipality level
(based on a nonprofit’s location as indicated on its Form 990 filling) for Massachusetts
jurisdictions for which Massachusetts Department of Revenue data were available.

        There are some limitations to these data. First, the data cover only Massachusetts, which
may limit the generalizability of the results. However, Massachusetts is a particularly good state


3
  PILOT receipts, property taxes, land values, property tax referenda results, and other characteristics of
Massachusetts communities are available on the Department of Revenue web site, http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-
officials/municipal-data-and-financial-management/data-bank-reports/. Additional demographic and economic
information on Massachusetts communities are reported on the state Health and Human Services web site,
http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/researcher/community-health/masschip/census-2000-1990-socio-demographic-
trends.html.


                                                                                                       13
to study, as it has a long history of negotiating PILOT agreements, and appears to be one of the
top PILOT-receiving states. As PILOTs spread around the country, it is valuable to understand
developments in a place where PILOTs have long been established. Moreover, city and town
governments are particularly strong in New England, where school districts and other
government bodies that rely on local tax receipts are organized at the town level. In other states,
where there are unincorporated areas and townships, county governments conduct these
functions and are governing equivalents of Massachusetts towns. Therefore, the fiscal issues
confronting Massachusetts towns might be treated as roughly equivalent to those facing counties
elsewhere, and Massachusetts offers considerable variation, since there are more Massachusetts
towns (351) than counties in any other state (e.g., Texas, the state with the greatest number of
counties, has only 254).

       Second, there are challenges in matching nonprofits to Massachusetts towns. Since a
nonprofit may own property and have activities in more than its home jurisdiction, the use of
Form 990 data to attribute nonprofit activity to a locality has the potential to introduce
measurement error into the classification of the location of nonprofit activity. Another issue is
that the data coverage is incomplete, as religious nonprofits, those with annual gross revenues
below $25,000, and certain other categories of nonprofits are not required to file Form 990, nor
are all the Form 990s submitted to the IRS available in the Guidestar and NCSS data base.
Partly as a consequence, there are no Form 990 filings for a small portion of these Massachusetts
towns (e.g., 23 out of the 351 towns have no Form 990 filings in 1997), which are treated in the
following analysis as though they have no nonprofit assets, despite Massachusetts Department of
Revenue data indicating that there positive nonprofit property holdings and in some cases
PILOTs. Notwithstanding these limitations, the data afford a reasonably accurate depiction of
the distribution of nonprofit activity within Massachusetts.




5.     PILOT Experiences in Massachusetts

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the sample of Massachusetts communities,
distinguished by their history of PILOT receipts: columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 present descriptive
statistics for the subset of 47 towns without PILOT receipts from 1995-2007 whereas columns 3


                                                                                             14
and 4 present descriptive statistics for the entire sample of 351 Massachusetts towns. Towns that
never received PILOTs have per capita incomes, land areas, and unemployment in 2000 that are
similar to those of the whole sample of Massachusetts communities. Towns receiving PILOTs
tend to be more urban, heavily populated, have more diverse populations, and have much higher
property tax receipts than other towns. Towns receiving PILOTs have extensive nonprofit
activity, though their nonprofits have lower average ratios of fixed assets (land, buildings, and
equipment) to total assets than do nonprofits in towns without PILOTs. It is possible to use the
Department of Revenue data to calculate average property tax rates by town, the ratios of
property tax receipts to market values of taxable properties; similarly, average PILOT rates by
town are ratios of PILOTs to market values of tax-exempt property. By these calculations,
PILOT rates are considerably lower than property tax rates. PILOT rates average 0.11 percent
over the sample period and are of course zero in the 47 towns without PILOTs, while property
tax rates average 1.40 percent over the sample period and are higher in the whole sample than
they are in towns without PILOTs.

       The Massachusetts Department of Revenue data can be used to estimate the extent to
which towns with higher average property tax rates also have higher average PILOT rates, as
implied by the model sketched in Section 3. Figure 1 depicts median 2007 PILOT rates of 10
groups of Massachusetts towns, distinguished by their average property tax rates in 2007. That
is, the leftmost bar in Figure 1 represents the median 2007 PILOT rate of the 35 towns with the
lowest property tax rates that year; the rightmost bar is the median PILOT rate of the 35 towns
with the highest property tax rates. The figure exhibits a gentle upward slope, and indicates that
towns with property tax rates in the three lowest deciles also have the lowest median PILOT
rates. The positive association of property tax rates and PILOT rates does not control for other
variables, such as town size, that might also influence PILOT rates, but is nonetheless
suggestive.

       Figure 2 plots median PILOT rates by property tax decile for two equal-sized subsets of
Massachusetts communities, distinguished by size: the bars on the left of Figure 2 present data
for towns with populations below the median of Massachusetts communities, and the bars on the
right of Figure 2 present data for towns with above-median populations. It is evident from the
figure that the positive relationship between property tax rates and median PILOT rates is more



                                                                                             15
pronounced for larger communities than it is for smaller communities, though even among small
Massachusetts towns it appears to be the case that higher property tax rates are generally
associated with higher PILOT rates. One of the difficulties of analyzing PILOT rate data for
small towns is that these ratios can be very sensitive to the behavior of small numbers of
nonprofits, and the resulting variability in measured PILOT rates can make it difficult to draw
clear inferences about the effect of property tax rates even if there is a strong causal effect. This
consideration, together with the reality that larger towns have greater economic and fiscal
consequences than smaller towns, motivates the use of regressions in which observations are
weighted by town populations. Estimated coefficients from regressions using unweighted
observations are presented in appendix tables.

        Equation (6) suggests that the determinants of PILOT rates in Massachusetts towns can
be estimated the following way:

(7)                                       bit   it   X it   it ,


in which bit is the PILOT rate in town i in year t,  it is the property tax rate in town i in year t,

X it is a vector of observable characteristics (population, income, demographics, and others) of

town i in year t,  is a parameter to be estimated, and  is a vector of parameters to be estimated;
 it is the residual. The empirical work in Tables 2-4 and Appendix Tables 1-2 presents estimates
of equation (7) using data for different years and specifications that include different observable
variables in the X it vector.

        Table 2 presents estimated coefficients from Tobit specifications of equation (7) for
2007, the most recent of the sample years. The dependent variable in these regressions is the
ratio of PILOTs to the market value of real property held by nonprofits in each town, which can
be referred to as the “PILOT rate.” The 0.210 coefficient in column 1 indicates that a one
percent higher property tax rate is associated with a 0.21 percent higher PILOT rate. The
regression reported in column 2 adds the log of town population as an independent variable, and
the resulting 0.166 coefficient on the property tax rate is a bit smaller in magnitude though still
statistically significant. The regression reported in column 3 adds demographic variables to the
specification, as result of which the estimated property tax rate coefficient declines further to


                                                                                                   16
0.135, though this coefficient increases in magnitude to 0.178 with the inclusion of additional
economic variables in the regression reported in column 4.

       The regression coefficients reported in Table 2 are consistent with the model’s
implication that higher property tax rates are associated with higher PILOT rates. The estimated
magnitude of the effect, that one percent higher property tax rates are associated with 0.178
percent higher PILOT rates, should be evaluated in the context of average property tax rates that
are almost 13 times higher than average PILOT rates. This corresponds to a 2.3 elasticity of
PILOT rates with respect to property tax rates, suggesting that PILOT rates are quite sensitive to
property rate differences. Property taxes and PILOTs are likewise positively associated and
statistically significant, with slightly smaller coefficient magnitudes, in the regressions
unweighted by population reported in Appendix Table 1.

       The positive association of property tax rates and PILOT rates in 2007 is repeated in
other years. Figure 3 presents data on property tax rates and PILOT rates over the 1995-2007
sample period. Towns are distinguished by average property tax rates over that period, and the
heights of the bars reflect median 13-year average PILOT rates of towns in each cell. The
patterns in Figure 3 are similar to those in Figure 2: among larger Massachusetts towns there is a
marked positive association of property tax rates and PILOT rates, whereas among smaller
Massachusetts towns the association, while still somewhat positive, is considerably noisier.

       Table 3 presents pooled estimates for 1995-2007 of the same equations estimated in
Table 2, including that observations are weighted by town population. The specifications
reported in Table 3 include year dummies, and the standard errors are clustered by municipality.
The results are quite consistent with those for 2007 reported in Table 2. The 0.289 coefficient in
column 1 indicates that one percent higher property tax rates are associated with 0.289 percent
higher desired PILOT rates, an effect that falls in magnitude to 0.211 with the addition of town
population as an independent variable in the regression reported in column 2, declines to 0.120
with the addition of demographic controls in the regression reported in column 3, and is 0.134
with the further addition of economic controls in the regression reported in column 4. These
property tax rate coefficients, while somewhat unstable across specifications, nonetheless are
statistically significant and of similar magnitudes to those reported in Table 2, and are also



                                                                                                 17
similar to the corresponding coefficients in the unweighted regressions reported in Appendix
Table 2.

       The model sketched in section 3 implies not only that towns with higher property tax
rates will have higher PILOT rates, but also that towns that can more credibly encourage
nonprofits to make PILOTs will have higher rates. In the model, credible encouragement to pay
takes the form of greater anticipated costs to nonprofits of soured relationships with towns whose
PILOT requests they refuse. It is difficult to obtain fully convincing measures of the credibility
of costs of refusing to make PILOTs, but municipal experience with property tax referenda offers
one measure. Massachusetts limits the extent to which municipalities can increase property tax
rates each year, requiring local referenda for certain rate increases. Over the 1995-2007 period,
141 of the 351 Massachusetts communities never had any property tax override referenda; 54
had one or more referenda all of which failed; 55 had one or more referenda all of which passed;
and 101 had multiple referenda, some of which passed and some of which failed. Consistent
failure to pass property tax referenda is a sign that voters do not support town administrators who
propose these referenda, and may reflect more generally a weakness of town administrators that
might empower nonprofits to think that they could resist PILOT requests without incurring
significant costs. If so, then towns with failed referenda might have lower PILOT rates.

       Figure 4 compares the 1995-2007 property tax override referendum experiences of
Massachusetts towns with high and low PILOT rates in 2007. Two groups of towns are
considered: those that had one or more referenda, all of which failed, and those that never had
referenda. In both cases there was no property tax override, which would presumably have
influenced property tax rates and arguably also PILOT rates, so this potential channel of
influence is the same for all of the observations. As Figure 4 illustrates, towns in which voters
consistently defeat property tax referenda had lower PILOT rates in 2007 than did towns that did
not have any property tax referenda from 1995-2007.

       Table 4 presents estimated coefficients from population-weighted regressions using 2007
data for the sample of 195 towns that either had referenda from 1995-2007 that all failed, or else
never had referenda during that time period. The specifications are similar to those in the
regressions presented in Table 2, the only difference being the inclusion of a dummy variable



                                                                                              18
indicating that a town never had property tax override referenda. The estimated property tax rate
coefficients are very similar to those reported in Table 2, and the estimated effect of the absence
of failed referenda is positive in all specifications (albeit of marginal statistical significance in
columns 2 and 3). The 0.0462 coefficient in column 4 indicates that PILOT rates are
significantly higher in towns that never had referenda than in towns with referenda that failed,
the difference corresponding to about 33 percent of average PILOT rates for the whole sample as
reported in Table 1.

         The Massachusetts data also afford some indication of the effect of PILOTs on nonprofit
activity. Figure 5 presents ratios of nonprofit fixed asset holdings to nonprofit total assets for 10
groups of Massachusetts towns, distinguished by size of town in 2000 and average PILOT rates
from 1998-2007; only towns with some nonprofit activity during this period are included in the
data used to construct the figure. The patterns of the bars depicted in the figure suggest that
ratios of fixed asset holdings to total assets decline with PILOT rates, which is consistent with
incentives created by PILOTs for nonprofits to economize on property holdings that trigger
PILOT obligations.4

         Table 5 presents estimated coefficients from OLS regressions explaining nonprofit assets,
revenues, and real property holdings in Massachusetts towns. The regressions reported in
columns 3-6 use data for 1995-2007, while the regressions reported in columns 1-2 and 7-8,
which use information on real property holdings that start only in 1998, use data for 1998-2005.
The observations are pooled, and are weighted by population; the specifications include year
dummies and cluster standard errors by municipality. All of the specifications include town
population and median household income (in 1999) as control variables; regressions reported in
even-numbered columns add the same demographic and economic control variables used in
Tables 2-4.

         Columns 1-2 of Table 5 report estimated coefficients from regressions in which the
dependent variable is the log of aggregate nonprofit fixed asset holdings. The -0.801 coefficient

4
  The pattern in Figure 5 is also consistent with PILOT obligations being increasing functions of nonprofit non-fixed
asset holdings, which would induce a negative correlation between measured PILOT rates and ratios of fixed to total
assets. While this possibility is not an implication of the model in section 3, it is nonetheless difficult to rule out,
and may affect the interpretation of the strength of the pattern in Figure 5 and the coefficient magnitudes in the
related regressions reported in columns 7-8 of Table 5.


                                                                                                                19
in column 1 indicates that a one percent higher PILOT rate is associated with a 0.8 percent
reduction in nonprofit property holding over the sample period. This regression also includes as
independent variables the log of local population and the log of per capita household income in
1999, both of which have positive and significant associations with nonprofit fixed assets. The
magnitude of the estimated PILOT rate coefficient falls to -0.662 in the column 2 regression in
which additional demographic and economic control variables are included, but remains
statistically significant.

        The large magnitudes of the estimated PILOT rate effects in the regressions reported in
columns 1-2 of Table 5 are consistent with PILOTs significantly influencing nonprofit property
holdings, but also raise the possibility that variable construction may influence the estimated
coefficients. The PILOT rate is the ratio of PILOT receipts to nonprofit property holdings, so
classical measurement error in nonprofit property holdings generates a negative correlation
between the measured PILOT rate and nonprofit property. In evaluating the likely role that the
resulting bias might play in this regression, it is noteworthy that the data used in constructing the
dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns 1-2 (Form 990 data from nonprofit
filings) differ from the data used to construct PILOT rates (Massachusetts Department of
Revenue data on local property assessments). While this difference addresses part of the
potential for bias it does not address all of it, since unexplained differences in true nonprofit
property holdings that somehow do not translate directly into differences in PILOTs will affect
both measures.

        Columns 3-4 of Table 5 report estimated coefficients from regressions in which the
dependent variable is the log of total nonprofit assets. The -0.211 coefficient in column 3
indicates that nonprofits in towns with higher PILOT rates have fewer assets, though this effect
is between one-quarter and one-third as strong as the effect of PILOTs on fixed asset holdings.
The -0.0741 coefficient in the regression reported in column 4 that includes additional
demographic and economic controls is considerably smaller in magnitude and not statistically
significant.

        Columns 5-6 of Table 5 report estimated coefficients from regressions in which the
dependent variable is the log of nonprofit revenue. The -0.204 coefficient in column 5 indicates



                                                                                               20
that one percent higher PILOT rates are associated with 0.2 percent lower nonprofit revenue, an
effect that declines significantly in magnitude to 0.08 percent, and becomes statistically
insignificant, in the column 6 regression that includes additional control variables. From the
evidence presented in columns 3-6 of Table 5 it appears that higher PILOT rates are generally
associated with reduced nonprofit activity as reflected in asset holdings and total revenue, but
that this effect is considerably weaker than the effect of PILOTs on fixed asset holdings.

       The regressions presented in columns 7 and 8 of Table 5 estimate the effect of PILOT
rates on ratios of fixed assets to total assets. These regressions omit observations from towns
with no nonprofit activity. The -0.661 coefficient in column 7 indicates that fixed asset holdings
decline significantly as a fraction of total assets as PILOT rates increase. Inclusion of additional
control variables in the regression reported in column 8 has little effect on this estimated
association.

       Consequently, it appears that one of the primary effects of higher PILOT rates is to
change the nature of nonprofit activity in a jurisdiction, moving it away from the use of property
that would otherwise be subject to taxation. In the process, higher PILOT rates also appear to
discourage nonprofit activity in general. Unfortunately, these regressions are unable to
distinguish whether these effects take the form of changing the places in which nonprofit
organizations choose to locate, changing the local activities of nonprofits that remain despite
higher PILOT rates, or changing the rates at which nonprofits are formed and dissolved, though
hopefully that will be a topic for future research.




6.     Conclusion

       The Massachusetts evidence is consistent with a model in which municipalities make
PILOT demands that are increasing functions of local property tax rates, reflecting community
needs and the costs that nonprofits impose by reducing the local tax base. These PILOT
demands have effects similar to those of property and other taxes in discouraging nonprofit
activity, particularly real property holdings of nonprofit organizations. Since PILOTs are
individually negotiated and nominally voluntary, it is striking that they would have such effects.



                                                                                               21
This pattern suggests that Massachusetts communities are unable to tailor their PILOT demands
with sufficient precision to be able to extract resources from nonprofits without also influencing
their behavior. The pattern also suggests that nonprofits are sufficiently concerned about the cost
of current and future PILOT burdens that they adjust their behavior in response.

       These tax-like features of PILOTs raise the possibility that, despite their voluntary nature,
PILOT payments may share many of the distributional and efficiency characteristics of property
taxes, including the impact of fiscal competition. Governments eager to attract nonprofit activity
might limit, or avoid making, PILOT demands, much in the way that local governments compete
over tax rates (Wilson, 1986; Zodrow and Mieszkowski, 1986; Bucovetsky, 1991; Hoyt, 1991;
Wilson and Wildasin, 2004) and in offering business development incentives (Bartik, 1991;
Anderson and Wassmer, 1995; Fisher and Peters, 1998; Man, 1999; Gibson, 2003; Felix and
Hines, 2013). There has been mixed evidence of the effect of enterprise zones, property tax
abatements, and other tax-related incentives on business location decisions and economic
development (Papke, 1994; Boarnet and Bogart, 1996; Dye and Merriman, 2000; O’Keefe, 2004;
Hanson, 2009; Neumark and Kolko, 2010), though more recent evidence that preferential tax
treatment significantly increases economic activity (Busso et al., 2013; Rohlin et al., 2014) is
consistent with nonprofits being attracted to locations that make fewer PILOT demands.

       In an era of strained public finances it is understandable that towns might seek payments
from nonprofits that are otherwise exempt from local property taxes. In doing so it is important
for towns to be aware of the possible consequences of PILOTs for the nature and volume of local
nonprofit activity, and the extent to which nonprofits respond to PILOTs much in the way that
taxable entities respond to real estate taxes. Given the fiscal challenges that many U.S. towns
face, there are likely to be growing calls for PILOTs, and quite possibly growing resistance from
nonprofit organizations. It remains to be seen what effect this process has on local public
finances and on relations between governments and nonprofits.




                                                                                              22
References

Anderson, John E. and Robert W. Wassmer, The decision to ‘bid for business’: Municipal
      behavior in granting property tax abatements, Regional Science and Urban Economics,
      December 1995, 25 (6), 739-757.
Bartik, Timothy, Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?
        (Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1991).
Boarnet, Marlon G. and William T. Bogart, Enterprise zones and employment: Evidence from
      New Jersey, Journal of Urban Economics, September 1996, 40 (2), 198-215.
Brody, Evelyn, All charities are property-tax exempt, but some charities are more exempt than
       others, New England Law Review, 2010, 44 (3), 621-732.
Brody, Evelyn, Mayra Marquez, and Katherine Toran, The charitable property-tax exemption
       and PILOTs, Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center (Aug. 2012),
       http://tpcprod.urban.org/UploadedPDF/412640-The-Charitable-Property-Tax-Exemption-
       and-PILOTs.pdf.
Bucovetsky, Sam, Asymmetric tax competition, Journal of Urban Economics, September 1991,
      30 (2), 167-181.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a
       prominent place based policy, American Economic Review, April 2013, 103 (2), 897-947.
City of Boston, PILOT Requests for FY 2013,
        http://www.cityofboston.gov/assessing/PILOTProgram.asp, (accessed December 17,
        2013).
Connecticut General Statutes Annotated
       §12-19a (West 2015a).
       §12-20a (West 2015b).
Connecticut Office of Policy and Management, State-owned property – Payment in lieu of taxes,
      available at http://www.ct.gov/opm/cwp/view.asp?A=2985&Q=383162 (last accessed
      January 27, 2014).
Cordes, Joseph J., Marie Gantz, and Thomas Pollak, What is the property-tax exemption worth?
       In Evelyn Brody ed., Property-tax exemption for charities: Mapping the battlefield
       (Washington DC: Urban Institute Press 2002), 81-112.
Deitrick, Sabina and Christopher Briem, The impact of nonprofit, large landowners on public
       finance in a fiscally distressed municipality: A case study of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
       Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Working Paper WP07SD1, 2007.
Dye, Richard F. and David F. Merriman, The effects of tax increment financing on economic
       development, Journal of Urban Economics, March 2000, 47 (2), 306-328.


                                                                                            23
Felix, R. Alison and James R. Hines Jr., Who offers tax-based business development incentives?
        Journal of Urban Economics, May 2013, 75 (1), 80-91.
Fisher, Peter S. and Alan H. Peters, Industrial incentives: Competition among American states
        and cities (Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1998).
Fortress Bible Church v. Feiner, 734 F. Supp. 2d 409 (S.D.N.Y. 2010).
Gentry, William M. And John R. Penrod, The tax benefits of not-for-profit hospitals, in David
       M. Cutler ed., The changing hospital industry: Comparing not-for-profit and for-profit
       institutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 285-324.
Gibson, Diane, Neighborhood characteristics and the targeting of tax increment financing in
      Chicago, Journal of Urban Economics, September 2003, 54 (2), 309-327.
Halper, Zach, Maine nonprofits targeted in property tax plan, Nonprofit Times, January 28,
        2015, available at http://www.thenonprofittimes.com/news-articles/maine-nonprofits-
        targeted-property-tax-plan/ (last accessed January 31, 2015).
Hansmann, Henry, The effect of tax exemption and other factors on the market share of
     nonprofit versus for-profit firms, National Tax Journal, March 1987, 40 (1), 71-82.
Hanson, Andrew, Local employment, poverty, and property value effects of geographically-
      targeted tax incentives: An instrumental variables approach, Regional Science and Urban
      Economics, November 2009, 39 (6), 721-731.
Hospital Council v. City of Pittsburgh, 949 F. 2d 83 (3rd Cir. 1991).
Hoyt, William H., Property taxation, Nash equilibrium, and market power, Journal of Urban
       Economics, July 1991, 30 (1), 123-131.
Internal Revenue Code §501(c)(3).
Kenyon, Daphne A. and Adam H. Langley, Payments in lieu of taxes: Balancing municipal and
      nonprofit interests, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Policy Focus Report PF 028, 2010.
Langley, Adam H., Daphne A. Kenyon, and Patricia C. Bailin, Which nonprofits make PILOTs
      and which localities receive them, State Tax Notes, October 1, 2012, 137 (1), 31-43.
Leland, Pamela, PILOTs: The large-city experience, in Evelyn Brody ed., Property-tax
       exemption for charities: Mapping the battlefield (Washington DC: Urban Institute Press,
       2002), 193-210.
Leland, Pamela, Payments-in-lieu-of-taxes: A revenue-generating strategy for central cities, in
       Fritz W. Wagner ed., Revitalizing the city (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2005), 201-225.
Levitz, Jennifer, Maine Gov. LePage wants to tax big nonprofits, The Wall Street Journal,
        January 23, 2015 available at http://www.wsj.com/articles/maine-gov-lepage-wants-to-
        tax-big-nonprofits-1422048040 (Last accessed January 31, 2015).




                                                                                           24
Man, Joyce Y., Fiscal pressure, tax competition and the adoption of tax increment financing,
       Urban Studies, June 1999, 36 (7), 1151-1167.
Massachusetts Department of Revenue, Division of Local Services, A study of charitable and
      educational property tax exemptions, 2003.
      http://leesix.com/images/Exempt%20Property%20report%20%282%29.pdf
Massachusetts General Laws Annotated.
       Ch. 59, §5 (West 2013a).
       Ch. 61B, §1 (West 2013b).
       Ch. 63, §38Y (West 2015).
Massachusetts House Bill 624, 181st General Court (1997).
Neumark, David and Jed Kolko, Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence from California’s
     enterprise zone program, Journal of Urban Economics, July 2010, 68 (1), 1-19.
Northwestern University v. City of Evanston, 2001 WL 219632 (N.D. Ill. March 6, 2001)
O’Keefe, Suzanne, Job creation in California’s enterprise zones: A comparison using a
      propensity score matching model, Journal of Urban Economics, January 2004, 55 (1),
      131-150.
Papke, Leslie E., Tax policy and urban development: Evidence from the Indiana enterprise zone
       program, Journal of Public Economics, May 1994, 54 (1), 37-49.
Pomp, Richard D., State tax reform: Proposals for Wisconsin, Marquette Law Review, 2004, 88
      (1), 45-91.
Radnor Township School District v. Valley Forge Military Academy 58 Del.Co. 319, 59 Pa.DD.
      & C.2d 768 (Pa.Com.Pl.) (1970).
Rakow, Ronald W., Payments in lieu of taxes: The Boston experience, Lincoln Institute of Land
      Policy, Land Lines, January 2013, 25 (1), 2-7.
Rohlin, Shawn, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and Amanda Ross, Tax avoidance and business location in a
       state border model, Journal of Urban Economics, September 2014, 83, 34-49.
Rokoff, Gerald, Note, Alternatives to the university property tax exemption, Yale Law Journal,
       November 1973, 83 (1), 181-196.
Schiller, Zach and Chris Hileman, Hospitals would owe millions if exempt properties were
        taxed, Policy Matters Ohio, Tax Policy (December 2013). Available at
        http://www.policymattersohio.org/hospitals-dec2013#_ftn2 (last accessed January 27,
        2014).




                                                                                          25
Tartakoff, Joseph M., Harvard reaches PILOT deal with city, The Harvard Crimson, (February 2,
       2005) available at http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2005/2/2/harvard-reaches-pilot-
       deal-with-city/ (last accessed, January 27, 2014).
Town of Andover, Massachusetts, PILOTs: Payments in lieu of taxes, Andover Town Manager’s
      Office (July, 2013).
Urban Institute, Tax Policy Center Website http://slfdqs.taxpolicycenter.org/ (last accessed
       January 28, 2015).
Wilson, John D., A theory of interregional tax competition, Journal of Urban Economics, May
      1986, 19 (3), 296-315.
Wilson, John Douglas and David E. Wildasin, Capital tax competition: Bane or boon? Journal of
      Public Economics, June 2004, 88 (6), 1065-1091.
Zodrow, George R. and Peter Mieszkowski, Pigou, Tiebout, property taxation and the under-
      provision of local public goods, Journal of Urban Economics, May 1986, 19 (3), 356-
      370.




                                                                                           26
                                            Figure 1
                    PILOT Rates and Property Tax Rates in 2007




Note to Figure 1: The figure presents median 2007 PILOT rates for 10 groups of Massachusetts
towns, distinguished by their average property tax rates in 2007. A town’s PILOT rate is the
ratio of its PILOT receipts to the market value of nonprofit property; its average property tax rate
is the ratio of property tax collections to the market value of taxable property. Towns in the first
property tax decile from the left have the lowest property tax rates, whereas those in the tenth
property tax decile have the highest property tax rates. The heights of the bars depict the median
PILOT rates of towns in each group.




                                                                                             27
                                             Figure 2
            2007 PILOT and Property Tax Rates, by Municipality Size




Note to Figure 2: The figure presents median 2007 PILOT rates for 20 groups of Massachusetts
towns, distinguished by size of town in 2000 and average property tax rates in 2007. The left
figure depicts data for Massachusetts towns with below-median populations; the right figure
depicts data for Massachusetts towns with above-median populations. A town’s PILOT rate is
the ratio of its PILOT receipts to the market value of nonprofit property; its average property tax
rate is the ratio of property tax collections to the market value of taxable property. Towns in the
first property tax decile from the left in each of the two graphs have the lowest property tax rates,
whereas those in the tenth property tax decile have the highest property tax rates. The heights of
the bars depict the median PILOT rates of towns in each group.




                                                                                              28
                                           Figure 3
        PILOT and Property Tax Rates, 1995-2007, by Municipality Size




Note to Figure 3: The figure presents median PILOT rates for 20 groups of Massachusetts towns,
distinguished by size of town in 2000 and average property tax rates from 1995-2007. The left
figure depicts data for Massachusetts towns with below-median populations in 2000; the right
figure depicts data for Massachusetts towns with above-median populations. A town’s average
PILOT rate is the average over the 13-year sample of its annual ratios of PILOT receipts to
market values of nonprofit property; its average property tax rate is the 13-year average ratio of
its property tax collections to the market value of its taxable property. Towns in the first
property tax decile from the left in each of the two graphs have the lowest property tax rates,
whereas those in the tenth property tax decile have the highest property tax rates. The heights of
the bars depict the median PILOT rates (13-year averages) of towns in each group.




                                                                                           29
                                          Figure 4
                  PILOT Rates and Property Tax Referenda, 2007




Note to Figure 4: The figure reports numbers of towns in groups distinguished by average
PILOT rates in 2007 and property tax referendum experience from 1995-2007. The two left bars
depict towns with below-median PILOT rates, in which the median is calculated based on all 351
Massachusetts towns; the right figure depicts towns with above-median PILOT rates. A town’s
PILOT rate is the ratio of its PILOT receipts to the market value of nonprofit property. The
heights of the lightly shaded bars depict numbers of towns in each group that had property tax
referenda that all failed during 1995-2007; the heights of the darkly shaded bars depict numbers
of towns that had no property tax referenda at all during 1995-2007.




                                                                                         30
                                           Figure 5
     Fixed Asset Ratios and PILOT Rates, 1998-2007, by Municipality Size




Note to Figure 5: The figure presents ratios of nonprofit fixed asset holdings to nonprofit total
assets for 10 groups of Massachusetts towns, distinguished by size of town in 2000 and average
PILOT rates from 1998-2007. The left figure depicts data for Massachusetts towns with below-
median populations in 2000; the right figure depicts data for Massachusetts towns with above-
median populations. A town’s average PILOT rate is the average from 1998-2007 of its annual
ratios of PILOT receipts to market values of nonprofit property. Towns in the first PILOT
quintile from the left in each of the two graphs have the lowest PILOT rates, whereas those in the
fifth PILOT quintile have the highest PILOT rates. The heights of the bars depict the median
fixed-asset ratios (10-year averages) of towns in each group. Towns without any nonprofit
activity from 1998-2007 are omitted from these data.




                                                                                           31
                                            Table 1:
                       Variable Means and Standard Deviations
                                                            No PILOTs               All Towns
  Number of Observations                                          47                     351
                                                         Mean           S.d.     Mean          S.d.
  Property and Payments
    PILOT Receipts, in $ m                                 0              0      0.258      2.073
    PILOT Rate, in %                                       0              0      0.109      0.420
    Property Taxes, in $ m                               12.822        14.043   25.239     62.341
    Property Tax Rate, in %                              1.289          0.399    1.402      0.382
    % Property Owned by Nonprofits                       7.518          3.694    9.914      6.321
  Nonprofit Activities
    Total Assets, in $ m                                 31.028        73.254   374.025 3645.842
    Total Revenue, in $ m                                15.923        42.665   151.475 1282.39
    Fixed Assets, in $ m                                 8.731         19.271    67.602 502.173
    Share of Fixed Assets in Total Assets, in %          32.040        24.738   27.162   21.733
  Municipality Characteristics
    Population                                           8,374          9,390   17,957     36,502
    Median Household Income                              73,712        25,792   73,782     23,499
    Per Capita Income                                    35,116        11,903   34,455     10,985
    City Status (1 if City, 0 if Town)                   0.064          0.245    0.157      0.364
    Land Area, in sq miles                               23.606        10.967   22.336     12.431
    Public Road Mileage, in miles                        79.734        53.639   103.230    82.433
  Demographic Variables
    % of White Population                                97.422         2.855   93.868      8.684
    % of Black Population                                0.754          0.906    1.664      3.042
    % of Hispanic Population                             1.096          1.560    2.554      5.472
    % of High School Graduates                           28.843         9.355   28.007      8.460
    % of Some College                                    27.017         6.483   26.148      5.049
    % of College Graduates                               33.438        15.579   34.515     15.574
  Economic Variables
    Unemployment Rate                                    7.902          2.632    7.831      2.629
    % of People under 20                                 24.058         4.103   24.342      4.173
    % of People over 65, Living Alone and in Poverty     0.537          0.410    0.554      0.369
    % of People over 65                                  0.133          0.042    0.134      0.044
    % of Households with Income < $10K                   5.551          3.370    6.014      3.361
    % of Households with Income > $50K                   54.145        15.453   55.304     13.256



Note to Table 1: The table presents means and standard deviations of variables used in the
regressions presented in Tables 2-5 and Appendix Tables 1-2. The first two columns present
means and standard deviations of the regression variables for the 47 towns that never collected


                                                                                                 32
PILOTs from 1995-2007, whereas the third and fourth columns present means and standard
deviations of the regression variables for the whole sample of 351 Massachusetts towns.
“PILOT receipts, in $ m” is aggregate town PILOT receipts in millions of real 2005 dollars
(calculated using the Implicit Price Deflator of State and Local Government Expenditures and
Gross Investment provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis). “PILOT rate” is the ratio of
town PILOT receipts to the market value of its nonprofit property, expressed as a percentage.
“property taxes, in $ m” is aggregate town property tax receipts in millions of real 2005 dollars.
“Property tax rate” is the ratio of town property tax receipts to the market value of its taxable
property, expressed as a percentage. “% of property owned by nonprofits” is the ratio of the
market value of property owned by nonprofits to the sum of the market value of nonprofit
property plus the market value of taxable property. “Total Assets, in $ m” is total assets (in 2005
dollars) reported on Form 990 by nonprofit organizations located in a town; “Total Revenue, in $
m” is total revenue (in 2005 dollars) of the same nonprofit organizations as reported on Form
990; “Fixed Assets, in $ m” is the sum of the market values of land, building, and equipment
owned by local nonprofits as reported on Form 990; and “Share of Fixed Assets in Total Assets,
in %” is the product of 100 and the ratio of Fixed Assets to Total Assets. “Population” is annual
town population; “Median household income” and “Per capita income” are based on data from
2000 census and correspond to calendar year 1999; “City status” takes the value 1 for cities 0 for
towns, and “Land area” is measured in square miles, both of these variables corresponding to
2000; and “Public road mileage” is measured in linear miles and reported every year. All of the
“Demographic variables and “Economic variables” are Census figures for 2000, with the
exception of the town unemployment rate, which is reported every year; they are all expressed as
percentages. “% of white population” is the ratio of a town’s white population in 2000 to its
total population in 2000; “% of black population” is the ratio of a town’s black population in
2000 to its total population in 2000; “% of Hispanic population” is the ratio of a town’s Hispanic
population in 2000 to its total population in 2000; “% of high school graduates” is the ratio of a
town’s residents in 2000 who graduated from high school but did not attend college to its total
population in 2000; “% of some college” is the ratio of a town’s residents in 2000 who attended
college but did not graduate to its total population in 2000; and “% of college graduates” is the
ratio of a town’s residents in 2000 who graduated from college to its total population in 2000.
“% of people under 20” is the ratio of a town’s residents in 2000 younger than 20 to its total
population in 2000; “% of people over 65, living alone and in poverty” is the ratio of a town’s
residents in 2000 younger over 65 and with incomes below the poverty line to its total population
in 2000; “% of people over 65” is the ratio of a town’s residents in 2000 over 65 to its total
population in 2000; “% of households with income < $10K” is the ratio of the number of
households with total household incomes below $10,000 in 2000 to the total number of
households in 2000; “% of households with income > $50K” is the ratio of the number of
households with total household incomes above $50,000 in 2000 to the total number of
households in 2000.




                                                                                            33
                                      Table 2:
                   Determinants of PILOT Rates in 2007

                                                (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)


Property Tax Rate, in %                       0.210***    0.166*** 0.135***    0.178***
                                              (0.0547)    (0.0553) (0.0460)    (0.0587)
Log (Population)                                         0.0246*** 0.0201        0.0255
                                                         (0.00535) (0.0141)    (0.0156)
% of White Population                                               0.00364     0.00435
                                                                   (0.00235)  (0.00332)
% of Black Population                                               0.00434    0.00673*
                                                                   (0.00265)  (0.00403)
% of Hispanic Population                                           0.00670**  0.00924**
                                                                   (0.00267)  (0.00435)
% of High School Graduates                                          0.00219    -0.00214
                                                                   (0.00252)  (0.00573)
% of Some College                                                  -0.000383   -0.00369
                                                                   (0.00309)  (0.00614)
% of College Graduates                                              0.00126    -0.00145
                                                                   (0.00142)  (0.00444)
Unemployment Rate                                                               0.00802
                                                                              (0.00575)
% of People under 20                                                           -0.00498
                                                                              (0.00397)
% of People over 65                                                              0.0782
                                                                                (0.335)
% of People over 65, Living Alone and in Poverty                               0.000588
                                                                               (0.0555)
% of Households with Income < $10K                                              -0.0168
                                                                               (0.0163)
% of Households with Income > $50K                                            -0.000894
                                                                              (0.00267)
Constant                                         -0.182*** -0.391*** -0.773**    -0.447
                                                  (0.0590) (0.0693)   (0.342)   (0.551)

Observations                                    351         351       351       351
Pseudo R-squared                               0.169       0.210     0.244     0.280
F-stat                                         14.68       21.06     8.100     7.421




                                                                                      34
Note to Table 2: The table presents estimated coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the
dependent variable is the ratio of town PILOT receipts in 2007 to the market value of its
nonprofit property in 2007, expressed as a percentage. Observations are weighted by town
population. Among the independent variables, the town property tax rate, town population, and
town unemployment rate are all 2007 values; all other variables correspond to 2000.




                                                                                         35
                                          Table 3:
                        Determinants of PILOT Rates, 1995-2007


                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)

             Property Tax Rate, in %     0.289***   0.211**    0.120**    0.134**
                                          (0.109)   (0.105)    (0.0585)   (0.0577)

             Log (Population)                       0.0408**    0.0264    0.0351*
                                                    (0.0159)   (0.0198)   (0.0211)

             Constant                    -0.357**   -0.654**    -1.149*    -0.646
                                          (0.169)    (0.243)    (0.697)    (0.903)

             Demographic Controls           N          N          Y          Y
             Economic Controls              N          N          N          Y
             Year dummies                   Y          Y          Y          Y

             Observations                 4,547      4,547      4,534      4,534
             Pseudo R-squared             0.0673     0.0791     0.104      0.116
             F-stat                       2.280      1.706      2.180      2.066


Note to Table 3: The table presents estimated coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the
dependent variable is the ratio of town PILOT receipts to the market value of its nonprofit
property, expressed as a percentage. The sample includes observations from 1995-2007.
Observations are weighted by town population, and standard errors are clustered by municipality.
All of the regressions include year dummy variables; the regression reported in column 3
includes the six “Demographic Variables” listed in Table 1; and the regression reported in
column 4 includes the six “Demographic Variables” listed in Table 1 plus the six “Economic
Variables” listed in Table 1. Among the independent variables, the town property tax rate, town
population, and town unemployment rate are all 2007 values; all other variables correspond to
2000.




                                                                                         36
                                          Table 4:
               2007 PILOT Rates and Tax Referenda Experience


                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)

Property Tax Rate, in %                        0.200***    0.161**      0.124**     0.172**
                                               (0.0647)    (0.0721)     (0.0615)    (0.0744)
Dummy (No Referendum)                          0.0572**    0.0452*      0.0504*    0.0462**
                                               (0.0231)    (0.0270)     (0.0280)    (0.0227)
Log (Population)                                          0.0223***     0.0317*     0.0377*
                                                          (0.00823)     (0.0181)    (0.0210)
% of White Population                                                 0.00619**     0.00548
                                                                       (0.00314)   (0.00423)
% of Black Population                                                  0.00548*    0.00902*
                                                                       (0.00313)   (0.00514)
% of Hispanic Population                                              0.00942***   0.0117**
                                                                       (0.00333)   (0.00569)
% of High School Graduates                                             0.000884    -0.00357
                                                                       (0.00303)   (0.00715)
% of Some College                                                       0.00160    -0.00495
                                                                       (0.00370)   (0.00789)
% of College Graduates                                                  0.00199    -0.00153
                                                                       (0.00168)   (0.00549)
Unemployment Rate                                                                   0.00880
                                                                                   (0.00602)
% of People under 20                                                               -0.00032
                                                                                   (0.00532)
% of People over 65                                                                  0.983*
                                                                                     (0.501)
% of People over 65, Living Alone in Poverty                                         0.0510
                                                                                    (0.0683)
% of Households with Income < $10K                                                  -0.0247
                                                                                    (0.0222)
% of Households with Income > $50K                                                 0.000654
                                                                                   (0.00335)
Constant                                       -0.206**   -0.393***   -1.191***       -0.937
                                               (0.0747)    (0.0835)    (0.454)       (0.701)

Observations                                     195         195         195         195
Pseudo R-squared                                0.276       0.321       0.396       0.519
F-stat                                          7.740       13.15       6.733       7.962




                                                                                        37
Note to Table 4: The table presents estimated coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the
dependent variable is the ratio of town PILOT receipts in 2007 to the market value of its
nonprofit property in 2007, expressed as a percentage. The sample includes only those towns
that either never had a property tax referendum from 1995-2007, or else had property tax
referenda that failed. Observations are weighted by town population. The “Dummy (No
Referendum)” variable takes the value 1 for towns without a property tax referendum from 1995-
2007, and is zero for towns with property tax referendums that failed. Among the independent
variables, the town property tax rate, town population, and town unemployment rate are all 2007
values; all other variables correspond to 2000.




                                                                                        38
                                                               Table 5:
                                Effects of PILOT Rates on Nonprofit Activity, 1995-2007

 Dependent Variables                log(Fixed Assets)         log(Total Assets)         log(Total Revenue)       log(Fixed Assets Ratio)
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)

 PILOT rate (in %)                  -0.801***    -0.662***    -0.211**      -0.0741     -0.204**      -0.0826   -0.661***    -0.622***
                                      (0.237)      (0.193)     (0.103)     (0.0867)     (0.0926)     (0.0765)     (0.191)      (0.177)
 Log(population)                    2.654***      2.467***    2.420***     2.103***     2.353***     2.169***   0.311***      0.530***
                                     (0.0607)     (0.0636)    (0.0287)     (0.0397)     (0.0332)     (0.0381)    (0.0499)     (0.0488)
 Log household income (1999)         0.745***     6.401***    1.154***     4.048***     0.552***     4.357***   -0.384***     2.684***
                                      (0.164)      (1.163)     (0.107)      (0.648)      (0.100)      (0.628)    (0.0872)      (0.787)
 Constant                           -19.55***    -71.69***   -20.02***    -47.38***    -12.94***    -50.44***     -0.937     -31.28***
                                      (2.198)      (11.63)     (1.378)      (6.496)      (1.332)      (6.352)     (1.293)      (7.854)

 Year dummies                           Y               Y        Y            Y            Y            Y           Y            Y
 Demographic+Economic
                                        N               Y        N            Y            N            Y           N            Y
 Controls

 Observations                         3,502        3,492        4,547        4,534        4,544       4,531       3,181        3,171
 R-squared                            0.510        0.607        0.615        0.709        0.650       0.723       0.052        0.104
 F-stat                               185.7        199.3        603.1        433.2        428.7       445.4       9.288        16.62




Note to Table 5: The table reports estimated coefficients from OLS regressions. The dependent variable in the regressions reported in
columns 1-2 is the natural log of one plus total nonprofit fixed assets (the sum of land, buildings, and equipment) in a town; the
dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns 3-4 is the natural log of one plus total nonprofit assets in a town; the
dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns 5-6 is the natural log of one plus total nonprofit revenues in a town; and the


                                                                                            39
dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns 7-8 is the natural log of the ratio of nonprofit fixed assets to nonprofit total
assets. The sample used in the regressions reported in columns 3-6 includes observations from 1995-2007. The sample used in the
regressions reported in columns 1-2 and 7-8 includes observations from 1998-2007, though observations from towns without any
nonprofit activity in a year are excluded from the regressions reported in columns 7-8. Observations are weighted by town population,
and standard errors are clustered by municipality. All of the regressions include year dummy variables; the regression reported in
even-numbered columns include the six “Demographic Variables” listed in Table 1 plus the six “Economic Variables” listed in Table
1. Among the independent variables, the town PILOT rate, town population, and town unemployment rate are all contemporaneous
values; all other variables correspond to 2000.




                                                                                            40
                                   Appendix Table 1:
      Determinants of PILOT Rates in 2007, Unweighted Regressions


                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

Property Tax Rate, in %                        0.146**    0.142**      0.145**     0.162**
                                               (0.0626)   (0.0644)    (0.0651)    (0.0747)
Log (Population)                                           0.0127     0.00436       0.0192
                                                          (0.0112)    (0.0140)    (0.0140)
% of White Population                                                 0.00201      0.00233
                                                                     (0.00305)   (0.00456)
% of Black Population                                                  0.00306     0.00253
                                                                     (0.00467)   (0.00603)
% of Hispanic Population                                               0.00544    0.00900*
                                                                     (0.00347)   (0.00529)
% of High School Graduates                                            -0.00395    -0.00555
                                                                     (0.00521)   (0.00588)
% of Some College                                                     0.000745    -0.00385
                                                                     (0.00345)   (0.00511)
% of College Graduates                                               -0.000510    -0.00232
                                                                     (0.00316)   (0.00438)
Unemployment Rate                                                                  0.00478
                                                                                 (0.00434)
% of People under 20                                                             -0.0102**
                                                                                 (0.00442)
% of People over 65                                                                 -0.651
                                                                                   (0.467)
% of People over 65, Living Alone in Poverty                                        0.0535
                                                                                  (0.0458)
% of Households with Income < $10K                                                -0.0218*
                                                                                  (0.0123)
% of Households with Income > $50K                                                -0.00079
                                                                                 (0.00297)
Constant                                       -0.135**   -0.247**     -0.273        0.207
                                               (0.0667)   (0.0975)    (0.435)      (0.600)

Observations                                     351       351         351         351
Pseudo R-squared                               0.0343     0.0391      0.0542      0.0923
F-stat                                          5.463     5.254       3.098       1.875




                                                                                      41
Note to Appendix Table 1: The table presents estimated coefficients from Tobit regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of town PILOT receipts in 2007 to the market value of
its nonprofit property in 2007, expressed as a percentage. Observations are unweighted. Among
the independent variables, the town property tax rate, town population, and town unemployment
rate are all 2007 values; all other variables correspond to 2000.




                                                                                        42
                                       Appendix Table 2:
      Determinants of PILOT Rates, 1995-2007, Unweighted Regressions


                                             (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)

             Property Tax Rate, in %      0.156**    0.138**     0.136*     0.132*
                                          (0.0612)   (0.0680)   (0.0730)   (0.0797)

             Log (Population)                         0.0170    -0.00331    0.0198
                                                     (0.0188)   (0.0238)   (0.0213)

             Constant                     -0.190**   -0.317*    -0.424      0.312
                                          (0.0937)   (0.162)    (0.719)    (0.904)

             Demographic Controls            N          N          Y          Y
             Economic Controls               N          N          N          Y
             Year dummies                    Y          Y          Y          Y

             Observations                   4,547     4,547     4,534      4,534
             Pseudo R-squared              0.00743   0.00855    0.0177     0.0256
             F-stat                         1.102     1.370     1.459      1.183




Note to Appendix Table 2: The table presents estimated coefficients from Tobit regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of town PILOT receipts to the market value of its
nonprofit property, expressed as a percentage. The sample includes observations from 1995-
2007. Observations are unweighted, and standard errors are clustered by municipality. All of
the regressions include year dummy variables; the regression reported in column 3 includes the
six “Demographic Variables” listed in Table 1; and the regression reported in column 4 includes
the six “Demographic Variables” listed in Table 1 plus the six “Economic Variables” listed in
Table 1. Among the independent variables, the town property tax rate, town population, and
town unemployment rate are all contemporaneous values; all other variables correspond to 2000.




                                                                                         43
