                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CHINESE OUTWARDS MERCANTILISM – THE ART AND PRACTICE OF BUNDLING

                                      Joshua Aizenman
                                       Yothin Jinjarak
                                      Huanhuan Zheng

                                     Working Paper 21089
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21089


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2015, Revised May 2017




We gratefully acknowledge the useful comments of anonymous referees, Ram Mudambi, Shang-
Jin Wei, the discussions at the October 2015 West Coast Workshop on International Finance and
Open Economy Macroeconomics, and the 14th Research Meeting of NIPFP-DEA Research
Program, Rajasthan, 2015. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Huanhuan Zheng. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Chinese Outwards Mercantilism – the Art and Practice of Bundling
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Huanhuan Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 21089
April 2015, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F4,O2

                                         ABSTRACT

The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) brought to the fore the limits of the Chinese export led-growth
strategy and the need for Chinese rebalancing of its international business approaches. Our paper
takes stock of what may be the new chapter of Chinese outward-mercantilism, which aims at
securing a higher rate of returns on its net foreign asset position, leveraging its success in
manufacturing exports, natural resource imports and RMB internationalization. Using micro-level
project data and macroeconomic covariates, we find positive association of Chinese trade and
financial flows with China’s outward direct investment (ODI). The relationship is stronger for
ODI originated from the Chinese state-owned enterprises, and strengthened by the provision of
RMB swap-line agreements with China’s trading partners. The evidences support the conjecture
that Chinese ODI is bundled to trade and financial linkages with its investment and trading
partners.

Joshua Aizenman                                 Huanhuan Zheng
Economics and SIR                               Department of Economics and
USC                                             Lau Chor Tak Institute of
University Park                                  Global Economics and Finance
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                      The Chinese University of Hong Kong
and NBER                                        arwenzh@gmail.com
aizenman@usc.edu

Yothin Jinjarak
School of Economics and Finance
Victoria University of Wellington
PO Box 600
23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
New Zealand 6140
yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
1. Introduction
        China has been a prime example of export-led growth that has benefited from learning by
doing, and by adopting foreign know-how, supported by a complex industrial policy. Arguably, a
modern version of mercantilism has been at work (Aizenman and Lee, 2008). The rapid growth,
growing trade, and current account/GDP surpluses in the 2000s had occurred in tandem with
massive hoarding of international reserves (IR) combined with massive sterilization of expanding
trade surpluses and financial inflows 1. These policies were aimed at delaying and slowing the real
appreciation associated with successful rapid growth. Following the Asian crisis of 1997-98, which
mitigated Chinese competitiveness in the late 1990s, as well as Chinese accession to the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in the early 2000s, the country intensified its drive toward export-led
growth, racking up current-account surpluses and growing stockpiles of international reserves. On
the eve of the financial crisis, China’s real GDP growth had reached 14%, its current-account
surplus had grown to 10% of GDP, and its international reserves had reached about 50% in 2010
(Aizenman, Jinjarak and Marion, 2014).

        The global financial crisis (GFC) of the late 2000s put an abrupt end to the Chinese export-
led, growth-cum-large current-account surplus trajectory. In the U.S., the private sector was forced
to de-leverage and lower demands for imports. Other crisis-hit developed countries also cut back
on imports. Consequently, the GFC and its aftermath induced rapid Chinese internal balancing,
reducing the scope of future reserve hoarding. Since the crisis, China’s current-account surplus
fell from 10% of GDP (2007) to about 2% in 2013. A legacy cost of Chinese policies during the
2000s has been its skewed external balance — long on low-yielding foreign assets (mostly
international reserves), and short on high-yielding assets (mostly large liabilities associated with
past net FDI inflows to China). While China’s net external financial assets in 2013 was about 20%
of China’s GDP, the real net return on these assets was negative. 2 This reflects two fundamental
factors -- the low real return on Chinese international reserves (two-third of its gross external
assets), and the high return on past FDI inflows to China, which accounts for about 60% of Chinese



1 We note that international-reserves accumulation may be the outcome of current account surplus in
countries with inferior financial intermediation, and not only mercantilism (Ju and Wei, 2010). Yet,
running current account surplus does not imply hoarding mostly international reserves, as it may be
consistent also with outward FDI, like what has been done by Japan, even if its financial intermediation is
inferior to that of other countries. The timing of moving towards Chinese outward FDI around the global
financial crisis is consistent with our interpretation.
2 See http://rhg.com/notes/chinas-international-investment-position-2014-update.

                                                     1
external liabilities. 3 The low return on Chinese foreign assets is bad news, especially considering
the rapid aging of China’s population. This is in contrast to Japan, where the sizable return on
Japan’s foreign asset position helps in buffering the future income of its rapidly graying
population.

        A way of mitigating the adverse consequences of Chinese legacy external balance sheet
exposure is external rebalancing, that is “swapping” overtime some of its international reserves
with higher yielding foreign equities and Chinese outward direct investment (ODI). Indeed, China
embarked on diversifying its holdings of dollar IR by channeling surpluses into a sovereign wealth
fund (SWF), encouraging outward foreign direct investment in tangible assets, and offering much
higher expected returns. 4 The outcome has been growing ODI in the global resource sectors and
infrastructure services, especially in commodity and mineral exporting countries, which includes
developing countries and emerging markets in Africa and Latin America. In a way, China has
joined the trend of other Emerging Markets (EMs). 5

        After the GFC, China embarked on large bilateral currency-swap agreements with other
countries. This was done in tandem with the unprecedented provisions of swap lines among the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries and the more
selective provision of four swap lines by the U.S. Federal Reserve (FED) to selected emerging
market economies (Appendix, Table B). Comparing the bilateral swap lines offered by the U.S.
FED and the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) reveals key differences. Most of the swap lines
offered by China have been to commodity countries, developing and emerging market economies,
whereas most of the bilateral swap lines offered by the U.S. FED are between the OECD countries,
and four emerging markets: Brazil, South Korea, Mexico, and Singapore. Aizenman and Pasricha
(2010) pointed out that the selection criteria explaining the U.S. FED supply of bilateral swap lines


3 According to the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), China’s external financial assets
were about U.S.$ 6 trillion at the end of 2013, of which international reserves were about two-third (U.S.
$3.9 trillion), the outbound direct investment about 10%, securities investment about 4%, and other
investment at about 20%. The country’s external liability position was 4 trillion U.S.$, out of which FDI
in China was $2.35 trillion, 60% of the total liability. The investment in securities and other aspects took
up 10% and 30%, respectively.
4 On December 19, 2013, the WSJ reported “Beijing will ease the approval process for all but the largest
Chinese investments in overseas companies and projects, a major relaxation of regulatory oversight that
analysts say is aimed at encouraging Chinese firms to expand abroad.”
5 Aizenman and Pasricha (2013) noted that EMs eased outflows of capital more in response to higher
stock price appreciation, higher appreciation pressures in the exchange market, higher IR/GDP, and
higher real exchange rate volatility.
                                                      2
to emerging markets were close financial and trade ties, a high degree of financial openness, and
a relatively good sovereign credit history. Chances are that similar factors account for the Chinese
supply of Renminbi (RMB) bilateral swap lines to a growing list of developing and emerging
markets, as has been illustrated by Garcia-Herrero and Xia (2015). 6 This strategy blends very well
with the trade internationalization of the RMB in the context of the broader outward investment
strategy of China, and is consistent with the channeling of China’s net foreign-asset position into
an ODI-cum-credit strategy.

        Against this background, our paper takes stock of what may be the new chapter of Chinese
outward mercantilism, which is aimed at securing a higher rate of returns on its net foreign asset
position, leveraging its success in international trade, and its large net foreign asset position. We
conjecture that in the aftermath of the GFC, China has bundled ODI with its finance dealing
(lending, swap lines, trade credit), its trade and foreign investment (including exports of Chinese
capital products and labor services), and leveraging its growing market clout. This bundling
strategy has been mostly applied to developing and emerging market economies, and to
“commodity-countries”. During the GFC and its aftermath, China increased rapidly its ODI, swap-
lines, imports and exports in tandem to the selected countries. Such a bundling strategy is
consistent with Adams and Yellen (1976): bundling as a manifestation of market clout in which
the bundling party leverages its market powers aimed at increasing its surplus. Accordingly, China
may use its market power in the provision of “swap and lender of last resort”, supplying capital
goods, and infrastructure services to its trading partners. 7

        The shortness of the sample and the lack of more detailed data do not allow us to evaluate
the success of the bundling strategy in delivering higher returns to the Chinese net foreign asset
position. The willingness of China to extend credit lines and invest in countries with histories of
default, including Argentina, Venezuela, Zimbabwe, raises concerns about the growing exposure
of China to sovereign defaults, and the risk of partial nationalization of its ODI assets. One should
keep in mind, however, that some Chinese lending to commodity countries is secured by “in kind”


6 Garcia-Herrero and Xia (2015) concluded the choice of countries signing an RMB-denominated
bilateral swap agreement with China was predominantly by “gravity motifs”; that is, by country size and
distance from China, as well the trade motif in terms of both exports to China and the existence of the
Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with China. Institutional soundness also matters, since countries with better
government and less corruption are more likely to sign an RMB-denominated bilateral swap agreement.
7 Such a bundling strategy may also act as a barrier to entry of late new comers in the destination
countries (Nalebuff, 2004).
                                                   3
long-run payment in the form of oil flows and other commodities to China. 8 Arguably, Chinese
outside exposure may be also partially hedged by the growing dependence of some developing
countries on Chinese infrastructure services needed to maintain their upgraded rail system, and the
growing importance of China as the prime destination of their imports (and for some, their
dependence on China as their only “lender of last resort”). 9 During global economic uncertainty,
such dependence on Chinese trade and ODI has also become ever more relevant for countries at
the early stage of investment development path, where the domestic sector is limited, the
innovation system is poorly defined, and natural resource extraction is the main production
activity. Our interpretation is also consistent with the evidence that China’s ODI drive for natural
resources is a recent phenomenon and became prominent after the ‘Going Global’ policy adopted
in 2002 (Cheung et al., 2012), exemplified by the GFC. 10

        In the following sections we summarize several regressions analyzing the association
among trade, ODI, and finance. We find that Chinese exports of manufactures to and imports of
commodities from its trading partners are positively associated with Chinese ODI. The provision
of the RMB swap lines strengthens such a linkage. Focusing on Chinese Greenfield ODI and
distinguishing between the ODI into tradable sectors, non-tradables sector, and natural resources,
we find that Chinese commodities imports influences the natural resources sector ODI. The
positive association between Chinese ODI and commodities imports increases with the provision
of RMB swap lines to China’s trading partners. The influence of RMB swap lines is especially
large on the Chinese ODI in the natural resources sector. The overall findings are supportive to
the conjecture that in the aftermath of the GFC, Chinese ODI is bundled with trade and financial


8 The Financial Times commented on March 17, 2015 “Credit risks (of Venezuela) are soaring, with the
economy set to shrink by as much as 7 per cent this year. The slump in crude prices is clobbering
Caracas’s ability to finance its debt. The markets are pricing in about a 90 per cent probability that
Venezuela will default on its debt over the next five years. Chinese lending may, in effect, be senior to
that of international bond holders, secured as it is against 450,000 barrels a day of oil.” “Russia’s
financial arrangements with China are shrouded in mystery, which is reinforced by western sanctions
imposed on Moscow since the Ukraine crisis began. However, several analysts put Chinese state-backed
lending to Russian corporations at well over $30bn, much of it secured by oil shipments to China.”
9 Our conjecture is in line with recent case studies - three out of the largest five industry activities of
China’s-outward Greenfield FDI are in the natural resources sector, before and after the global financial
crisis of 2008–09 [see Table A in the Appendix]. Seven out of ten largest capital investments abroad by
Chinese companies have operated in host countries that receive RMB swap-lines in the aftermath of the
GFC.
10 See also Cheung and Qian (2009) for the evidence that both market-seeking and resource-seeking
motives drive China's ODI; Chinese exports to developing countries induce China's ODI; and China's
international reserves promote its ODI.
                                                     4
linkages, thereby increasing the country’s influence in the international markets, and securing its
long-run access to a stable supply of commodities

       The contribution of this paper is in identifying the post GFC developments in Chinese ODI.
By the time of GFC, China has become the manufacturing workshop and the major commodity
importer of the world, while being one of the largest global creditors with two third of its
international assets in safe but low yielding reserves. This juxtaposition has imposed new
challenges on China, including securing more stable supply lines of raw material, finding new
sources of demand at times of growing access capacity and dwindling global demand for
manufacturing, preferably in underserved markets with higher future growth potential, in
preparation for the aging of the Chinese work force. Meeting these challenges may be facilitated
by encouraging the ODI of China, targeting especially resource rich countries that are challenged
by scarcity of engineering knowhow and finance, and relative poverty. A necessary condition for
deepening the future trade of China with these countries are lower transportation costs, thereby
needing upgraded infrastructure (ports, rail system, highways, stable supply of electricity, etc.).
Our paper shows that these challenges have been accommodated by ODI drive of China, especially
in resource rich countries. During recent years, these countries have been the recipients of Chinese
ODI, exports of construction and engineering services, and capital goods, as well as the provision
of credit and swap lines. This strategy may be a win-win arrangement. Chinese comparative
advantage has been its ability to supply relatively reliable and cheap construction infrastructure
services and the needed engineering knowhow, supported by supplying the needed capital goods
and manufacturing products, with abundance of Chinese credit arrangements. In contrast, the
developing countries served by China are abounded with potential supply of commodities and
minerals, some with growing market potential due to their young population base, yet challenged
by the lack of functioning infrastructure and engineering knowhow, and scarcity of saving and
limited access to external funding, in dire needs for better infrastructure, where better ports, rails
and highways may be the key for deeper trade integration.

       Bundling has been a common practice throughout the history of corporations and countries.
Bundling's welfare implications are ambiguous, as it may be used to reduce cost and improve
quality, and for price discrimination (Nalebuff, 2008). Bundling strategy is important for
multinational enterprises (MNEs) to enter foreign market. It has been widely studied in industrial
organization and marketing (Adams and Yellen, 1976, Nalebuff, 2004). We provide empirical


                                                  5
evidence of bundling practices in the context of international trade, finance and investment. In
recent years, China has established an efficient export platform for manufacture goods and a huge
import demand for natural resources. The dominant role of China in manufactory exports and
commodity imports may allow it to leverage its market power to promote ODI that is still in the
growing stage through bundling strategy. Bundling a successful business with a newer or less
successful business is a market tactic to help the latter find its way into a new market. Indeed, it is
strategic for multinational enterprises (MNEs) to bundle their specific advantages with the
country-specific advantage in order to enter a foreign market. 11 Our results highlight trade (in
particular import of natural resources) and finance as the comparative advantage of China, based
on which MNEs can leverage their market power and promote ODI. The evidence of bundling is
robust after controlling for market-seeking, resource-seeking and strategic asset-seeking motives,
institutional quality, ownership structure, and other factors that could potentially affect ODI.
Bundling Chinese ODI with investment in infrastructure supported by Chinese credit lines meets
the needs of the recipient countries. For China, this strategy may secure cheaper and more
enduring trade arrangement. In the first phase, Chinese exports of constructive and infrastructure
services, bundled with the needed capital goods deals with the post GFC Chinese access capacity.
The financing of these activities by China increases its attractiveness to the recipient countries,
where China is expected to be paid back by the future exports of commodities and raw material
from the recipient countries to China. These engagements and the resultant drop in the cost of
trade may facilitate deeper future exports of China to growing markets in African, Latin American
and Asia, and future selective Chinese outsourcing of its production to selective growing markets.
Our regression analysis confirms these associations, finding that the bundling of trade and credit
arrangement with ODI is especially pronounced after the GFC and in the activities of state-owned
enterprises (SOE) 12.


11 The complementarity between Chinese ODI in mining commodities in developing countries and export
of Chinese manufacturing and infrastructure services may be especially strong in countries challenged by
limited access to external borrowing, low saving, and limited experience in building infrastructure, e.g.,
Argentina, Zimbabwe, Venezuela and others. In these circumstance, better infrastructure reduces the cost
of trade. Chinese ODI in mining and minerals may expend the future exports of these countries,
providing the hard currency needed to pay for Chinese products, and to service the debt and credit
arrangements associated with Chinese upfront investment.
12 These findings are in line with the Chinese Five-Year Plan approved in 2011, encouraging ODI, with

focus on commodity exporting developing countries. Sauvant and Chen (2014) noted “the 12th Industrial
Five-Year Plan, laid out five priorities for industrial sectors that all have potential implications for
                                                    6
2. Data

        Generally, there is limitation and difficulty working with FDI data. To help overcome, we
employ ODI data from two different sources and disaggregation levels to verify the empirical
analysis. The first data come from aggregate Chinese ODI flows from the UNCTAD FDI/TNC
database, based on the information from the Chinese Ministry of Commerce. The aggregate
outflows (in USD millions) sum together brownfield ODI (mergers and acquisitions) and
greenfield ODI (new plants and production). The data are available up to year 2012 on annual
basis for 144 host (destination) countries.

        The second, micro-level source of ODI data is greenfield-type Chinese ODI projects
invested abroad from fDi Intelligence of the Financial Times Ltd. This micro-level, project-based
information reports not only capital investment (in USD millions) of new plants and production in
a host country, but also employment created and details about industry sector of the corresponding
ODI projects. The data cover 137 host (destination) countries from 2003 to 2014 (see Appendix
Table C for the list of countries). The industry sectors are grouped into tradable, non-tradable, and
natural resources (see Appendix Table D for the list of sectors in each group). As the ownership
structure is associated with the ODI decisions, we differentiate the ODI flows from SOEs and
POEs, and evaluate them separately. SOEs are defined as firms whose ultimate owners are Chinese


Outward FDI [OFDI]: (1) the outsourcing of production to locations where domestic technologies are
established and global demand is high; (2) the establishment of industrial parks overseas in regions where
conditions are advantageous; (3) international exploration and cooperation projects in important energy
and natural resources such as oil and gas, iron ore, uranium, copper, and aluminum, and the building of
long-term, stable, safe, and diversified multi-channel supply systems for natural resources; (4) the
construction of R&D centers in technology-intensive overseas locations and collaboration with foreign
R&D institutions and innovative enterprises; and (5) comprehensive engineering projects by capable and
capital-rich big corporations; M&As and greenfield investments; the international registration of
intellectual property rights; the establishment of global marketing and sales networks and regional sales
centers; and global resource configuration and value-chain integration (State Council 2011). Similarly, to
a large extent (and consistent with earlier documents) the 12th FDI Five-Year Plan lays out the future
development of the OFDI policy framework. It emphasizes the government’s role in promoting OFDI in
three priority areas: • supporting the active participation of Chinese firms in natural resource projects
overseas in order to secure the sustainable, stable, economic, and safe supply of energy and natural
resources; • accelerating the implementation of technological upgrading; and • effectively implementing
the expansion into foreign markets (NDRC 2012a).” “The 12th FDI Five-Year Plan also encourages
capable private enterprises, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), to engage in OFDI."
                                                    7
governments, where ultimate owners are those who own at least 25.01% of the subject firms. The
data on firm ownership structure are from ORBIS Bureau van Dijk.

       Note that we attempt to be forthcoming in providing both sets of micro and aggregate data
evidence. As noted by Blanchard and Acalin (2016), FDI flows measured in the balance of
payments are different from the depiction of greenfield FDI: aggregate FDI inflows and outflows
are highly correlated and a large proportion are just flows going in and out of the country on their
way to their final destination, with the stop due to corporate tax considerations. A full array of
conformity and disagreement across the two sets of evidence should substantiate our empirical
analysis and its robustness.

       The explanatory variables include bilateral manufacture exports and commodity imports
between China and its trading partners. The micro trade flows reported on annual basis (USD
millions) from 2003-2012 are from the UN Comtrade. We follow the UN classification and group
the tradable products into commodities and manufactures. 13 To conform with the existing literature
that use aggregate trade data, we also include aggregate imports and exports by pair of country
(origin-destination) from the China Statistical Yearbook (National Bureau of Statistics of China)
as explanatory variables

       To further explore the bundling effect due to a leveraging of China’s comparative
advantage in international trade and finance, we include the PBOC swap-line agreements (Swap)
in the control list. The details on agreement date and amount of bilateral currency swap-line
established by PBOC with other central banks are from Aizenman, Jinjarak and Park (2016),
Garcia-Herrero and Xia (2015), and the PBOC’s website.

       We control for a number of country-specific factors. To address the market-seeking
motives of Chinese ODI (Buckley, et al, 2007), we include host country market size, measured by
the log of GDP (log(GDP)) from World Development Indicators (WDI). To account for the
influence of cultural similarities on trade and ODI (Rauch and Trindade 2002), we include the
logarithmic distance between China and host countries (log(Distance)), and a common language
indicator (Common Language) that equals to one if a language is spoken by at least 9% of the
population in both China and host country, and zero otherwise. As host country institution quality



13The category of commodities includes the primary commodities, precious stones, and non-monetary
gold (SITC 0 +1+2+3+4+68+667+971). The manufactured goods include SITC 5-8 less 667, and 68.
                                                 8
is found to affect ODI, we include the legal-origin variable that indicates whether the host
country’s legal system is based on common law, French civil law, German civil law or
Scandinavian civil law. The measure of cultural similarities and institutional quality are from
CEPII.Subsequently, to help address the endogeneity issue that may arise from the feedback
between ODI and trade, we instrument trade variables with (i) geographic size (Size), the log of
geographic area of host-country territory measured in square of kilometers; (ii) the liner shipping
connectivity (Connectivity); and (iii) the logarithmic number of merchant ships registered in host
country (Ship). Both Connectivity and Ship measure the marine transport ease of connecting to the
rest of the world. The detailed variable definitions and sources are summarized in Appendix Table
E.

        For comparison, we focus on the sample period from 2003 to 2012 when both aggregate
and micro-level ODI data are both available. The two ODI data sources have in common 118 host
(destination) countries from 2003 to 2012 with 582 country-year observations. In the main
regressions, we use all available observations from 2003 to 2012 14.

        Table 1 provides summary statistics of the estimation variables. To illustrate the intensity
of China’s trade and investment, Figure 1 shows a heat map of average Chinese bilateral trade,
ODI, and RMB swap lines (all divided by a destination country’s GDP). Figure 2 then overviews
the relationship between Chinese FDI, trade, and swap-lines. The diamond chart plots, based on
bilateral data, the relationship between Chinese ODI, exports, imports, and swap lines (all divided
by a destination country country’s GDP, and weighted by the sample means). The dotted, dashed
and solid lines plot, respectively, the statistics before, during, and after the 2008–09 GFC. The
diamond charts indicate significant and concurrent rises in Chinese ODI, imports and exports, and
RMB swap-line agreements to the selected countries.




14In an earlier version, we limit the sample to common country-year observations and the results are
similar.
                                                    9
3. Empirical Analysis

         The baseline gravity model for studying the association between Chinese ODI and bilateral
trade is specified as follows 15:

         log(ODIjt) = δ1 + γ1 log(Tradejt) + θ1Gravityjt + κ1 yeart + ε1jt ,                           (1)

where ODIjt refers to different measures of Chinese ODI to host country j in year t (t = 2003, 2004,
… , 2012), Tradejt refers to measures of bilateral trade between China and destination country j in
year t. Throughout, the Gravityjt term includes log of host-country GDP (log(GDP)), log of the
distance between host country j and China (log(Distance)), common language indicator (Common
Language) and five legal origin dummy variables, Leg_French, Leg_German, Leg_Scandinavian,
Leg_Socialist and leg_UK, which equals to one if the legal origin of country j is, respectively,
French, Germany, Scandinavian, Socialist, and United Kingdom. Year fixed effects are also
included in the estimation.

         This empirical specification (1) allows us to focus first on the pattern of Chinese ODI and
trade with the rest of the world, and later on the association of RMB swap lines with Chinese ODI.
We note that there may be other confounding factors beyond the scope of our study, including (i)
that China’s inward FDI may replace third (other) countries’ FDI inflows (Eichengreen and Tong,
2007); (ii) that the competitive effects of China’s exports and the exports from other developing
countries (Hanson and Robertson, 2010) may influence China’s bilateral trade patterns; and (iii)
that China’s ODI, bundled with access to finance and the exports of Chinese capital products and
labor services, may be a barrier to entry of new comers in the ODI destination countries (Nalebuff,
2004).

To conform the existing literature, we study empirical linkages between Chinese ODI and
international trade using aggregate data, as well as testing the hypotheses on Chinese bundling
strategy using sectoral trade and micro-level ODI project information.




15Gravity equation has been the benchmark approach to study bilateral FDI; see Buch (2005); Kleinert
and Toubal (2010); Loungani, Mody and Razin (2002); Portes and Rey (2005), and also Anderson (2010)
for a review of theoretical foundation. When disaggregate trade variables are applied, the gravity equation
becomes log(ODIjt) = δ1 + γ1 log(Commodity Importsjt-1) + log(Manufactures Exportsjt-1) + θ1Gravityjt-1 +
κ1 yeart + ε1jt, where Commodity Importsjt-1 is commodity imported from destination j to China, and
Manufactures Exportsjt-1 is the manufactures exported from China to country j in year t-1.
                                                    10
3.1 Aggregate ODI and Trade

        Table 2 reports estimates from the baseline regressions of Eq. (1). Column 1 shows that
the bilateral trade is positively and significantly associated with Chinese aggregate ODI. Increasing
the level of China’s bilateral trade from 50th percentile (million US$ 2,850) to 75th percentile
(million US$ 12,418) is associated with a 54% raise in the aggregate ODI. 16 The logarithmic
distance between China and the host country (trading partner) j, log(Distance), is negatively and
significantly associated with ODI. The coefficient of log(GDP) is positive but insignificant, which
may be driven by the large exposure of Chinese outward investment in African countries and other
emerging markets. Countries that share the common language with China receive more Chinese
ODI. Countries in the French, Germany and Scandinavian legal system are associated with less
ODI than those in United Kingdom legal system.

        Delving further China’s trade into bilateral exports and imports, we re-estimate the gravity
equation and report the results in column 2 of Table 2. We find that Chinese ODI is positively and
significantly associated with both its exports and imports. Increasing the level of China’s bilateral
imports from 50th percentile (million US$ 817) to 75th percentile (million US$ 5,736) is associated
with a 23% raise in aggregate ODI, while increasing the level of China’s bilateral exports from
50th percentile (million US$ 1,733) to 75th percentile (million US$ 6,560) is associated with a 48%
raise in aggregate ODI. The effects of distance and the other standard control variables remain
generally significant and consistent with the previous result.

        China has comparative advantage on commodity imports and manufacture export. In the
past decades, it has established efficient manufacture export platforms and accumulated huge
demand for commodities. These comparative advantages may allow China to better leverage its
market power on international trade to promote ODI that is still on the growing stage. We test the
conjecture by disaggregating Chinese bilateral trade into commodity imports and manufacture
exports and re-estimating the gravity estimation. The results presented in column 3 of Table 2
suggest that Chinese imports of commodities and exports of manufactures are both positively and
significantly associated with the Chinese aggregate ODI flows. Increasing the level of commodity
imports from 50th percentile (million US$ 399) to 75th percentile (million US$ 2,618) is associated


16In this scenario, based on the summary statistics in Table 1, bilateral trade increases by log(12418)-
log(2850) = 1.47. As the estimated coefficient is 0.37, this change increases ODI by 1.47*0.37*100% =
54%.
                                                    11
with a 32% increase in the Chinese ODI. Additionally, increasing the level of manufacture exports
from 50th percentile (million US$ 1,635) to 75th percentile (million US$6,237) is associated with
a 50% increase in the Chinese ODI. The results suggests that leveraging on the market power of
manufacture exports and commodity imports helps promote Chinese ODI flows, in line with the
Chinese bundling strategy hypothesis. Including country fixed effects or excluding year fixed
effects yield similar results, as shown in column 4 and 5 of Table 2.

3.2 Sectoral ODI and Trade

       To uncover the channels of effective bundling, we examine the level of investment projects,
disaggregating greenfield ODI into tradable, non-tradable and natural resource sector ODI. Table
3 reports coefficient estimates from the OLS estimation for sectoral ODI as well as the total
greenfield ODI, calculated as the sum of tradable, non-tradable and natural resource ODI. The
estimation results suggest that commodity imports are significantly and positively associated with
all types of sectoral ODI as well as greenfield ODI. The commodities imports appears to be the
most closely related to natural resource ODI: increasing the level of commodities imports from
50th percentile to 75th percentile is associated with a 66 % increase in the ODI to natural resource
sector. The coefficients of log(Manufacture Exports) are not statistically significant across various
measures of greenfield-type ODI.

       There are two possible reasons why manufacture exports play different roles on greenfield
and aggregate ODI. First, the difference in data recording methods may drive the different impacts
of manufacture exports on ODI. Greenfield ODI data are mainly estimated and forward looking
while aggregate ODI data record the historical and actual investments 17. Moreover, greenfield data
report the ODI to the final destination regardless of the intermediate movements of funds while
aggregate ODI data record data according to the first destination. For example, if a Chinese
company establishes a subsidiary in Bermuda and have that subsidiary invest in Singapore, it is
considered to be ODI from China to Singapore by fDi Intelligence, the greenfield ODI data
provider, and ODI from China to Bermuda by UNCTAD, the aggregate ODI data provider. Second,
the role of manufacture exports on ODI may differ by ODI entry modes. Aggregate ODI consists
of greenfield and brownfield ODI. While the former refers to setting up new plants, the latter is




17The quality of greenfield ODI data from fDi Intelligence is well acknowledged by UNCTAD’s World
Investment Report in various years.
                                                 12
about acquiring existing firms in host countries. Manufacture exports may be more effective in
promoting brownfield ODI than greenfield ODI.

3.3 Robustness Checks

       To check the robustness of the results, we first exclude Hong Kong and Macau and then
exclude all offshore markets identified by IMF to avoid bias caused by unique investment styles
in two of the Chinese special administrative regions and offshore centers. The results shown in
Panel A and B of Table 4 highlight the positive associations of commodity imports with sectoral
and aggregate ODI, which is consistent with previous findings. The results remain generally robust
when we estimate the baseline equation using Tobit and of Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood
(PPML), as shown in Panel C and D of Table 4.

       We also control for more variables to mitigate the concerns of omitted variables. To
account for technology seeking motives of Chinese ODI, we control for host country’s intellectual
property captured by patents and trademarks, which are measured by the number of patents applied
and the number of trademarks registered in host countries obtained from WDI. Host country’s
exchange rate against US$ are included to address the effect of asset valuation on ODI. Financial
development, measured by private credit from deposit money banks and other financial institutions
divided by GDP, is included to account for the capital seeking motives of ODI. We also add
institutional quality, calculated as the sum of indices for corruption, law and order, and
bureaucratic quality from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) following Bekaert et al.
(2004). As shown in Table 5, the previous results remain generally robust after controlling for
these additional variables. Commodity imports are positively related to different measures of ODI.
The evidence however becomes insignificant in the regression of tradable and non-tradable sector
ODI.




                                               13
3.4 The Role of RMB Swap Lines

       Although there is a positive relationship between trade and ODI, it remains empirically
open whether the RMB internationalization in the past decade has any influence on Chinese ODI.
By providing liquidity buffer in the form of RMB swap lines to emerging-market countries,
potentially facing credit constraint, institutional challenges, and commodity price volatility, China
can enhance its market power and improve the efficiency of bundling. To test the hypothesis that
Chinese ODI is associated with trade and financial dealing with trading partners, we add the
provision of RMB swap lines (Swap), a dummy variable that equals to 1 if there is an effective
RMB swap line between PBOC and the central bank of its trading partner j in year t, together with
its interactions with commodity imports and manufacture exports in the regression of ODI.

       The results in Table 6 shows that the coefficient of the interaction term between
log(Commodity Imports) and Swap is positive and statistically significant in the regression of
natural resource ODI. It suggests that commodity imports have become more important for
Chinese ODI in natural resource sector with the provision of RMB swap lines. In terms of
economic significance, increasing the level of commodities imports from 50th percentile to 75th
percentile is associated with a 60% increase in the natural resource sector ODI in the absence of
RMB swap lines, and by 182% in the presence of RMB swap lines. There is no evidence that the
provision of RMB swap lines affect other types of ODI. These results remain robust when we
restrict the sample period to start from 2008, the first year when RMB swap line is introduced. It
suggests that the role of RMB swap is not a reflection of GFC effect. These findings are supportive
to the hypothesis that Chinese ODI in natural resource sector is bundled with commodity imports
and financial linkages, increasing thereby the economic role of China in developing countries and
emerging markets.

3.5 Endogeneity Issues

       So far we have documented a positive relation between Chinese ODI and trade, which is
strengthened by financial linkages. However, the estimation results may be subject to endogeneity
issue due to a two-way feedback between asset flows and trade (Aviat and Coeurdacier, 2007). In
the presence of reverse causality, the ordinary least square (OLS) estimations are bias and
inconsistent. To address the endogeneity concern, we apply the instrumental variable (IV)
approach.


                                                 14
         Our IVs include (i) Connectivity, the liner shipping connectivity index from UNCTAD; (ii)
Ship, the log of the number of merchant ships registered in host countries obtained from UNCTAD;
(iii) Size, the log of land size in square kilometers obtained from WDI. Both Connectivity and Ship
measure how well host countries are connected to global shipping networks of marine transport.
As the majority of global trades are carried by sea, the ease of marine transport benefit trades, both
Connectivity and Ship are likely to satisfy the relevance criteria 18. The variable Size is likely to
satisfy the relevance criteria as well because geographic variables are found to be associated with
trade (Frankel and Romer, 1999). Investments that neither target for exporting products and nor
require importing inputs are unlikely to gain directly from the ease of marine transport. However,
through facilitating trades, well connected marine transport networks are likely to benefit
investments that rely on trades indirectly. Thus both Connectivity and Ship are likely to satisfy the
exogenous criteria. We screen whether the three IVs satisfy the exogeneous criteria by performing
over identification tests.

         We first run two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation to explore the relation between trade
and ODI and present the results in Table 7. The first-stage estimation results in column 1 and 2
suggest that the three IVs, Connectivity, Ship and Size are all significantly related with commodity
imports and manufacture exports. The p-value associated with under-identification tests is less
than 1% across different measures of ODI (see columns 3-7 in Table 7), which confirm that the
selected IVs satisfy the relevance criteria. Except for the regression of natural resource ODI, the
Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic from weak-identification test is generally higher than 13.43, the
Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values for 10% maximal IV size. It suggests that the chosen
instruments are not weak, with the estimation bias of less than 10%. The p-value for the over-
identification test is generally more than 10%, suggesting the excluded instruments are
uncorrelated with the error term and that the exclusion restriction is satisfied. Overall, these tests
support our choices of IVs.

         The second-stage estimation results reported in column 3-7 in Table 7 show that
commodity imports are positively and significantly correlated with different measures of ODI
except for non-tradable sector ODI. The coefficient of commodity imports is the largest in the

18 To reduce costs or avoid regulations, more than half of world’s merchant ships are registered in a country other
than that of the ship's owners. Therefore it is reasonable to think that Ship affect trade but not vice versa. Moreover,
the ease of marine transport is largely determined by a country’s geographic location, shipping service capacity,
ports efficiency, and regulation. Thus the bilateral trade between China and host country is unlikely to affect the
marine transport facilities in host country.
                                                           15
 regression of natural resources ODI. The 2SLS results are consistent with previous findings based
 on OLS estimation, which highlight the role of commodity imports on promoting Chinese ODI,
 especially those in natural resource sector.

         Table 8 presents the second-stage estimation results to explore the role of RMB swap lines,
 focusing on the sample period from 2008 to 2012. In Panel A, commodity imports, manufactures
 exports and their interactions with RMB swap lines (Swap) are instrumented with Connectivity,
 Ship, Size, and their interaction with Swap. The diagnostic tests broadly support our choices of
 IVs. Panel B presents the results that further instrument the dummy variable Swap with with Fed,
 a dummy variable that equals to 1 if the central bank in host country has an effective liquidity swap
 line with the Federal Reserve Bank and 0 otherwise. Swap, log(commodity imports),
 log(manufactures exports) and their interaction terms are instrumented with Fed, Connectivity,
 Ship, Size and their interactions. The results in both Panel A and B are consistent with previous
 finding that the interaction between commodity imports and Swap are positive and statistically
 significant. It suggests that RMB swap line enhances the bundling efficiency channeled through
 leveraging market power on commodity import to promote natural resource sector ODI. 19

 3.6 Before and After Global Financial Crisis

         GFC may reshape the investment patterns as it drained out the global market liquidity and
 slowed down economic growth. To study whether GFC affect the bundling between trade and
 ODI, we regress measures of ODI on the interaction between the two trade variables (commodity
 imports and manufacture exports) and a crisis dummy, GFC, which equals to one for the
 observations after 2007 and zero otherwise. The OLS estimation results are presented in Table 9.
 The coefficients of the interaction term between log(Commodity Imports) and GFC are not
 statistically significant across different measures of ODI, which provide no evidence that GFC
 reshape the positive relation between commodity imports and ODI. The coefficients of the
 interaction term between log(Manufacture Exports) and GFC are positive and statistically


19It is worth pointing out that, while swap-line agreements are potentially endogenous, the correlation
 between economic linkages and provision of swap lines is far from prefect. China has trade relationships
 with most of the countries, yet no significant swap lines established before the crisis. By now China has
 extended more than thirty RMB swap lines. For instance, China provides no swap line to the US and
 Venezuela, but has large trade and significant ODI with these countries. Essentially, our analysis points
 out that post crisis, Chinese ODI and the liquidity needs for improving infrastructure in some developing
 countries have been associated with the establishments of RMB swap lines.

                                                     16
significant for all measures of ODI, except for natural resource ODI. It suggests that the relation
between manufacture exports and ODI is generally strengthened after GFC. The results indicate a
stronger bundling effect after the GFC that is leveraged on manufactures exports. The 2SLS
estimation results yield similar findings.

3.7 Heterogeneity across Firm Ownership

       To explore the role of ownership structure on cross-border investment and bundling
strategy, we decompose the ODI flows by their source, using micro-level project information. A
Chinese cross-border investment project is classified as SOE ODI if at least 25.01% of the
investment entity’s parent company is ultimately owned by Chinese (central or local) governments
and POE ODI otherwise. We further classify SOE and POE ODI into tradable, non-tradable and
natural resources sector and calculate the corresponding types of Chinese ODI to each host
country.


       While the dichotomy of SOEs and POEs is useful for our empirical analysis, we note to
readers its evolving dynamics. Take for instance, Contemporary Amperex Technology Limited
(CATL): a major player in global lithium ion battery and has been investing heavily in natural
resource sector in Africa and Latin America. The firm was founded in 2011 and approved as the
government sponsored enterprise in 2012, then followed by its spin-offs including CATL-Munich
in 2014, a 2015 modification into a joint stock limited company, as well as selected to be one of
the three lithium-ion battery enterprises in the ‘13th Five-Year Plan’ of the People’s Republic of
China (Financial Times, March 6th, 2017: Electric cars: China’s battle for the battery market).


       SOEs and POEs may benefit differently from the country’s comparative advantage on trade
and finance. On one hand, Chinese government that plays a crucial role in trade, financial dealing
and outward investment have preferential treatment on SOEs when leveraging their market power
on trade and finance. Moreover, the state ownership builds political linkages among SOEs, which
facilitates coordination on trade, finance and outward investment and therefore improves the
bundling efficiency. On the other hand, it is relatively easy to bundle trade and finance with POE
ODI than with SOE ODI because POEs are typically small and market-oriented and thus facing
less resistance and scrutiny from host country especially those with nationalism government. POEs
are also more flexible and motivated to be bundled, which may increase the bundling efficiency.


                                                17
If the first (second) effect dominates, we expect ODI by SOEs (POEs) to benefit more from
Chinese trade and financial dealings. If the two effects offset each other, ownership structure shall
not make a difference on the relation between ODI and trade as well as finance. We explore the
role of ownership structure by running OLS estimation for both SOE and POE related ODI and
summarize the results in Panel A and B of Table 10 respectively.


        The tradable sector ODI is positively associated with commodity imports for SOEs and
POEs. The χ2 test yields a statistics of 0.05 with a p-value that is higher than 10%, which cannot
reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient of log(Commodity Imports) is the same for tradable
ODI oriented from SOEs and POEs. Similarly, the χ2 test suggests no evidence that non-tradable
and natural resources ODI by SOEs benefit more from the commodity imports than their peers by
POEs 20. However, we do find that commodity imports are more closely related to the aggregate
greenfield ODI by SOEs than those by POEs. We find no evidence that manufacture exports have
different impacts on ODI oriented from SOEs and POEs. The results suggest that overall all, on
an aggregate level, SOEs benefits more from commodity imports than POEs in their outward
investment.


        We then explore whether the role of central bank swap lines differs between SOE- and
POE-oriented ODI. In Table 11, the coefficient of the interaction term between log(Commodity
Imports) and Swap is positive and statistically significant for natural resource ODI from both SOEs
and POEs (shown respectively in Panel A and B). The coefficient of this interaction term is 2.38
in the regression of natural resource ODI by SOEs, which is more than two times of that by POEs.
Testing the difference of the two coefficients yields a χ2 statistics of 7.12 with a p-value of less
than 1%. It suggests that RMB swap lines benefit natural resource ODI from SOEs more than those
from POEs.




20The lack of significance in commodity import in the regressions of natural resource ODI can be driven by the
small sample size.
                                                        18
4.   Concluding remarks

       The results of our paper are in line with the conjecture that China has bundled its ODI with
trade and finance dealing, thus leveraging its growing market clout. This outward mercantilism
has been mostly applied to developing and emerging market economies, and to “commodity
countries.” This conjecture is consistent with the increasingly stronger relationships of China’s
imports, ODI and swap-lines. While it is pre-mature to estimate the returns on this bundling
strategy, the outcome has been increased access of emerging Africa, Asia and Latin America to
improved infrastructure services, co-financed and constructed with the help of Chinese capital
goods and knowhow, and co-paid by the growing exports of commodities and minerals to China.
The recent formation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, in which China would be the
main shareholder may be viewed as a follow up of this bundling strategy. One should note that the
unprecedented willingness of China to invest in the infrastructure of Latin America, Africa and
Asia may solve massive coordination failures in these regions. Bundling may be needed to
encourage China to undertake these investments despite the resultant growing exposure of China
to sovereign risks. This strategy may be a global version of the costly investment in the rail system
in India by the United Kingdom during the 19th Century, inducing large increase in domestic and
international trade. A by-product of this investment was the large welfare gains associated with
mitigating the incidence of famines in India, breaking the links between weather shocks and
massive excess mortality (see Burgess and Donaldson 2010).




                                                 19
References

1. Adams, William James and Janet L. Yellen, 1976, “Commodity Bundling and the Burden of
    Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 3:475-498.
2. Aizenman J, Lee J., 2008, “Financial versus monetary mercantilism–long-run view of large
    international reserves hoarding,” World Economy, 31, 5:593–611.
3. Aizenman J., Jinjarak, Y., Marion, N., 2014, “China’s Growth, Stability, and Use of
    International Reserves,” Open Economies Review, 25, 3:1-22.
4. Aizenman, J., Jinjarak, Y., Park, D. “International reserves and swap lines: the recent
    experience,” in A New Global Reserve System for a Transformed Global Economy, Jeffrey
    Sachs and Wing Thye Woo (eds.), MIT Press, forthcoming.
5. Aizenman, J., Pasricha, G. K. 2010, “Selective swap arrangements and the global financial
    crisis: Analysis and interpretation,” International Review of Economics & Finance, 19, 3:353-
    365.
6. _________ 2013, “Why do emerging markets liberalize capital outflow controls? Fiscal versus
    net capital flow concerns,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 39:28-64.
7. Anderson, James E. 2010, “The Gravity Model,” National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper Series No. 16576.
8. Aviat, Antonin, and Nicolas Coeurdacier, 2007, “The geography of trade in goods and asset
    holdings,” Journal of International Economics, 71, 1:22-51.
9. Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R. and Lundblad, C., 2005. Does financial liberalization spur growth?.
    Journal of Financial economics, 77(1), pp.3-55.
10. Blanchard, Olivier, and Julien Acalin, 2016, “What Does Measured FDI Actually Measure?”
    Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy Brief 16-17.
11. Blonigen, B., Davies, R., Waddell, G., Naughton, H., 2007, “FDI in space: Spatial
    autoregressive relationships in foreign direct investment,” European Economic Review,
    51:1303-1325.
12. Blonigen, Bruce A., Piger, Jeremy, 2014, “Determinants of foreign direct investment,”
    Canadian Journal of Economics, 47, 3, 775-812.
13. Buch, Claudia M., 2005, “Distance and International Banking,” Review of International
    Economics, 13, 4:787-804.
14. Buckley, P.J., Clegg, L.J., Cross, A.R., Liu, X., Voss, H. and Zheng, P., 2007. The determinants
    of Chinese outward foreign direct investment. Journal of international business studies, 38(4),
    pp.499-518.
15. Burgess, Robin; Dave, Donaldson, 2010, "Can Openness Mitigate the Effects of Weather
    Shocks? Evidence from India's Famine Era." American Economic Review. 100 (2): 449–53.
16. Cheung, Yin-Wong, de Haan, Jakob, Qian, Xingwang, Yu, Shu, 2012, “China's Outward Direct
    Investment in Africa,” Review of International Economics, 20, 2, 201-220.
17. Cheung, Yin-Wong, Qian, Xingwang, 2009, “Empirics of China’s Outward Direct
    Investment,” Pacific Economic Review, 14, 3, 312-341.
18. Eichengreen, Barry, and Hui Tong, 2007, “Is China’s FDI coming at the expense of other
    countries?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 21, 2:153-172.
19. Financial Times, March 6th, 2017: Electric cars: China’s battle for the battery market.
20. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David H. Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American
    Economic Review, 89, 3:379-99.
21. Garcia-Herrero, A., & Xia, L., 2015, “China’s RMB bilateral swap agreements: What explains
    the choice of countries?” Asia-Pacific Journal of Accounting & Economics, 22, 4: 368–383.



                                                20
22. Hanson, Gordon H., and Raymond Robertson, 2010, “China and the Manufacturing Exports of
    Other Developing Countries,” in Robert Feenstra and Shang Jin Wei, eds., China's Growing
    Role in World Trade, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and the NBER:137-159.
23. Ju, Jiandong, and Wei, Shang-Jin, 2010, “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of
    Financial Globalization,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2, 4, 173-204
24. Kleinert, Jörn, and Farid Toubal, 2010, “Gravity for FDI,” Review of International Economics,
25. Loungani, Prakash, Ashoka Mody, and Assaf Razin, 2002, “The Global Disconnect: The Role
    of Transactional Distance and Scale Economies in Gravity Equations,” Scottish Journal of
    Political Economy, 49, 5:526-43.
26. Nalebuff, Barry, 2004, “Bundling as an Entry Barrier,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
    1: 159-187.
27. Nalebuff, Barry, 2008, "Bundling and tying", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd
    Edition, Steven Durauf and Lawrence Blume
28. Portes, Richard, and Hélène Rey, 2005, “The determinants of cross-border equity flows,”
    Journal of International Economics, 65, 2:269-96.
29. Rauch, J. E., and Trindade, V., 2002, "Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 116-130.
30. Sauvant, Karl P., and Victor Zitian Chen, 2014, "China’s regulatory framework for outward
    foreign direct investment." China Economic Journal 7,1: 141-163.
31. Silva, JMC Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006, "The log of gravity." The Review of
    Economics and statistics 88. 4: 641-658.




                                               21
Figure 1. Chinese ODI, Bilateral Trade, and RMB swap lines.
Notes: The heat maps plot Chinese greenfield outward direct investment (ODI), aggregate ODI, bilateral
trade, and RMB swap lines, all as a ratio of host country (trading partner)’s GDP; darker colour
corresponds to higher intensity (averaged over the sample period, from year 2003 to 2012).

A. China’s Greenfield ODI




B. China’s Aggregate ODI




                                                  22
C. China’s Bilateral Trade




D. RMB Swap Lines




                             23
Figure 2. Relationship between Chinese ODI, Trade, and RMB Swap Lines.
Notes: The diamond chart plots, based on bilateral data, the relationship of Chinese outward direct
investment (ODI), exports, imports, and RMB swap lines, all measured as a ratio of host country (trading
partner)’s GDP, weighted by the sample means. The dotted, dashed and solid lines plot, respectively, the
relationships before, during, and after the Global Financial Crisis. The host countries (trading partners)
are listed in Appendix Table B.
A. Chinese ODI: Greenfield




B. Chinese ODI: Aggregate




                                                   24
Table 1. Summary Statistics.

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for different measures of Chinese outward direct
investment (ODI) and bilateral trade from year 2003 to 2012. Tradable, Non-Tradable, Natural Resource
and Greenfield refer to Chinese greenfield ODI to tradable, non-tradable, natural resource and all sectors
respectively. Aggregate refers to the total Chinese ODI to a host country. The reporting unit is million
USD. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table E.


                          Mean       S.D.      Min        P25      Median       P75       Max         N
ODI
Tradable                  184        380         0         12         51        175      3,458       386
Non-Tradable              109        320         0          9         33         77      3,542       357
Natural Resource          531        894         0         15        148        529      4,589       221
Greenfield                382        770         0         22         89        350      5,579       595
Aggregate                 385       2,863      -815         3         14         82      51,238     1,059
Bilateral Trade
Commodity Imports         3,007      7,090       0         45        399       2,618     78,862     1,116
Manufacture Exports      9,524      29,449       1        332       1,635     6,237     341,135     1,149
Imports                   8,249     21,920       0         80        817      5,736     194,564     1,121
Exports                  10,267     31,308       0        350       1,733      6,560    351,777     1,140
Trade                    18,378     47,807       0        602       2,850     12,418    484,674     1,140




                                                     25
Table 2. Baseline Results with Aggregate ODI Flows.
Notes: This table provides estimates from the gravity estimation of China’s aggregate outward
direct investment (ODI) and bilateral trade. Trade is the sum of bilateral exports and imports
between China and the host country, GDP is the gross domestic product in host country, Distance
is the population-weighted distance between China and the host country in kilometres, Common
Language is a dummy variable that equal to one if the host country share the same language with
China. Leg_French, Leg_German, Leg_Scandinavian, and Leg_Socialist, are dummy variables
that equal to one if the legal origin of host country is, respectively, French, Germany,
Scandinavian, and Socialist. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table E.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**, *) signifies statistical
significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.


                                             Dependent variable is log(Aggregate ODI)
                                  (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)
log(Trade)                     0.37***
                                (0.07)
log(Imports)                                  0.12***
                                               (0.04)
log(Exports)                                  0.36***
                                               (0.06)
log(Commodity Imports)                                      0.17***         0.24***        0.20***
                                                              (0.03)         (0.08)         (0.03)
log(Manufacture Exports)                                    0.37***         0.83***        0.67***
                                                              (0.06)         (0.13)         (0.06)
log(GDP)                         0.03          -0.09*        -0.13**        1.67***       -0.39***
                                (0.06)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.60)         (0.06)
log(Distance)                 -0.51***       -0.47***       -0.46***
                                (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.12)
Common Language                1.43***        1.24***        1.36***
                                (0.37)         (0.36)         (0.36)
Leg_French                    -0.47***       -0.42***       -0.45***
                                (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.12)
Leg_German                    -0.85***       -0.75***         -0.50*
                                (0.27)         (0.26)         (0.27)
Leg_Scandinavian              -1.56***       -1.64***       -1.42***
                                (0.40)         (0.40)         (0.40)
Leg_Socialist                    -0.30         -0.35*        -0.35**
                                (0.18)         (0.18)         (0.17)
Constant                       4.25***        6.12***         3.03**       -53.09***       2.82**
                                (1.28)         (1.28)         (1.21)         (13.28)       (1.26)
Observations                      931           920            918             920          918
R-squared                         0.45          0.46           0.48            0.72         0.40
Year fixed effects                 Y              Y              Y              N             N
Country fixed effects              N              N              N              Y             N




                                                26
Table 3. Baseline Results with Greenfield ODI.

Notes: This table provides OLS estimation results of log(ODI) on bilateral trade. ODI refers to
outward direct investment in tradable, non-tradable, and natural resource sector, as well as all
greenfield investment. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table E. All
regressions control for year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in
parentheses, with *** (**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                              Dependent variable is log(ODI)
                                 (1)             (2)                  (3)             (4)
                              Tradable       Non-Tradable     Natural Resource     Greenfield

log(Commodity Imports)        0.22***             0.13**         0.35***            0.29***
                                (0.06)            (0.06)           (0.12)             (0.05)
log(Manufacture Exports)         -0.05              0.07            -0.13              0.09
                                (0.15)            (0.12)           (0.22)             (0.11)
log(GDP)                         -0.01              0.07          -0.43**              -0.18
                                (0.14)            (0.10)           (0.21)             (0.11)
log(Distance)                    -0.20           -0.52***           -0.29            -0.48**
                                (0.24)            (0.17)           (0.38)             (0.19)
Common Language                  -0.11             -0.54           -1.46*            -0.85**
                                (0.47)            (0.41)           (0.79)             (0.38)
Leg_French                       -0.24             -0.18            -0.47            -0.38**
                                (0.24)            (0.19)           (0.40)             (0.19)
Leg_German                    -1.24***           -0.81***        -3.00***           -1.30***
                                (0.41)            (0.29)           (0.73)             (0.32)
Leg_Scandinavian               -1.26**            -1.03*            -0.03           -1.85***
                                (0.50)            (0.54)           (0.77)             (0.43)
Leg_Socialist                  0.52**               0.23            -0.59              -0.12
                                (0.25)            (0.27)           (0.47)             (0.22)
Constant                        3.90*              3.38*         15.58***           8.23***
                                (2.22)            (1.99)           (3.42)             (1.77)
Observations                      372               345              211                569
R-squared                        0.18               0.17            0.26               0.22




                                              27
Table 4. Robustness Checks with alternative samples and estimation methods.

Notes: This table provides OLS estimation results of the logarithmic Chinese outward direct
investment (ODI) on bilateral trade based on different subsamples and estimation methods. All
regressions control for gravity variables described in Table 2 and year fixed effects (not
reported). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**, *)
signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                              Panel A: Exclude Hong Kong and Macau
                               (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)          (5)
                           Tradable     Non-Tradable Natural Resource          Greenfield   Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)     0.20***         0.19***            0.34***           0.30***      0.19***
                            (0.07)          (0.05)             (0.12)            (0.05)       (0.03)
log(Manufacture Exports)     -0.01           -0.03              -0.10             0.08       0.31***
                            (0.16)          (0.10)             (0.22)            (0.12)       (0.05)
Observations                  363             331                208              554          899
R-squared                     0.18            0.19               0.26             0.21         0.44
                                                Panel B: Exclude All Offshore Market
                           Tradable     Non-Tradable Natural Resource          Greenfield   Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)     0.22***         0.19***            0.35***           0.29***      0.25***
                            (0.07)          (0.06)             (0.13)            (0.06)       (0.04)
log(Manufacture Exports)     -0.03           -0.09              -0.07             0.06       0.28***
                            (0.18)          (0.12)             (0.22)            (0.13)       (0.06)
Observations                  329             292                195              502          796
R-squared                     0.17            0.19               0.26             0.22         0.47
                                                     Panel C: Tobit log(1+ODI)
                           Tradable     Non-Tradable Natural Resource          Greenfield   Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)       0.11          0.14**             1.23***           0.38***      0.36***
                            (0.08)          (0.07)             (0.17)            (0.07)       (0.03)
log(Manufacture Exports)   0.65***        0.52***                0.38           0.44***      0.72***
                            (0.20)          (0.17)             (0.35)            (0.16)       (0.06)
Observations                1,677           1,677               1,677            1,677        1,615
R-squared                   0.199           0.222               0.141            0.171        0.207
                                      Panel D: Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML)
                           Tradable     Non-Tradable Natural Resource          Greenfield
log(Commodity Imports)     0.27***           0.18              0.23**           0.35***
                            (0.06)          (0.12)             (0.11)            (0.06)
log(Manufacture Exports)     0.05            0.14               0.06              0.16
                            (0.17)          (0.13)             (0.17)            (0.13)
Observations                 372              345                211             1,677
R-squared                    0.24            0.08               0.17              0.26




                                               28
Table 5. Including Additional Variables.

Notes: This table provides OLS estimation results of the log of different measures of outward
direct investment (ODI) on bilateral trade, controlling for additional variables. Patent and
Trademark are respectively the total number of patent and trademark applications. Financial
Development is measured by the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions to GDP. Exchange Rate is the percentage appreciation of host country
currency relative to USD. Institutional Quality is the sum of corruption, law and order, and
bureaucratic quality indices from ICRG. All regressions control for gravity variables described
in Table 2 and year fixed effects (not reported). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in
parentheses, with *** (**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)
                            Tradable       Non-Tradable   Natural Resource   Greenfield   Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)         0.10              0.10         0.59***         0.29***      0.38***
                             (0.09)            (0.08)          (0.16)          (0.06)       (0.04)
log(Manufacture Exports)       0.31           0.49**             0.28         0.38**       0.99***
                             (0.20)            (0.20)          (0.46)          (0.17)       (0.16)
log(Patent)                    0.10              0.10            0.48            0.14        -0.00
                             (0.16)            (0.15)          (0.31)          (0.14)       (0.08)
log(Trademark)                 0.14           -0.51*            -0.57           -0.19     -0.60***
                             (0.29)            (0.29)          (0.46)          (0.22)       (0.14)
Financial Development       -0.01**          -0.01***        -0.02***        -0.01***       -0.00*
                             (0.00)            (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.00)
Exchange Rate                  0.22             -0.19           -1.90           0.27      -1.42***
                             (1.22)            (0.94)          (1.57)          (1.03)       (0.53)
Institutional Quality         -0.04              0.05            0.14           0.02         -0.02
                             (0.06)            (0.05)          (0.11)          (0.05)       (0.04)
Observations                   285               259             154             393          461
R-squared                      0.25             0.27            0.42            0.32          0.61




                                                 29
Table 6. RMB Swap Lines, Trade, and Chinese ODI.
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of ODI in tradable, non-tradable, natural resource sector,
as well as greenfield and aggregate ODI. Swap is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if
there is an effective RMB swap line in host country and 0 otherwise. All regressions control for
gravity variables described in Table 2 and year fixed effects (not reported). Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1
(5, 10) % level.

                                                    Panel A: Sample Period: 2003-2012
                                 Tradable   Non-Tradable Natural Resource Greenfield        Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)           0.20***       0.16***           0.32**           0.29***    0.17***
                                  (0.07)        (0.06)            (0.13)           (0.05)     (0.03)
log(Manufacture Exports)           -0.01          0.01             -0.13             0.09    0.36***
                                  (0.15)        (0.12)            (0.23)           (0.12)     (0.06)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap         0.13      -0.53***           0.65**             -0.11      -0.19
                                  (0.15)        (0.17)            (0.28)           (0.13)     (0.15)
log(Manufacture Exports)×Swap      -0.08       0.71***             -0.49             0.21    0.54***
                                  (0.21)        (0.21)            (0.41)           (0.16)     (0.19)
Swap                                0.28         -3.70             -1.04            -1.05   -5.62***
                                  (2.50)        (3.12)            (4.90)           (2.10)     (1.90)
Observations                        372           345               211              569        918
R-squared                           0.19          0.19             0.27              0.22       0.48
                                                    Panel B: Sample Period: 2008-2012
                                 Tradable   Non-Tradable Natural Resource Greenfield        Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)              0.14        0.14**            0.28*           0.26***    0.15***
                                  (0.09)        (0.07)            (0.16)           (0.08)     (0.04)
log(Manufactures Exports)           0.15         -0.04           -0.63**             0.01    0.38***
                                  (0.22)        (0.13)            (0.26)           (0.16)     (0.08)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap         0.22      -0.56***           0.59**             -0.08      -0.18
                                  (0.17)        (0.18)            (0.30)           (0.14)     (0.16)
log(Manufactures Exports)×Swap     -0.31       0.73***             0.28              0.14     0.45**
                                  (0.26)        (0.24)            (0.43)           (0.20)     (0.22)
Swap                                2.42         -3.57          -11.97**            -0.42    -4.52**
                                  (2.94)        (3.42)            (5.36)           (2.50)     (2.20)
Observations                        237           214               130              340        533
R-squared                           0.17          0.26             0.34              0.21       0.42




                                                30
Table 7. Instrumental Variable Approach: Trade and ODI
Notes: This table reports the first and second stage estimation results based on two-stage least square estimation. Log(Commodity Imports) and
log(Manufactures Exports) are instrumented with Connectivity, measured by the host country’s liner shipping connectivity index, Ship, the log of
the number of merchant fleet registered in host country, and Size, the log of geographic size in square kilometres. The dependent variable in the
second-stage estimation is log(ODI), where ODI refers to Chinese outward investment in tradable, non-tradable, natural resource sector, as well
as greenfield and aggregate ODI. All regressions control for gravity variables described in Table 2 and year fixed effects (not reported). The p-
values associated with the Kleibergen-Paap rank Lagrange Multiplier (Hansen J) statistic for the Under-identification (Over-identification) test
are reported. Weak-identification presents the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses, with
*** (**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.


                                              First Stage                                               Second Stage
                                    (1)                      (2)               (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                           log(Commodity Imports) log(Manufacture Exports)   Tradable   Non-Tradable Natural Resource    Greenfield    Aggregate
Connectivity                      -0.01***               0.02***
                                    (0.00)                (0.00)
Ship                                -0.07*               0.18***
                                    (0.04)                (0.02)
Size                               0.52***               0.15***
                                    (0.05)                (0.02)
log(Commodity Imports)                                                       0.84***         0.14         1.30***         0.79***       0.28***
                                                                              (0.13)        (0.13)         (0.25)          (0.12)        (0.07)
log(Manufacture Exports)                                                       0.06          0.33           1.23          1.23***       0.49***
                                                                              (0.52)        (0.30)         (1.13)          (0.37)        (0.14)
Observations                        669                     669                301           274            161             422           669
R-squared                           0.68                    0.89               0.81          0.87           0.21            0.85          0.84
Underidentification                                                            0.00          0.00           0.10            0.00          0.00
Weakidentification                                                            14.23         12.93           4.13           24.12         51.78
Overidentification                                                             0.32          0.36           0.49            0.89          0.03




                                                                        31
Table 8. Instrumental Variable Approach: The Role of RMB Swap Lines
Notes: This table reports the second stage estimation results for log(ODI) based on two-stage
least square estimation. Swap is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the host country has an
effective RMB swap line in a given year. In Panel A, log(Commodity Imports) and
log(Manufacture Exports) and their interactions with Swap are instrumented with Connectivity,
measured by the host country’s liner shipping connectivity index, Ship, the log of the number of
merchant fleet registered in host country, Size, the log of geographic size in square kilometres,
and their interactions with Swap. In Panel B, Swap is further instrumented with Fed, a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the host country has an effective liquidity swap lines with Federal
Reserve Bank and 0 otherwise. log(Commodity Imports) and log(Manufacture Exports) and their
interactions with Swap are instrumented with Connectivity, Ship, Size and their interactions with
Fed. All regressions control for gravity variables and year fixed effects (not reported). The p-
values associated with the Kleibergen-Paap rank Lagrange Multiplier (Hansen J) statistic for the
Under-identication (Over-identication) test are reported. Weak-identification presents the Cragg-
Donald Wald F statistic. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses, with ***
(**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                    Panel A: Instrument Commodity Imports and Manufacture Exports
                                Tradable   Non-Tradable Natural Resource     Greenfield     Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)          0.66***         0.24        0.94***           0.74***        0.28***
                                  (0.19)       (0.16)         (0.26)           (0.17)         (0.08)
log(Manufacture Exports)            0.02       0.50*           0.65           1.11***         0.38**
                                  (0.52)       (0.27)         (0.69)           (0.34)         (0.16)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap        -0.40     -1.69***       3.43***             0.56           -0.72
                                  (0.79)       (0.65)         (1.22)           (0.49)         (0.51)
log(Manufacture Exports)×Swap      -0.66        0.14           0.34             0.20           0.74*
                                  (0.70)       (0.35)         (0.84)           (0.38)         (0.38)
Swap                              18.09       24.56**       -60.01**           -12.26          -1.30
                                 (20.84)      (12.12)        (27.50)           (9.80)         (9.29)
Observations                        197         177            108               264            410
R-squared                           0.84        0.88           0.36             0.87            0.87
Underidentification                 0.00        0.00           0.01             0.00            0.00
Weakidentification                  6.65        6.47           3.33             12.76          18.24
Overidentification                  0.07        0.19           0.81              0.14           0.00
                                 Panel B: Instrument Commodity Imports, Manufacture Exports and Swap
                                Tradable   Non-Tradable Natural Resource     Greenfield     Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)          0.72***        0.27          0.74**           0.69***        0.40***
                                  (0.20)      (0.18)         (0.29)            (0.18)         (0.10)
log(Manufacture Exports)           -0.15     0.64**           0.49            1.05***          0.27
                                  (0.66)      (0.32)         (0.65)            (0.37)         (0.20)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap        -3.56      -3.93*        10.92**             -0.72          1.23
                                  (2.87)      (2.17)         (4.88)            (1.80)         (2.16)
log(Manufacture Exports)×Swap      -1.96       -1.66         4.34**             -0.62         4.11**
                                  (2.37)      (1.99)         (1.83)            (1.79)         (1.99)
Swap                              93.24        93.37       -247.43**           24.41          -95.41
                                 (86.28)     (68.12)        (103.25)          (60.34)        (68.09)
Observations                        197         177            108               264           410
R-squared                           0.79        0.79          0.74               0.86          0.70
Underidentification                 0.31        0.20          0.16               0.07          0.13
Weakidentification                  0.55        0.65          2.15               1.00          0.79
Overidentification                  0.39        0.52          0.83               0.68          0.15




                                                32
Table 9. Chinese ODI and Trade Before and After the Global Financial Crisis.

Notes: GFC is a dummy variable that equals to 1 from year 2008 onwards, and zero otherwise.
All regressions control for gravity variables described in Table 2 and year fixed effects (not
reported). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**, *)
signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                               Tradable   Non-Tradable   Natural Resource   Greenfield   Aggregate
log(Commodity Imports)         0.25***        0.13           0.39**          0.29***     0.17***
                                (0.09)       (0.09)           (0.19)          (0.07)      (0.05)
log(Manufacture Exports)         -0.22        -0.02            0.05            0.04      0.31***
                                (0.15)       (0.15)           (0.23)          (0.12)      (0.06)
log(Commodity Imports)×GFC       -0.07        -0.02            0.01            -0.01       -0.02
                                (0.12)       (0.11)           (0.23)          (0.10)      (0.06)
log(Manufacture Exports)×GFC   0.33**        0.25*           -0.41**           0.12      0.14**
                                (0.15)       (0.14)           (0.20)          (0.11)      (0.07)
Observations                      372          345             211              569         918
R-squared                        0.19         0.18             0.28            0.22        0.48




                                              33
Table 10. Heterogeneity across firm ownership.

Notes: This table provides the OLS estimation of outward direct investment (ODI) originated
from State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) and Private-Owned Enterprise (POE). An investor is
classified as a SOE if at least 25.01% of its equity is ultimate owned by Chinese government and
POE otherwise. All regressions control for gravity variables described in Table 2 and year fixed
effects (not reported). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,
*) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                            Panel A: State-Own Enterprises (SOEs)
                                 Tradable        Non-Tradable   Natural Resource        SOE
log(Commodity Imports)            0.28*              0.12             0.18            0.38***
                                  (0.14)            (0.10)           (0.14)            (0.09)
log(Manufacture Exports)           -0.35             0.27             0.20              -0.00
                                  (0.41)            (0.21)           (0.43)            (0.20)
Observations                        127              192              133                335
R-squared                           0.25             0.11             0.30               0.14
                                            Panel B: Private-Own Enterprises (POEs)
                                Tradable          Non-Tradable Natural Resource        POE
log(Commodity Imports)           0.31***              -0.08            0.28            0.11
                                  (0.08)              (0.10)          (0.18)          (0.07)
log(Manufacture Exports)           -0.12               0.22            0.04            0.25
                                  (0.21)              (0.25)          (0.32)          (0.16)
Observations                        325                246             111             455
R-squared                           0.20               0.15            0.32            0.11
H0: The coefficient of log(Commodity Imports) is the same for SOE and POE related ODI
χ2                                  0.05                2.07            0.23            5.50
p-value                             0.82                0.15            0.63            0.02
H0: The coefficient of log(Manufacture Exports) is the same for SOE and POE related ODI
χ2                                 0.32               0.03             0.11             0.97
p-value                            0.57               0.87             0.74             0.32




                                                 34
Table 11. Heterogeneous Role of RMB Swap Lines across Firm Ownership.

Notes: The sample period is from 2008 to 2012. An investor is classified as a State-Owned
Enterprise (SOE) if at least 25.01% of its equity is ultimate owned by Chinese government
and Private-Owned Enterprise (POE) otherwise. Swap is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the
host country has an effective RMB swap line in a given year. All regressions control for gravity
variables described in Table 2 and year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
are in parentheses, with *** (**, *) signifying statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) % level.

                                                  Panel A: State-Own Enterprises (SOEs)
                                      Tradable        Non-Tradable   Natural Resource        SOE
log(Commodity Imports)                   0.22              0.12            0.22            0.33***
                                       (0.16)            (0.12)           (0.21)            (0.13)
log(Manufacture Exports)                -0.56             -0.02            -0.67            -0.46*
                                       (0.55)            (0.25)           (0.63)            (0.27)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap              0.79             -0.97          2.38***             -0.12
                                        (0.59)           (0.59)           (0.86)            (0.20)
log(Manufacture Exports)×Swap            -0.42            0.40             0.97              0.81**
                                        (0.92)           (0.43)           (0.64)             (0.33)
Swap                                    -4.24             9.07          -54.09***          -11.39***
                                        (7.22)          (14.33)          (19.15)             (4.21)
Observations                               99             137               73                217
R-squared                                 0.22            0.18             0.47               0.11
                                                 Panel B: Private-Own Enterprises (POEs)
                                      Tradable        Non-Tradable   Natural Resource        POE
log(Commodity Imports)                0.28***             -0.08            0.08              0.08
                                       (0.10)            (0.13)           (0.27)            (0.09)
log(Manufacture Exports)                0.04               0.35            -0.22            0.46**
                                       (0.26)            (0.34)           (0.35)            (0.19)
log(Commodity Imports)×Swap              -0.26            -0.12          1.03**              -0.08
                                        (0.21)           (0.27)          (0.51)             (0.19)
log(Manufacture Exports)×Swap            0.12              0.48            -0.40             -0.10
                                        (0.29)           (0.35)           (0.56)            (0.29)
Swap                                     3.03             -6.58            -6.32              3.67
                                        (4.22)           (4.48)           (5.86)            (4.27)
Observations                             200               147              77                273
R-squared                                0.17              0.17            0.43               0.14




                                                 35
Appendix Table A. Top China’s Direct Foreign Investment Activities and Investing Companies
(Outward Greenfield FDI) Before and After the Global Financial Crisis.
This table reports the largest capital investments by China in host countries from January 2003
to January 2015, based on fDi Intelligence database.




                                              36
Appendix Table B. Swap lines provided by US Federal Reserve (billion US$), European Central Bank (ECB,
billion Euro), and People’s Bank of China (PBOC, billion RMB), December 2007 – October 2014.
Source: Aizenman, Jinjarak and Park (2014) and Garcia-Herrero and Xia (2015).


Recipient Country            Fed                    ECB                            PBOC
                       (billion US$)   (billion Euro) (billion US$)     (billion RMB) (billion US$)
Albania                                                                         2           0.3
Argentina                                                                      70          11.1
Australia                   30                                                200           33
Brazil                      30                                                190          31.4
Belarus                                                                        20           3.2
Canada                 30, standing       standing
Denmark                     15               15            20
ECB                    300, standing                                         350            57.8
Hong Kong                                                                    400            66.1
Hungary                                      5              9                 10
Iceland                                     1.5             2                3.5            0.6
Indonesia                                                                    100            15.9
Japan                  120, standing      standing                            20             3.2
Kazakhstan                                                                    7             1.2
Korea                       30                                               360            59.5
Mexico                      30
Malaysia                                                                     180            29.7
Mongolia                                                                     10             1.7
Norway                      15
New Zealand                 15                                                25            4.1
Pakistan                                                                      10            1.7
Poland                                      10
Russia                                                                     standing       standing
Sweden                      30
Singapore                   30                                               300            49.6
Switzerland            60, standing       standing       standing
Thailand                                                                     70             2.4
Turkey                                                                       10             1.6
Ukraine                                                                      15             2.4
United Arab Emirates                                                         35             5.8
United Kingdom         100, standing      standing       standing            200            33
Uzbekistan                                                                   0.7            0.1




                                                  37
Appendix Table C. Country List.

Countries that appear in both (Greenfield) fDi Intelligence (FT) and (Aggregate) UNCTAD FDI database. Countries

marked by * are not included in the estimation sample due to the missing observations in the control variables.

                 Afghanistan              Ethiopia           Luxembourg             Senegal
                 Algeria                  Fiji               Macau                  Singapore
                 Angola                   Finland            Madagascar             Slovakia
                 Argentina*               France             Malaysia               South Africa
                 Australia                Gabon              Mexico                 South Korea
                 Austria                  Georgia            Mongolia               Spain
                 Azerbaijan               Germany            Morocco                Sudan
                 Bangladesh               Ghana              Mozambique             Sweden
                 Belarus                  Greece             Myanmar (Burma)*       Switzerland
                 Belgium                  Guyana             Namibia                Syria*
                 Bolivia                  Honduras           Nepal                  Taiwan*
                 Bosnia-Herzegovina       Hong Kong          Netherlands            Tajikistan
                 Botswana                 Hungary            New Zealand            Tanzania
                 Brazil                   India              Niger                  Thailand
                 Brunei                   Indonesia          Nigeria                Tunisia
                 Bulgaria                 Iran               Norway                 Turkey
                 Cambodia                 Iraq               Oman                   UAE
                 Cameroon                 Ireland            Pakistan               United Kingdom
                 Canada                   Israel             Panama                 Uganda
                 Cayman Islands*          Italy              Papua New Guinea       Ukraine
                 Chile                    Japan              Paraguay               United States
                 Colombia                 Jordan             Peru                   Uruguay
                 Congo (DRC)              Kazakhstan         Philippines            Uzbekistan
                 d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast)   Kenya              Poland                 Venezuela
                 Croatia                  Kuwait             Portugal               Vietnam
                 Cyprus                   Kyrgyzstan         Qatar                  Yemen
                 Czech Republic           Laos               Romania                Zambia
                 Denmark                  Latvia             Russia                 Zimbabwe
                 Ecuador                  Liberia            Rwanda
                 Egypt                    Lithuania          Saudi Arabia




                                                     38
Appendix Table D. Classifications of ODI Sectors in the Estimation based on Industry Groups in fDi Intelligence (Financial

                     Times) database.



                                     Tradables                                               Nontradables            Natural Resources
 Aerospace                             Electronic Components                     Business Services          Coal, Oil and Natural Gas
 Alternative/Renewable energy          Engines & Turbines                        Communications             Ceramics & Glass
 Automotive Components                 Food & Tobacco                            Financial Services         Metals
 Automotive OEM                        Industrial Machinery, Equipment & Tools   Healthcare                 Plastics
 Beverages                             Medical Devices                           Hotels & Tourism           Rubber
 Biotechnology                         Non-Automotive Transport OEM              Leisure & Entertainment    Minerals
 Building & Construction Materials     Paper, Printing & Packaging               Real Estate                Wood Products
 Business Machines & Equipment         Pharmaceuticals                           Software & IT services
 Chemicals                             Semiconductors                            Transportation
 Consumer Electronics                  Textiles                                  Warehousing & Storage
 Consumer Products




                                                                          39
            Appendix Table E. Variables Definitions.

Variable                        Definition                                                                  Data Source
Dependent Variable
Aggregate                       The bilateral aggregate outward direct investment originated from           UNCTAD FDI/TNC
                                China to a host country i
Tradable                        The sum of ODI directed to the tradable sector in country i at year t       fDi Intelligence
Non-Tradable                    The sum of ODI directed to the non-tradable sector in country i at year t   fDi Intelligence
Natural Resource                The sum of ODI directed to the natural resources sector in country i at     fDi Intelligence
                                year t
SOE                             The sum of ODI by state-owned enterprises to country i at year t            fDi Intelligence/ORBIS
POE                             The sum of ODI by private-owned enterprises to country i at year t          fDi Intelligence/ORBIS
Key Explanatory Variables
Manufacture Exports             The total export of manufacture goods from China to host country i at       UN Comtrade
                                year t

Commodity Imports               The total import of commodity goods by China from host country i at         UN Comtrade
                                year t

Swap                            A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if there is a currency swap        PBOC website
                                agreement between Peoples’ Bank of China (PBOC) and the central
                                bank of host country i at year t
Export                          The total Chinese export to country i at year t                             China Statistical Yearbook
Import                          The total Chinese import from country i at year t                           China Statistical Yearbook
Trade                           The total Chinese trade (import plus export) with country i at year t       China Statistical Yearbook
Cultural Similarity
Distance                        The distance between China and the host country in kilometers               CEPII
                                weighted by the population (to account for population density)
Common language                 A dummy variable that equals to 1 if at least 9% of the host country        CEPII
                                population speak the same language with that of China.

Instrumental Variable
Size                            The log of geographic area of host-country territory measured in square     WDI
                                kilometers
Connectivity                    The liner shipping connectivity index                                       UNCTAD
Ship                            The log of the number of merchant ships registered in host countries        UNCTAD
Fed                             A dummy that equals to 1 if the central bank in host country in yeatyear    Fed Website
                                t has an effective liquidity swap line with the Federal Reserve Central
                                Bank and 0 otherwise.
Other Control Variables                                                                                     WDI
GDP                             The gross domestic product of host country i at year t                      WDI
Patent                          The total number of patent applications by residents and nonresidents in    WDI
                                host country i at year t
Exchange Rate                   The exchange rate of host currency against USD at year t                    WDI


Trademark                       The amount of international reserve in host country i at year t             WDI
Financial Development           The private credit by deposit money banks and                               WDI
                                other financial institutions divided GDP between host country
                                and China
Institutional Quality           The sum of corruption, law and order, and bureaucratic                      ICRG
                                quality between host country and China. Details are
                                provided in Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005)




                                                                  40
41
