NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ETHNIC COMPLEMENTARITIES AFTER THE OPENING OF CHINA:
HOW CHINESE GRADUATE STUDENTS AFFECTED THE PRODUCTIVITY OF THEIR ADVISORS
George J. Borjas
Kirk B. Doran
Ying Shen
Working Paper 21096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21096

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by George J. Borjas, Kirk B. Doran, and Ying Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Ethnic Complementarities after the Opening of China: How Chinese Graduate Students Affected
the Productivity of Their Advisors
George J. Borjas, Kirk B. Doran, and Ying Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 21096
April 2015
JEL No. D83,J24,J61,O31
ABSTRACT
The largest and most important flow of scientific talent in the world is the migration of international
students to the doctoral programs offered by universities in industrialized countries. This paper uses
the opening of China in 1978 to estimate the causal effect of this flow on the productivity of their professors
in mathematics departments across the United States. Our identification strategy relies on both the
suddenness of the opening of China and on a key feature of scientific production: intra-ethnic collaboration.
The new Chinese students were more likely to be mentored by American professors with Chinese
heritage. The increased access that the Chinese-American advisors had to a new pool of considerable
talent led to a substantial increase in their productivity. Despite these sizable intra-ethnic knowledge
spillovers, the relatively fixed size of doctoral mathematics programs (and the resulting crowdout of
American students) implied that comparable non-Chinese advisors experienced a decline in the number
of students they mentored and a concurrent decline in their research productivity. In fact, the productivity
gains accruing to Chinese-American advisors were almost exactly offset by the losses suffered by
the non-Chinese advisors. Finally, it is unlikely that the gains from the supply shock will be more evident
in the next generation, as the Chinese students begin to contribute to mathematical knowledge. The
rate of publication and the quality of the output of the Chinese students is comparable to that of the
American students in their cohort.

George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
Kirk B. Doran
438 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kdoran@nd.edu

Ying Shen
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Ying.Shen.24@nd.edu

	  

3	  

Ethnic Complementarities after the Opening of China:
How Chinese Graduate Students Affected
the Productivity of Their Advisors
George J. Borjas, Kirk B. Doran, and Ying Shen*
I. Introduction
Scientific	  knowledge	  is	  essential	  for	  long-­‐term	  economic	  growth.	  Because	  science	  is	  
a	  social	  and	  reciprocal	  endeavor	  (Lucas,	  2009),	  the	  production	  of	  scientific	  knowledge	  
depends	  heavily	  on	  knowledge	  spillovers	  in	  which	  one	  person’s	  knowledge	  output	  
becomes	  another	  person’s	  knowledge	  input.	  Although	  a	  number	  of	  studies	  have	  found	  
evidence	  for	  such	  spillovers	  (e.g.,	  Waldinger,	  Moser,	  and	  Voena,	  2014),	  the	  overall	  evidence	  
is	  mixed.	  Moreover,	  even	  when	  spillovers	  are	  found,	  little	  is	  known	  about	  how	  to	  harness	  
them.	  Despite	  this	  uncertainty,	  one	  specific	  proposal	  surfaces	  repeatedly	  in	  policy	  
discussions:	  the	  large-­‐scale	  immigration	  of	  high-­‐skill	  persons	  opens	  up	  the	  opportunity	  for	  
knowledge	  spillovers	  to	  occur	  and	  for	  increasing	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  native-­‐born	  
scientific	  workforce.	  
A	  careful	  examination	  of	  the	  existing	  research	  reveals	  an	  interesting	  pattern.	  On	  the	  
one	  hand,	  there	  seem	  to	  be	  powerful	  knowledge	  spillovers	  among	  scientists	  who	  are	  
directly	  collaborating	  with	  each	  other	  (Waldinger,	  2010;	  Azoulay,	  Zivin,	  and	  Wang,	  2010).	  
On	  the	  other	  hand,	  diminishing	  returns	  may	  dominate	  when	  scientists	  compete	  for	  topic-­‐
specific	  or	  location-­‐specific	  resources	  (Borjas	  and	  Doran,	  2012;	  and	  the	  related	  work	  of	  
Waldinger,	  2012).	  A	  natural	  inference	  that	  can	  be	  drawn	  from	  these	  conflicting	  results	  is	  
that	  a	  high-­‐skill	  supply	  shock	  is	  more	  likely	  to	  generate	  spillovers	  that	  outweigh	  the	  
competitive	  effects	  if:	  (a)	  collaboration	  with	  the	  newcomers	  is	  more	  likely;	  and/or	  (b)	  the	  
newcomers	  are	  less	  likely	  to	  compete	  for	  the	  scarce	  resources	  that	  are	  necessary	  for	  
knowledge	  production,	  such	  as	  faculty	  slots,	  grant	  resources,	  and	  journal	  space.	  
In	  this	  paper,	  we	  examine	  the	  resulting	  productivity	  effects	  of	  a	  large	  high-­‐skill	  
supply	  shock	  that	  shares	  both	  of	  these	  characteristics:	  the	  “immigration”	  of	  young	  graduate	  
students	  in	  mathematics	  from	  China.	  These	  students	  were	  eager	  to	  learn	  from	  and	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Dame.	  

*	  Borjas:	  Harvard	  Kennedy	  School;	  Doran	  and	  Shen,	  Department	  of	  Economics,	  University	  of	  Notre	  

	  

4	  

collaborate	  with	  professors	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  but,	  as	  graduate	  students,	  were	  not	  
competing	  for	  funds	  or	  job	  positions	  with	  their	  advisors.	  Put	  differently,	  there	  was	  no	  direct	  
competition	  between	  the	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  and	  their	  advisors.	  
Our	  study	  makes	  use	  of	  a	  historic	  natural	  experiment	  that	  affected	  the	  supply	  of	  
Chinese	  doctoral	  students:	  Vice	  Premier	  Deng	  Xiaoping's	  "Open	  Up"	  reforms	  of	  December	  
1978.	  Before	  Deng	  Xiaoping's	  rapid	  rise	  to	  power,	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution	  both	  destroyed	  
the	  Chinese	  higher	  education	  system	  and	  engendered	  strict	  isolationism,	  causing	  China	  to	  
send	  virtually	  no	  students	  to	  doctoral	  programs	  abroad	  for	  over	  a	  decade.	  After	  1978,	  Deng	  
Xiaoping's	  reforms	  both	  facilitated	  the	  acquiring	  of	  the	  secondary	  education	  that	  is	  a	  
prerequisite	  to	  “produce”	  future	  graduate	  students,	  and	  encouraged	  the	  students	  to	  acquire	  
their	  graduate	  training	  in	  Western	  universities.	  This	  policy	  shift	  resulted	  in	  a	  very	  large	  and	  
sudden	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  sent	  to	  study	  in	  doctoral	  programs	  
abroad.	  
The	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  in	  the	  doctoral	  mathematics	  programs	  of	  
American	  universities	  can	  be	  expected	  to	  have	  many	  productivity	  repercussions.	  One	  
particular	  consequence	  of	  this	  supply	  shock	  is	  implied	  by	  the	  extensive	  literature	  on	  
diasporas.	  Multiple	  studies	  have	  documented	  that	  people	  of	  similar	  ethnic	  background	  
dispersed	  around	  the	  world	  are	  much	  more	  likely	  to	  communicate	  with	  each	  other,	  to	  
spread	  technological	  knowledge	  within	  their	  ethnic	  and	  linguistic	  network,	  and	  to	  
collaborate	  on	  joint	  ventures	  (Rauch	  and	  Trindade,	  2002;	  Nanda	  and	  Khana,	  2010;	  Kerr,	  
2008;	  and	  Kerr	  and	  Kerr,	  2014).	  The	  “ethnic	  magnet”	  hypothesis	  suggests	  that	  scientists	  
may	  experience	  the	  most	  powerful	  knowledge	  spillovers	  when	  they	  interact	  with	  those	  
most	  ethnically	  similar	  to	  them.	  In	  fact,	  as	  Freeman	  and	  Huang	  (2014)	  show,	  there	  is	  a	  very	  
strong	  propensity	  for	  ethnically	  similar	  scientists	  to	  coauthor	  scientific	  papers.	  
If	  scientists	  indeed	  experience	  the	  most	  powerful	  knowledge	  spillovers	  when	  they	  
interact	  with	  those	  most	  ethnically	  similar	  to	  them,	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  
students	  in	  mathematics	  should	  result	  in	  three	  distinct	  outcomes.	  First,	  advisors	  with	  
Chinese	  ancestry	  should	  mentor	  more	  of	  the	  new	  Chinese	  doctoral	  students	  than	  would	  
otherwise	  similar	  “American”	  advisors	  (i.e.,	  mathematicians	  who	  did	  not	  have	  Chinese	  
ancestry).	  Second,	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  should	  coauthor	  with	  their	  new	  Chinese	  
students	  more	  frequently	  than	  would	  be	  predicted	  by	  their	  earlier	  collaboration	  profiles,	  or	  

	  

5	  

than	  otherwise	  similar	  American	  advisors	  are	  doing	  with	  the	  (smaller	  number	  of)	  Chinese	  
students	  that	  they	  managed	  to	  attract.	  Third,	  the	  increased	  intra-­‐ethnic	  collaboration	  
between	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  and	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  should	  perhaps	  lead	  to	  
greater	  research	  output	  for	  those	  advisors,	  even	  apart	  from	  coauthoring	  with	  the	  Chinese	  
students,	  as	  the	  knowledge	  gained	  from	  the	  new	  interactions	  becomes	  an	  input	  in	  their	  
own	  knowledge	  production	  function.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  these	  implications,	  we	  make	  use	  of	  two	  datasets	  introduced	  in	  Borjas	  
and	  Doran	  (2012).	  The	  first	  is	  the	  archive	  maintained	  by	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  
Society	  (AMS)	  MathSciNet	  database	  of	  all	  papers	  published	  in	  mathematics	  and	  related	  
fields	  worldwide.	  The	  second	  is	  a	  collection	  of	  advisor-­‐advisee	  matches	  created	  and	  
maintained	  by	  the	  Mathematics	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP).	  Using	  name-­‐matching	  techniques,	  
we	  identify	  which	  American	  advisors	  and	  which	  doctoral	  students	  in	  the	  MGP	  data	  likely	  
had	  Chinese	  ancestry.	  We	  then	  match	  records	  from	  the	  AMS	  and	  MGP	  files	  to	  examine	  the	  
trend	  in	  the	  scientific	  output	  of	  advisors	  over	  time.	  
Employing	  a	  simple	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  strategy,	  we	  find	  that	  the	  productivity	  
of	  American	  advisors	  with	  Chinese	  ancestry	  increased	  substantially	  after	  the	  opening	  up	  of	  
China	  and	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  students	  began	  to	  substantially	  affect	  enrollment	  in	  
American	  mathematics	  departments.	  Specifically,	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  began	  to	  
mentor	  more	  Chinese	  students;	  these	  mentoring	  relationships	  resulted	  in	  an	  increased	  
number	  of	  published	  papers,	  some	  of	  which	  were	  the	  result	  of	  collaborations	  with	  the	  
Chinese	  students;	  and	  there	  was	  some	  increased	  productivity	  for	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors	  even	  after	  netting	  out	  the	  “direct”	  effect	  of	  increased	  collaboration	  with	  Chinese	  
graduate	  students.	  
Although	  these	  beneficial	  productivity	  effects	  are	  the	  ones	  that	  are	  commonly	  
conjectured	  and	  emphasized	  in	  the	  literature,	  our	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  carry	  the	  exercise	  one	  
step	  further,	  a	  step	  that	  has	  not	  been	  examined	  by	  previous	  studies.	  In	  particular,	  the	  
supply	  shock	  could	  also	  influence	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  American	  advisors	  who	  did	  not	  
have	  Chinese	  ancestry.	  After	  all,	  the	  increased	  mentoring	  opportunities	  for	  the	  Chinese-­‐
American	  advisors	  may	  have	  led	  to	  a	  shift	  in	  departmental	  resources,	  and	  these	  resources	  
likely	  flowed	  away	  from	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  advisors	  to	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese-­‐
American	  advisors.	  This	  kind	  of	  redistribution	  would	  be	  particularly	  important	  if	  there	  are	  

	  

6	  

significant	  crowdout	  effects	  from	  the	  supply	  shock—in	  other	  words,	  if	  American	  graduate	  
students	  were	  displaced	  by	  the	  increased	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  because	  of	  the	  
relatively	  fixed	  size	  of	  mathematics	  doctoral	  programs.	  In	  short,	  although	  there	  was	  no	  
direct	  competition	  between	  the	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  and	  their	  advisors,	  the	  supply	  
shock	  may	  have	  introduced	  indirect	  competitive	  forces	  between	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors	  and	  the	  American	  advisors	  who	  did	  not	  have	  a	  Chinese	  heritage.	  
Our	  empirical	  analysis	  contrasts	  the	  experience	  of	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  
with	  that	  of	  two	  distinct	  groups	  of	  American	  mathematicians:	  the	  advisors	  employed	  in	  the	  
departments	  that	  attracted	  most	  of	  the	  Chinese	  students	  and	  the	  advisors	  employed	  in	  
departments	  that	  attracted	  few	  Chinese	  students.	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  the	  departments	  that	  
attracted	  the	  Chinese	  students	  were	  departments	  that	  had	  a	  Chinese	  “connection,”	  as	  
measured	  by	  the	  presence	  of	  at	  least	  one	  Chinese-­‐American	  professor	  actively	  advising	  
students	  prior	  to	  the	  opening	  of	  China.	  
Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  supply	  shock	  had	  differential	  effects	  on	  the	  various	  groups	  of	  
advisors.	  Specifically,	  there	  was	  a	  drop	  in	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  American	  advisors	  
employed	  in	  the	  mathematics	  departments	  most	  affected	  by	  the	  supply	  shock.	  These	  
advisors	  experienced	  a	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  students	  they	  mentored	  and	  in	  the	  number	  
of	  papers	  they	  published.	  As	  is	  typical	  with	  supply	  shocks,	  therefore,	  there	  are	  winners	  and	  
losers.	  In	  particular,	  our	  study	  documents	  that	  there	  are	  winners	  and	  losers	  even	  when	  
there	  are	  sizable	  productivity	  spillovers	  benefitting	  a	  particular	  segment	  of	  the	  scientific	  
workforce.	  
Our	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  add	  up	  the	  productivity	  gains	  accruing	  to	  the	  winners	  and	  the	  
productivity	  losses	  suffered	  by	  the	  losers	  to	  calculate	  the	  change	  in	  the	  aggregate	  output	  of	  
the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors.	  The	  exercise	  reveals	  an	  unambiguous	  conclusion:	  the	  aggregate	  
output	  did	  not	  change.	  The	  additional	  research	  output	  produced	  by	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  was	  almost	  exactly	  offset	  by	  the	  smaller	  output	  produced	  by	  
the	  affected	  American	  advisors.	  Moreover,	  there	  is	  no	  evidence	  that	  the	  aggregate	  output	  is	  
somehow	  “better”	  in	  any	  qualitative	  sense.	  
Finally,	  our	  analysis	  examines	  the	  possibility	  that	  the	  efficiency	  gains	  from	  the	  
supply	  shock	  might	  show	  up	  in	  subsequent	  years,	  as	  the	  Chinese	  students	  become	  part	  of	  
the	  mathematics	  profession	  and	  their	  research	  output	  contributes	  to	  the	  body	  of	  

	  

7	  

mathematical	  knowledge.	  There	  is,	  however,	  no	  evidence	  to	  suggest	  that	  the	  quantity	  or	  
quality	  of	  the	  output	  eventually	  produced	  by	  the	  Chinese	  students	  themselves	  is	  far	  
superior	  to	  that	  produced	  by	  the	  comparable	  American	  students	  from	  their	  cohort.1	  
In	  sum,	  substantial	  knowledge	  spillovers	  were	  indeed	  generated	  by	  a	  supply	  shock	  
of	  doctoral	  students	  who	  had	  strong	  incentives	  to	  collaborate	  with	  their	  ethnically	  similar	  
advisors.	  As	  is	  often	  the	  case,	  however,	  such	  supply	  shocks	  have	  additional	  ramifications,	  
particularly	  on	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workers	  who	  are	  not	  part	  of	  the	  ethnic	  network.	  These	  
additional	  ramifications	  can	  greatly	  attenuate	  the	  net	  benefits	  resulting	  from	  the	  
knowledge	  spillovers.	  
	  
II. Historical Background
Between	  1949	  and	  1969,	  the	  Chinese	  communist	  regime	  was	  firmly	  committed	  to	  
the	  Sino-­‐Soviet	  alliance.	  As	  part	  of	  this	  alliance,	  the	  Chinese	  government	  implemented	  the	  
“leaning	  to	  one	  side”	  policy,	  a	  policy	  that	  committed	  the	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  China	  to	  
pursue	  actions	  that	  systematically	  favored	  interactions	  with	  the	  communist	  bloc.	  In	  the	  
higher	  education	  context,	  this	  policy	  instituted	  strict	  controls	  on	  the	  subset	  of	  countries	  
that	  Chinese	  students	  were	  allowed	  to	  study	  in,	  with	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  becoming	  the	  
dominant	  country	  receiving	  Chinese	  international	  students	  (He,	  2008).	  Between	  1949	  and	  
1965,	  for	  example,	  8,424	  Chinese	  students,	  or	  about	  78	  percent	  of	  all	  international	  students	  
originating	  in	  China,	  enrolled	  in	  Soviet	  universities,	  and	  most	  of	  these	  students	  enrolled	  in	  
science	  and	  technology	  programs.	  Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  United	  States	  received	  a	  trivially	  
small	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  during	  the	  period—only	  around	  200	  Chinese	  students	  
enrolled	  in	  the	  universities	  of	  Western	  developed	  countries.	  Moreover,	  most	  of	  the	  200	  
Chinese	  students	  in	  Western	  countries	  studied	  foreign	  languages,	  with	  only	  21	  of	  them	  
enrolling	  in	  programs	  in	  the	  natural	  sciences	  (Mathur,	  2007).	  
The	  social,	  economic,	  and	  political	  upheaval	  that	  began	  in	  the	  spring	  of	  1966,	  which	  
is	  now	  collectively	  known	  as	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution,	  and	  which	  lasted	  until	  October	  1976,	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  In	  related	  work,	  Stuen,	  Mobarak,	  and	  Maskus	  (2012)	  find	  that	  exogenous	  increases	  in	  the	  total	  

number	  of	  graduate	  students	  enrolled	  in	  a	  given	  field	  at	  a	  given	  university	  in	  a	  given	  year	  cause	  an	  increase	  in	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  publications	  produced	  (by	  professors	  and	  students	  combined),	  although	  the	  impact	  of	  an	  
additional	  foreign	  or	  domestic	  graduate	  students	  seems,	  on	  average,	  to	  be	  the	  same.	  

	  

8	  

further	  cemented	  the	  geographic	  and	  intellectual	  isolation	  of	  Chinese	  students.	  The	  higher	  
education	  system	  in	  China	  was	  effectively	  destroyed	  during	  those	  years	  so	  that	  a	  
remarkably	  high	  number	  of	  young	  people	  lost	  their	  opportunities	  to	  ever	  pursue	  a	  higher	  
education	  (Deng,	  1997).	  Premier	  Mao	  Zedong	  himself	  laid	  out	  the	  parameters	  for	  how	  the	  
Cultural	  Revolution	  would	  be	  applied	  in	  the	  education	  sector	  by	  advising	  students	  to:2	  
	  
Hold	  high	  the	  great	  banner	  of	  the	  proletarian	  cultural	  revolution,	  thoroughly	  
expose	  the	  reactionary	  bourgeois	  stand	  of	  those	  so-­‐called	  "academic	  
authorities"	  who	  oppose	  the	  Party	  and	  socialism,	  thoroughly	  criticize	  and	  
repudiate	  the	  reactionary	  bourgeois	  ideas	  in	  the	  sphere	  of	  academic	  work,	  
education,	  journalism,	  literature	  and	  art	  and	  publishing,	  and	  seize	  the	  
leadership	  in	  these	  cultural	  spheres.	  
	  
Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  urgent	  call	  to	  action	  had	  dramatic	  and	  violent	  consequences.	  As	  
MacFarquhar	  and	  Schoenhals	  (2006,	  p.	  126)	  describe	  in	  their	  comprehensive	  history	  of	  the	  
Cultural	  Revolution:3	  

	  

	  
In	  Beijing’s	  western	  district	  alone,	  in	  the	  course	  of	  little	  more	  than	  two	  weeks,	  
the	  violence	  left	  close	  to	  one	  hundred	  teachers,	  school	  officials,	  and	  
educational	  cadres	  dead.	  The	  number	  of	  those	  injured	  was,	  according	  to	  one	  
investigation,	  simply	  “too	  large	  to	  be	  calculated”.	  In	  every	  one	  of	  eighty-­‐five	  
elite	  colleges,	  middle	  schools,	  and	  elementary	  schools	  throughout	  China	  
investigated	  by	  a	  Chinese	  scholar	  after	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution,	  teachers	  were	  
tortured	  by	  students.	  At	  twelve	  of	  them,	  a	  teacher	  was	  beaten	  to	  death;	  at	  one	  
school,	  two	  teachers	  were	  murdered.	  
As	  part	  of	  the	  ideological	  cleansing,	  China	  further	  implemented	  a	  closed-­‐door	  policy	  

that	  led	  to	  a	  self-­‐imposed	  international	  isolation,	  both	  from	  countries	  in	  the	  communist	  
alliance	  and	  from	  Western	  countries.	  This	  closed-­‐door	  policy	  effectively	  shut	  down	  the	  
opportunity	  for	  any	  Chinese	  student	  to	  study	  abroad.	  Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  combination	  of	  
the	  violent	  persecution	  of	  educators,	  the	  political	  upheaval	  in	  educational	  institutions,	  and	  
the	  closed-­‐door	  policy	  substantially	  shrank	  the	  domain	  of	  the	  knowledge	  production	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  Circular	  of	  the	  Central	  Committee	  of	  the	  Chinese	  Communist	  Party,	  May	  16,	  1966.	  See	  

https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/documents/cpc/cc_gpcr.htm.	  

3	  See	  Wang	  (2001)	  for	  a	  discussion	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution	  on	  the	  education	  sector,	  

including	  detailed	  descriptions	  of	  the	  consequences	  for	  specific	  universities	  and	  faculty.	  Professor	  Wang	  also	  
maintains	  a	  website	  at	  the	  University	  of	  Chicago	  (hum.uchicago.edu/faculty/ywang/history/)	  that	  contains	  a	  
great	  deal	  of	  information	  on	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution	  and	  provides	  biographies	  of	  many	  of	  the	  victims.	  

	  

9	  

function,	  and	  the	  resulting	  opportunity	  cost	  for	  China’s	  economic	  development	  was	  
enormous.	  It	  is	  conservatively	  estimated	  that	  because	  of	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution,	  China	  
suffered	  a	  loss	  of	  100,000	  potential	  graduate	  degree	  holders	  between	  1965	  and	  1976,	  along	  
with	  a	  loss	  of	  one	  million	  qualified	  undergraduates	  and	  two	  million	  specialized	  secondary	  
graduates	  (Song,	  2009).	  	  
In	  December	  1978,	  two	  years	  after	  Mao’s	  death,	  China	  entered	  a	  historical	  turning	  
point	  when	  Vice	  Premier	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  proposed	  a	  comprehensive	  transformation	  of	  
China’s	  society	  and	  economy.4	  This	  policy	  shift,	  which	  went	  under	  the	  names	  of	  “Chinese	  
Economic	  Reform”	  or	  “Economic	  Reform	  and	  Open	  Up	  Policy,”	  effectively	  sparked	  the	  
transformation	  of	  China	  that	  eventually	  led	  the	  country	  to	  become	  one	  of	  the	  world’s	  
largest	  economies.	  A	  key	  component	  of	  Deng	  Xiaoping’s	  proposal,	  known	  as	  the	  Four	  
Modernizations,	  was	  the	  long-­‐term	  goal	  of	  modernizing	  China’s	  agricultural,	  industrial,	  
scientific,	  and	  technological	  sectors.	  
Vice	  Premier	  Xiaoping’s	  proposed	  reforms	  had	  a	  profound	  impact	  on	  China’s	  
education	  system.	  In	  particular,	  the	  government	  began	  to	  encourage	  the	  best	  and	  brightest	  
Chinese	  students	  to	  study	  abroad,	  and	  particularly	  to	  enroll	  in	  universities	  located	  in	  
Western	  industrialized	  countries.	  In	  June	  1978,	  for	  example,	  at	  a	  conference	  meeting	  with	  
professors	  from	  Tsinghua	  University	  that	  took	  place	  just	  a	  few	  months	  before	  the	  formal	  
introduction	  of	  the	  Chinese	  Economic	  Reform,	  Vice	  Premier	  Xiaoping	  emphasized	  that:5	  	  
	  
I	  highly	  support	  and	  encourage	  a	  quick	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  overseas	  
Chinese	  students,	  since	  this	  will	  be	  one	  of	  the	  most	  essential	  ways	  to	  
accelerate	  the	  development	  of	  our	  outdated	  technology.	  	  
	  
As	  part	  of	  the	  reforms,	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  made	  a	  strategic	  (and	  historic)	  decision	  to	  
send	  3,000	  Chinese	  students	  annually	  to	  study	  in	  different	  countries,	  including	  the	  United	  
States.	  Besides	  directly	  sending	  these	  government-­‐sponsored	  and	  government-­‐funded	  
students,	  the	  Vice	  Premier	  encouraged	  outstanding	  Chinese	  students	  to	  study	  abroad	  by	  
applying	  for	  teaching	  and	  research	  assistantships	  available	  in	  foreign	  institutions.	  Doctoral	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  was	  the	  key	  leader	  in	  China	  from	  the	  late	  1970s	  to	  the	  early	  1990s.	  Immediately	  

following	  the	  introduction	  of	  the	  reforms,	  Chinese-­‐U.S.	  diplomatic	  relations	  were	  formally	  established	  in	  
January	  1979,	  opening	  up	  a	  new	  chapter	  in	  Sino-­‐American	  relations.	  
5	  Chen	  (2007),	  p.	  30.	  

	  

10	  

programs	  in	  the	  United	  States	  quickly	  began	  to	  receive	  many	  such	  applications	  for	  
admission,	  and	  these	  programs	  became	  among	  the	  most	  generous	  in	  admitting	  and	  
welcoming	  such	  students.	  The	  exogenous	  supply	  shock	  sparked	  by	  the	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  
reforms	  was	  dramatic.	  China	  had	  sent	  nearly	  zero	  students	  to	  study	  in	  American	  
universities	  between	  the	  1950s	  and	  the	  late	  1970s.	  By	  the	  late	  1980s,	  however,	  China	  had	  
become	  the	  leading	  sender	  of	  international	  students	  to	  the	  United	  States.6	  In	  the	  1989-­‐
1990	  academic	  year,	  for	  example,	  China	  accounted	  for	  33,000	  (or	  8.6	  percent)	  of	  the	  
387,000	  international	  students	  in	  the	  country.	  
This	  paper	  examines	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  in	  
a	  specific	  field,	  mathematics,	  on	  a	  specific	  country,	  the	  United	  States,	  where	  the	  available	  
data	  allow	  us	  to	  comprehensively	  describe	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  shock	  on	  knowledge	  
production	  in	  the	  field.	  Figure	  1	  illustrates	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  doctoral	  students	  in	  
mathematics	  graduating	  from	  American	  institutions	  between	  1960	  and	  2004.	  It	  is	  evident	  
that	  there	  was	  a	  dramatic	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  doctoral	  recipients	  sometime	  
in	  the	  late	  1980s,	  as	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  reforms	  initiated	  by	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  took	  hold.	  In	  fact,	  
the	  number	  of	  doctoral	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students	  increased	  almost	  six-­‐fold,	  
from	  65	  to	  381,	  between	  1980	  and	  1990.7	  
It	  is	  obviously	  difficult	  to	  pinpoint	  a	  specific	  date	  when	  the	  supply	  shock	  began	  to	  be	  
fully	  felt	  in	  the	  production	  pipeline	  for	  mathematics	  doctorates	  in	  American	  universities.	  
After	  all,	  it	  probably	  took	  at	  least	  a	  year	  or	  two	  for	  the	  reforms	  initiated	  by	  Deng	  Xiaoping	  
to	  “filter	  down”	  and	  influence	  student	  behavior	  in	  the	  vast	  country	  of	  China.	  It	  would	  also	  
take	  another	  year	  or	  two	  for	  these	  students	  to	  establish	  the	  credentials,	  work	  through	  the	  
application	  process,	  and	  be	  accepted	  by	  American	  universities.	  And	  it	  would	  take	  another	  6	  
years	  or	  so	  for	  the	  accepted	  students	  to	  actually	  complete	  their	  course	  work,	  to	  write	  their	  
dissertation,	  and	  to	  receive	  their	  doctoral	  degree.	  Given	  these	  obvious	  and	  inevitable	  time	  
lags,	  it	  is	  not	  surprising	  that	  the	  (higher)	  number	  of	  Chinese	  mathematicians	  graduating	  
from	  American	  universities	  did	  not	  stabilize	  until	  around	  1989,	  towards	  the	  end	  of	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

6	  Institute	  of	  International	  Education	  (2013)	  and	  Institute	  of	  International	  Education	  (2009).	  
7	  We	  describe	  the	  methodology	  for	  identifying	  the	  sample	  of	  Chinese	  doctoral	  recipients	  in	  the	  next	  

section.	  It	  relies	  on	  a	  match	  between	  the	  surname	  of	  the	  recipient	  and	  a	  comprehensive	  list	  of	  Chinese	  
surnames.	  

	  

11	  

decade.	  The	  data	  illustrated	  in	  Figure	  1	  strongly	  confirm	  the	  existence	  of	  an	  exogenous	  
supply	  shock	  (with	  a	  lag)	  resulting	  from	  the	  Deng	  Xiaoping-­‐initiated	  reforms.	  
	  
III. Data
	  

We	  employ	  data	  drawn	  from	  three	  distinct	  sources	  to	  identify	  the	  ethnic	  

background	  and	  track	  the	  professional	  careers	  of	  mathematicians	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  First,	  
we	  have	  access	  to	  a	  database	  listing	  all	  papers	  published	  in	  mathematics	  and	  related	  fields.	  
This	  exhaustive	  listing	  of	  mathematics	  publications	  is	  compiled	  and	  maintained	  by	  the	  
American	  Mathematical	  Society	  (AMS)	  at	  MathSciNet,	  and	  is	  available	  for	  the	  period	  
between	  1939	  and	  the	  present.	  Second,	  we	  have	  access	  to	  data	  collected	  by	  the	  
Mathematics	  Genealogy	  Project	  (MGP),	  a	  database	  that	  matches	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  in	  
mathematics	  doctoral	  programs	  since	  the	  1300s.	  Finally,	  we	  use	  a	  database	  of	  ethnic	  names	  
that	  allows	  us	  to	  identify	  the	  Chinese	  heritage	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  our	  sample.	  
	  

In	  addition	  to	  providing	  comprehensive	  coverage	  of	  the	  universe	  of	  academic	  

papers	  published	  by	  mathematicians	  worldwide,	  the	  AMS	  data	  has	  one	  feature	  that	  makes	  
it	  particularly	  useful	  in	  the	  present	  context:	  The	  professional	  staff	  at	  the	  AMS	  assigns	  each	  
published	  mathematician	  a	  unique	  author	  identifier	  that	  follows	  a	  particular	  person	  
throughout	  his	  or	  her	  career.	  The	  availability	  of	  these	  (carefully	  assigned)	  unique	  
identifiers	  solves	  the	  problem	  of	  distinguishing	  the	  research	  profiles	  of	  authors	  who	  have	  
similar	  names	  or	  initials.	  We	  have	  access	  to	  a	  version	  of	  the	  AMS	  database	  aggregated	  at	  
the	  author,	  year	  of	  publication,	  and	  field	  of	  research	  level.	  For	  each	  author-­‐year-­‐field	  cell,	  
the	  database	  reports	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  
that	  those	  papers	  eventually	  earned	  from	  top	  journals	  in	  mathematics	  after	  the	  year	  2000.	  
Our	  version	  of	  the	  AMS	  database	  covers	  all	  papers	  published	  between	  1939	  and	  the	  first	  
half	  of	  2010,	  and	  was	  first	  used	  in	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012).	  
	  

The	  MGP	  data	  reports	  the	  name	  of	  each	  doctoral	  degree	  holder	  in	  mathematics,	  the	  

name	  of	  the	  advisor,	  the	  year	  the	  degree	  was	  earned,	  the	  institution	  that	  granted	  the	  degree,	  
and	  the	  country	  where	  that	  institution	  is	  located.8	  Crucially,	  it	  also	  contains	  an	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8	  The	  MGP	  is	  a	  worldwide	  database.	  The	  degree	  in	  question	  may	  then	  depend	  on	  the	  cultural	  or	  

educational	  context.	  In	  most	  cases,	  the	  degree	  is	  a	  Doctor	  of	  Philosophy,	  but	  it	  may	  also	  be	  a	  Doctor	  of	  Science,	  

	  

12	  

administrative	  match	  between	  the	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  and	  the	  unique	  author	  identifiers	  
in	  the	  AMS	  database.	  In	  other	  words,	  by	  using	  the	  unique	  author	  identifier	  we	  have	  access	  
to	  the	  history	  of	  published	  output	  produced	  by	  the	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  identified	  in	  the	  
MGP	  data.	  
To	  determine	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  coverage	  of	  the	  MGP	  advisor-­‐advisee	  matches	  and	  the	  
thoroughness	  of	  the	  match	  with	  the	  AMS	  data,	  we	  compared	  the	  degrees	  reported	  in	  the	  
MGP	  file	  to	  the	  degrees	  listed	  in	  the	  annual	  census	  of	  new	  mathematics	  doctoral	  degrees	  
awarded	  by	  North	  American	  universities	  and	  published	  annually	  by	  the	  American	  
Mathematical	  Society.	  Using	  the	  published	  census	  as	  the	  “universe”	  of	  doctoral	  degrees	  in	  
mathematics,	  we	  randomly	  chose	  20	  students	  from	  each	  of	  the	  following	  graduation	  years:	  
1980,	  1985,	  1990,	  1994,	  2000,	  2005,	  and	  2009.	  We	  found	  that	  the	  MGP	  file	  contained	  the	  
relevant	  (and	  correct)	  information	  for	  between	  85	  and	  100	  percent	  of	  the	  degrees	  awarded	  
in	  any	  given	  year,	  with	  an	  overall	  coverage	  rate	  of	  93	  percent.	  Furthermore,	  we	  found	  that	  
only	  2	  percent	  of	  mathematics	  doctoral	  recipients	  should	  have	  been	  matched	  to	  the	  AMS	  
unique	  author	  identifiers	  (because	  the	  author	  in	  question	  published	  a	  paper	  between	  1939	  
and	  2010),	  but	  were	  not.	  This	  robustness	  check	  of	  the	  underlying	  data,	  therefore,	  makes	  us	  
confident	  that	  our	  matched	  MGP-­‐AMS	  data	  has	  almost	  complete	  coverage	  of	  the	  universe	  of	  
mathematicians	  either	  advising	  students	  and/or	  awarded	  a	  doctoral	  degree	  at	  the	  time	  of	  
the	  Chinese	  supply	  shock.	  
	  

Finally,	  we	  identify	  the	  Chinese	  heritage	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  our	  sample	  by	  

matching	  their	  surnames	  with	  a	  list	  of	  Chinese	  surnames.	  The	  source	  of	  Chinese	  surnames	  
used	  in	  this	  paper	  is	  compiled	  in	  the	  genealogy	  section	  of	  FamilyEducation.com,	  the	  oldest	  
and	  most	  visited	  website	  offering	  parental	  advice.	  In	  the	  context	  of	  this	  paper,	  this	  website	  
is	  particularly	  useful	  because	  it	  provides	  a	  comprehensive	  list	  of	  the	  most	  common	  Chinese	  
surnames.9	  Many	  alternative	  lists	  of	  Chinese	  surnames,	  for	  example,	  only	  provide	  the	  top	  
100	  surnames;	  the	  list	  available	  at	  Family	  Education	  is	  far	  more	  thorough,	  listing	  more	  than	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
a	  Candidate's	  Degree,	  etc.	  We	  will	  only	  be	  looking	  at	  degrees	  awarded	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  where	  the	  relevant	  
degree	  is	  the	  Doctor	  of	  Philosophy.	  
9	  http://genealogy.familyeducation.com/browse/origin/chinese.	  

	  

13	  

400	  Chinese	  surnames.10	  In	  addition,	  the	  Family	  Education	  database	  not	  only	  provides	  a	  
phonetic	  system	  for	  transcribing	  the	  Mandarin	  pronunciations	  of	  Chinese	  surnames	  into	  
the	  Latin	  alphabet	  (Pinyin),	  but	  also	  provides	  the	  phonetic	  system	  for	  transcribing	  the	  
Cantonese	  pronunciations	  of	  Chinese	  surnames	  into	  the	  Latin	  alphabet	  (Jyutping).	  Because	  
the	  Cantonese	  make	  up	  the	  largest	  group	  of	  Chinese	  immigrants	  to	  the	  United	  States,	  the	  
inclusion	  of	  Cantonese	  Jyutping	  translations	  is	  particularly	  important	  to	  ensure	  that	  our	  
identification	  of	  Chinese	  mathematicians	  misses	  few	  observations.	  
We	  classify	  a	  mathematician	  as	  having	  “Chinese	  heritage”	  (or,	  more	  conveniently,	  
being	  “Chinese”)	  if	  the	  mathematician’s	  surname	  matches	  one	  of	  the	  surnames	  in	  the	  
Family	  Education	  list.	  We	  merge	  the	  list	  of	  Chinese	  surnames	  available	  in	  Family	  Education	  
with	  the	  MGP	  database	  to	  identify	  which	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  had	  Chinese	  ancestry.11	  
A	  potential	  problem	  with	  our	  approach	  to	  identifying	  the	  Chinese	  heritage	  of	  
doctoral	  recipients	  is	  that	  it	  also	  “catches”	  U.S.-­‐born	  persons	  of	  Chinese	  ancestry	  as	  well	  as	  
foreign	  students	  born	  in	  Taiwan.	  There	  were	  no	  sudden	  changes	  in	  the	  birthrates	  of	  
Chinese-­‐Americans	  twenty-­‐two	  years	  before	  the	  shock	  took	  place,	  making	  it	  unlikely	  that	  
the	  supply	  increase	  shown	  in	  Figure	  1	  could	  be	  explained	  by	  a	  sudden	  rise	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
Chinese-­‐American	  students	  seeking	  to	  become	  professional	  mathematicians.	  Similarly,	  
aggregate	  counts	  from	  the	  NSF	  census	  of	  doctorates	  indicates	  that	  around	  30	  to	  40	  doctoral	  
degrees	  in	  mathematics	  were	  awarded	  annually	  to	  students	  born	  in	  Taiwan	  both	  before	  
and	  after	  the	  opening	  of	  China,	  while	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  persons	  born	  in	  
the	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  China	  rose	  from	  near	  zero	  in	  the	  early	  1980s	  to	  around	  200	  in	  the	  
early	  1990s.	  In	  short,	  the	  rapid	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  
students	  documented	  in	  Figure	  1	  was	  a	  direct	  result	  of	  the	  supply	  increase	  induced	  by	  the	  
Deng	  Xiaoping	  reforms.	  
	  

Table	  1	  uses	  our	  merged	  AMS-­‐MGP	  data	  to	  calculate	  summary	  statistics	  on	  the	  

number	  of	  doctoral	  degrees	  awarded	  in	  mathematics	  by	  American	  universities	  between	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10	  The	  top	  100	  Chinese	  surnames	  account	  for	  85	  percent	  of	  China's	  population,	  so	  that	  a	  list	  of	  400	  

surnames	  is	  quite	  comprehensive	  (Lafraniere,	  2009).	  
11	  Although	  using	  surnames	  to	  construct	  the	  sample	  of	  mathematicians	  with	  Chinese	  heritage	  is	  not	  

ideal,	  we	  randomly	  sampled	  200	  of	  the	  identified	  Chinese	  advisors	  and	  Chinese	  advisees	  and	  manually	  
checked	  their	  profiles	  in	  MathSciNet.	  More	  than	  95	  percent	  of	  the	  mathematicians	  in	  this	  random	  sample	  
were	  indeed	  Chinese	  (or	  Chinese-­‐American).	  

	  

14	  

1975	  and	  2004.	  The	  data	  clearly	  show	  a	  sizable	  increase	  in	  the	  rate	  at	  which	  these	  degrees	  
were	  produced	  between	  the	  first	  half	  and	  the	  last	  half	  of	  this	  period,	  with	  a	  
disproportionately	  greater	  rise	  in	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students.	  The	  
number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  annually	  to	  Chinese	  students	  rose	  by	  over	  300	  percent	  
between	  the	  pre-­‐	  and	  post-­‐1989	  periods.	  However,	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  
American	  (i.e.,	  non-­‐Chinese)	  students	  rose	  by	  only	  59	  percent.	  Equally	  important,	  the	  
Chinese	  students	  gravitated	  heavily	  towards	  Chinese	  advisors	  throughout	  the	  entire	  period.	  
A	  Chinese	  student	  had	  a	  13.2	  percent	  probability	  of	  being	  mentored	  by	  a	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisor,	  as	  compared	  to	  only	  a	  3.4	  percent	  probability	  for	  the	  typical	  American	  student.	  
Table	  2	  reports	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  sample	  of	  advisors	  that	  we	  will	  use	  in	  the	  
empirical	  analysis	  reported	  below.	  The	  construction	  of	  the	  sample	  requires	  that	  these	  
advisors	  mentored	  at	  least	  one	  doctoral	  student	  in	  the	  United	  States	  between	  1975	  and	  
2004.12	  In	  addition,	  we	  restrict	  the	  analysis	  to	  the	  “pre-­‐existing”	  stock	  of	  professional	  
mathematicians,	  so	  that	  the	  advisors	  in	  our	  sample	  must	  have	  published	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  
before	  1986.13	  
The	  table	  reports	  statistics	  for	  two	  distinct	  groups:	  the	  advisors	  who	  have	  Chinese	  
heritage	  and	  the	  residual	  sample	  of	  advisors	  who	  did	  not	  have	  Chinese	  heritage.	  For	  
expositional	  convenience,	  we	  will	  refer	  to	  the	  advisors	  in	  the	  latter	  group	  as	  “American	  
advisors,”	  although	  it	  is	  obvious	  that	  this	  sample	  includes	  advisors	  of	  various	  ethnicities,	  
and	  some	  were	  born	  outside	  the	  United	  States.14	  Note	  that	  by	  restricting	  the	  sample	  to	  
“pre-­‐existing”	  advisors,	  we	  will	  be	  focusing	  on	  how	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  
affected	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematicians	  who	  had	  established	  professional	  careers	  prior	  
to	  the	  supply	  shock.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12	  We	  define	  mentoring	  a	  student	  at	  an	  American	  institution	  as	  the	  union	  of:	  (a)	  being	  listed	  as	  the	  

Ph.D.	  advisor	  for	  a	  fully	  matched	  recipient	  of	  a	  Ph.D.	  degree	  (i.e.	  a	  person	  that	  was	  administratively	  matched	  
in	  both	  the	  MGP	  and	  AMS	  data);	  and	  (b)	  the	  MGP	  information	  for	  that	  degree	  reports	  that	  it	  was	  granted	  by	  an	  
institution	  located	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  
13	  By	  using	  1986	  as	  the	  year	  that	  defines	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  group	  of	  mathematicians,	  we	  avoid	  the	  

possibility	  that	  the	  group	  of	  “Chinese-­‐American”	  advisors	  could	  include	  many	  of	  the	  Chinese	  foreign-­‐born	  
students	  who	  were	  themselves	  part	  of	  the	  supply	  shock,	  but	  who	  chose	  to	  remain	  in	  the	  United	  States	  after	  
getting	  their	  degree	  rather	  than	  return	  to	  the	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  China.	  
14	  The	  number	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  advisors	  in	  our	  sample	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  relatively	  small.	  The	  NSF	  census	  

of	  doctorates	  reports	  that	  only	  around	  20	  percent	  of	  doctoral	  degrees	  in	  mathematics	  awarded	  prior	  to	  1986	  
were	  granted	  to	  foreign-­‐born	  persons.	  

	  

15	  
	  The	  statistics	  reported	  in	  Table	  2	  show	  that	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese	  and	  American	  

advisors	  published	  roughly	  the	  same	  number	  of	  papers	  and	  mentored	  roughly	  the	  same	  
number	  of	  students	  prior	  to	  1989.	  Specifically,	  the	  advisors	  of	  Chinese	  heritage	  published	  
1.5	  papers	  per	  year,	  mentored	  0.17	  students	  per	  year,	  and	  each	  published	  paper	  received	  
an	  average	  of	  5.7	  citations.	  Similarly,	  the	  American	  advisors	  published	  1.4	  papers	  per	  year,	  
mentored	  0.18	  students,	  and	  received	  6.1	  citations.	  
The	  professional	  experience	  of	  the	  two	  groups,	  however,	  changed	  noticeably	  after	  
the	  supply	  shock.	  The	  publication	  rate	  of	  the	  Chinese	  advisors	  increased	  to	  1.7	  papers	  per	  
year,	  while	  that	  of	  the	  American	  advisors	  declined	  slightly	  to	  1.3	  papers.	  There	  was	  also	  a	  
change	  in	  the	  production	  of	  students:	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors,	  on	  average,	  began	  to	  
mentor	  a	  few	  more	  students	  more	  per	  year	  than	  the	  American	  advisors	  (0.26	  students	  
versus	  0.23	  students),	  and	  some	  of	  this	  increase	  is	  obviously	  attributable	  to	  a	  surge	  in	  the	  
number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored.	  The	  different	  experiences	  of	  the	  two	  groups	  of	  
advisors	  after	  the	  supply	  shock	  presage	  the	  productivity	  effects	  that	  are	  reported	  and	  
examined	  in	  the	  remainder	  of	  this	  paper.	  
	  
IV. The Productivity of Advisors
We	  use	  a	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  strategy	  to	  document	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  
shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  mathematics	  advisors	  in	  
American	  universities.	  Specifically,	  we	  compare	  the	  change	  in	  productivity,	  however	  
defined,	  between	  the	  advisors	  most	  affected	  by	  the	  shock	  and	  the	  advisors	  least	  affected	  by	  
the	  shock,	  before	  and	  after	  the	  shock.	  
It	  is	  instructive	  to	  begin	  with	  the	  simplest	  specification.	  It	  is	  possible	  that	  ethnic	  
complementarities	  between	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  and	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  
could	  easily	  generate	  knowledge	  spillover	  effects	  for	  this	  pool	  of	  mathematics	  advisors,	  and	  
that	  the	  productivity	  consequences	  would	  likely	  be	  different	  for	  the	  advisors	  that	  did	  not	  
have	  Chinese	  heritage.	  For	  example,	  if	  it	  were	  easier	  for	  Chinese	  advisors	  to	  interact	  and	  
communicate	  with	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  because	  of	  linguistic	  or	  cultural	  reasons	  (and	  
vice	  versa),	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  would	  be	  in	  greater	  demand	  for	  mentoring	  
services	  after	  the	  supply	  shock.	  The	  increased	  size	  of	  the	  advisee	  pool	  could,	  in	  turn,	  affect	  

	  

16	  

both	  the	  quantity	  and	  quality	  of	  the	  published	  output	  of	  Chinese	  advisors,	  either	  through	  an	  
increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  collaborations	  or	  through	  knowledge	  spillovers	  on	  their	  own	  
research	  program.	  
Our	  data	  consists	  of	  a	  panel	  constructed	  at	  the	  advisor-­‐year	  level.	  The	  data,	  
therefore,	  tracks	  the	  productivity	  of	  a	  particular	  advisor	  over	  time,	  and	  the	  panel	  allows	  us	  
to	  relate	  the	  change	  in	  productivity	  to	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  The	  
data	  consists	  of	  the	  219	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  and	  5,277	  American	  advisors	  first	  
introduced	  in	  Table	  2.	  Recall	  that	  all	  of	  these	  mathematicians	  published	  their	  first	  paper	  
prior	  to	  1986,	  so	  that	  the	  sample	  represents	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  stock	  of	  potential	  
mathematics	  advisors	  in	  American	  universities.	  The	  panel	  tracks	  the	  productivity	  of	  these	  
advisors	  in	  each	  year	  over	  the	  1975-­‐2004	  period.	  
To	  assess	  whether	  the	  supply	  shock	  had	  any	  relative	  productivity	  effects,	  we	  first	  
estimate	  the	  regression	  model:	  
	  
(1)	  

	  

yit	  =	  α Xit	  +	  ϕi	  +	  ϕt	  +	  γ	  (Ci	  ×	  T)	  +	  ε,	  

	  
where	  yit	  measures	  the	  productivity	  of	  advisor	  i	  at	  time	  t;	  φi	  represents	  a	  vector	  of	  advisor	  
fixed	  effects;	  φt	  represents	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects;	  Xit	  is	  a	  vector	  of	  standardizing	  
variables;	  T	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  observation	  is	  observed	  in	  the	  post-­‐shock	  
period	  (defined	  as	  1989	  or	  beyond);	  and	  Ci	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  advisor	  i	  is	  
Chinese-­‐American.15	  The	  variables	  included	  in	  X	  control	  for	  the	  advisor’s	  years	  of	  work	  
experience	  (defined	  as	  a	  vector	  of	  fixed	  effects	  giving	  the	  number	  of	  years	  elapsed	  since	  the	  
advisor’s	  first	  publication	  in	  5-­‐year	  bands).	  
Note	  that	  the	  regression	  adjusts	  for	  individual-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects	  in	  productivity,	  
as	  well	  as	  for	  any	  calendar	  year	  fixed	  effects	  that	  affect	  the	  productivity	  of	  all	  advisors	  
equally.	  We	  estimate	  equation	  (1)	  using	  various	  alternative	  measures	  of	  advisor	  
productivity.	  All	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15	  We	  estimated	  the	  regression	  models	  using	  alternative	  values	  for	  the	  specific	  year	  of	  the	  supply	  

shock	  (e.g.,	  1986,	  1987,	  or	  1988).	  The	  qualitative	  nature	  of	  our	  evidence	  is	  robust	  to	  the	  choice	  of	  a	  particular	  
date.	  

	  

17	  
Panel	  A	  of	  Table	  3	  reports	  the	  regression	  coefficient	  γ	  from	  the	  basic	  regression	  

specification	  in	  equation	  (1).	  This	  coefficient	  measures	  the	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  
estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  Chinese	  advisors	  relative	  
to	  American	  advisors.	  It	  is	  slightly	  positive	  and	  insignificant	  when	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  students	  mentored.	  However,	  this	  weakly	  positive	  point	  estimate	  
masks	  a	  substantial	  change	  in	  the	  ethnic	  composition	  of	  the	  advisees	  of	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors.	  The	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored	  by	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  
rose	  by	  0.075	  (with	  a	  standard	  error	  of	  0.016),	  while	  the	  number	  of	  American	  students	  
mentored	  fell	  by	  0.047	  (0.015).	  It	  seems,	  therefore,	  that	  while	  the	  supply	  shock	  only	  
slightly	  increased	  the	  number	  of	  advisees	  mentored	  by	  the	  typical	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisor,	  it	  certainly	  increased	  the	  probability	  that	  those	  students	  were	  Chinese.	  
The	  simple	  specification	  in	  equation	  (1),	  however,	  ignores	  the	  possibility	  that	  there	  
is	  an	  important	  heterogeneity	  in	  the	  baseline	  group	  of	  American	  advisors.	  After	  all,	  some	  of	  
those	  advisors	  worked	  in	  departments	  that	  received	  large	  numbers	  of	  Chinese	  students,	  
while	  some	  worked	  in	  departments	  that	  were	  not	  heavily	  affected	  by	  the	  influx.	  Not	  
surprisingly,	  there	  is	  one	  variable	  that	  helps	  to	  explain	  much	  of	  the	  departmental	  variation	  
in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  that	  enrolled	  after	  the	  supply	  shock:	  Chinese	  students	  
gravitated	  towards	  departments	  that	  already	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  in	  their	  
employ.	  
Suppose	  we	  classify	  mathematics	  departments	  into	  two	  types:	  “mixed”	  and	  “non-­‐
mixed.”	  To	  illustrate	  our	  construction	  of	  these	  two	  types	  of	  departments,	  consider	  initially	  
the	  simplest	  possible	  approach.	  We	  define	  a	  mixed	  department	  as	  one	  where	  a	  Chinese-­‐
American	  advisor	  supervised	  at	  least	  one	  doctoral	  thesis	  in	  the	  1981-­‐1985	  period.16	  Note	  
that	  because	  of	  the	  lag	  in	  the	  production	  of	  a	  dissertation,	  this	  definition	  essentially	  implies	  
that	  a	  mixed	  department	  employed	  an	  active	  Chinese-­‐American	  mathematician	  sometime	  
between	  the	  mid-­‐1970s	  to	  the	  early	  1980s.	  The	  residual	  group	  of	  departments	  that	  did	  not	  
employ	  any	  active	  Chinese-­‐American	  mathematicians	  would	  then	  give	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16	  We	  replicated	  the	  empirical	  analysis	  reported	  below	  using	  alternative	  definitions	  of	  a	  mixed	  

department	  by	  varying	  the	  period	  in	  which	  we	  need	  to	  observe	  a	  Chinese-­‐American	  mathematician	  actively	  
mentoring	  a	  student,	  including	  1976-­‐1985	  and	  1971-­‐1980.	  The	  results	  presented	  below	  are	  representative	  of	  
the	  evidence	  resulting	  from	  these	  other	  specifications.	  

	  

18	  

departments.	  Around	  20	  percent	  of	  mathematics	  departments	  in	  the	  United	  States	  were	  
mixed	  departments	  according	  to	  this	  classification.	  
A	  more	  stringent	  definition	  would	  be	  one	  that	  requires	  a	  higher	  level	  of	  supervising	  
activity	  by	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors.	  We	  define	  an	  alternative	  definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  
department	  as	  one	  where	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  doctoral	  
dissertations	  in	  the	  1981-­‐1985	  period.	  This	  definition	  implies	  that	  6	  percent	  of	  
mathematics	  departments	  were	  mixed	  departments.	  
Figure	  2	  uses	  this	  more	  stringent	  definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department	  and	  shows	  that	  
the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  was	  much	  larger	  in	  the	  departments	  that	  
had	  a	  history	  of	  “frequent”	  advising	  by	  Chinese-­‐American	  mathematicians.	  The	  (per-­‐
school)	  annual	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students	  by	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  
departments	  increased	  by	  only	  about	  0.6	  students	  per	  year	  between	  the	  1980s	  and	  the	  
1990s,	  as	  compared	  to	  an	  increase	  of	  around	  6	  students	  per	  year	  for	  the	  departments	  that	  
had	  a	  frequent	  Chinese	  presence.	  
This	  differentiation	  between	  departments	  implies	  that	  we	  can	  now	  think	  of	  three	  
distinct	  groups	  of	  advisors:	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors;	  American	  advisors	  who	  were	  
affiliated	  with	  a	  mixed	  department	  as	  of	  1988	  (just	  prior	  to	  the	  time	  that	  the	  variable	  
indicating	  the	  supply	  shock	  “turns	  on”);	  and	  American	  advisors	  affiliated	  with	  a	  non-­‐mixed	  
department	  as	  of	  1988.17	  Depending	  on	  whether	  we	  use	  the	  more	  or	  less	  stringent	  
definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department,	  either	  15.3	  or	  37.8	  percent	  of	  American	  advisors	  were	  
affiliated	  with	  a	  mixed	  department	  as	  of	  1988.	  As	  Figure	  2	  makes	  clear,	  American	  advisors	  
in	  the	  mixed	  departments	  were	  far	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  affected	  by	  the	  supply	  shock	  than	  
American	  advisors	  in	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  departments.	  
The	  expanded	  regression	  model	  can	  then	  be	  written	  as:	  
	  
(2)	  

	  

yit	  =	  α Xit	  +	  ϕi	  +	  ϕt	  +	  γC	  (Ci	  ×	  T)	  +	  γM	  ( AiM ×	  T)	  +	  ε,	  

	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17	  More	  precisely,	  we	  use	  the	  affiliation	  of	  the	  last	  dissertation	  supervised	  as	  of	  1988	  to	  determine	  if	  

an	  American	  mathematician	  is	  employed	  by	  a	  mixed	  or	  a	  non-­‐mixed	  department.	  In	  the	  small	  number	  of	  cases	  
where	  a	  mathematician	  had	  not	  yet	  supervised	  a	  thesis	  as	  of	  that	  date,	  we	  backdate	  the	  affiliation	  of	  the	  first	  
post-­‐1988	  thesis.	  

	  

19	  

where AiM 	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  advisor	  i	  is	  an	  American	  advisor	  employed	  in	  a	  
mixed	  department	  in	  1988.18	  The	  omitted	  group	  in	  equation	  (2),	  of	  course,	  is	  the	  group	  of	  
American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments.	  The	  coefficient	  γC	  in	  equation	  (2)	  
now	  gives	  the	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  
productivity	  of	  Chinese	  advisors	  (relative	  to	  American	  advisors	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments),	  
while	  the	  coefficient	  γM	  measures	  the	  corresponding	  impact	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  
American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments.	  	  
As	  with	  the	  simpler	  specification	  in	  equation	  (1),	  we	  would	  expect	  ethnic	  
complementarities	  in	  knowledge	  production	  to	  increase	  the	  productivity	  of	  Chinese	  
advisors,	  so	  that	  γC	  would	  be	  positive.	  However,	  the	  potential	  impact	  on	  the	  productivity	  of	  
the	  American	  advisors	  employed	  by	  the	  mixed	  departments	  is	  less	  clear-­‐cut.	  These	  
advisors	  could	  perhaps	  benefit	  from	  the	  presence	  of	  additional	  Chinese	  students,	  although	  
it	  seems	  reasonable	  to	  suspect	  that	  the	  spillovers	  would	  be	  weaker	  than	  those	  affecting	  the	  
Chinese	  advisors	  in	  those	  same	  departments.	  Such	  a	  differential	  spillover	  effect	  could	  arise,	  
for	  example,	  if	  Chinese	  advisees	  are	  more	  likely	  to	  coauthor	  with	  Chinese	  advisors	  than	  
with	  American	  advisors.	  The	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  students	  could	  also	  affect	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
potential	  advisee	  pool	  for	  American	  advisors	  in	  an	  indirect	  way.	  For	  example,	  if	  the	  
admission	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  crowds	  out	  American	  graduate	  students,	  the	  
supply	  shock	  might	  shrink	  the	  number	  of	  students	  that	  American	  advisors	  could	  mentor	  
and	  collaborate	  with.	  
Finally,	  there	  is	  little	  reason	  for	  the	  supply	  shock	  to	  have	  much	  of	  an	  impact	  on	  the	  
productivity	  of	  American	  advisors	  working	  in	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  departments,	  which	  serves	  as	  
the	  control	  group	  in	  the	  regression	  model.	  As	  Figure	  2	  indicates,	  this	  group	  of	  advisors	  was	  
not	  particularly	  affected	  by	  the	  supply	  shock	  because	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  attracted	  
relatively	  few	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  after	  the	  opening	  up	  of	  China.	  The	  impact	  on	  the	  
productivity	  of	  American	  advisors	  employed	  by	  such	  departments	  would	  most	  likely	  be	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18	  Note	  that	  the	  variable	   A M 	  is	  not	  indexed	  by	  t,	  so	  that	  the	  regression	  captures	  the	  reduced-­‐form	  
i

effect	  of	  being	  initially	  employed	  in	  a	  non-­‐mixed	  department,	  regardless	  of	  whether	  the	  mathematician	  
remained	  in	  that	  department	  or	  moved	  elsewhere	  at	  some	  point	  after	  the	  supply	  shock.	  

	  

20	  

composed	  of	  second-­‐order	  effects,	  resulting	  from	  feedback	  mechanisms	  in	  the	  academic	  
marketplace.	  
Panels	  B	  and	  C	  of	  Table	  3	  report	  the	  estimates	  of	  the	  coefficients	  γC	  and	  γM using	  the	  
two	  alternative	  definitions	  of	  a	  mixed	  department. To	  simplify	  the	  exposition,	  we	  will	  
mainly	  discuss	  the	  coefficients	  summarized	  in	  Panel	  C,	  which	  uses	  the	  more	  stringent	  
definition.	  The	  qualitative	  nature	  of	  the	  evidence,	  however,	  is	  robust	  to	  the	  definition	  used.	  
Consider	  initially	  the	  regression	  where	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  total	  number	  
of	  students	  produced	  by	  an	  advisor	  in	  a	  particular	  year.	  As	  with	  the	  simpler	  specification	  
discussed	  earlier,	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  did	  not	  lead	  to	  a	  sizable	  
increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  students	  that	  the	  Chinese	  advisors	  produced.	  The	  coefficient	  γC	  is	  
again	  positive	  and	  insignificant,	  with	  a	  value	  of	  0.026	  (0.022).	  However,	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  
supply	  shock	  on	  the	  number	  of	  students	  produced	  by	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  mixed	  
departments	  is	  slightly	  negative	  (but	  insignificant).	  In	  other	  words,	  although	  the	  supply	  
shock	  seemed	  to	  slightly	  increase	  the	  total	  number	  of	  students	  produced	  by	  Chinese	  
advisors,	  it	  also	  seemed	  to	  slightly	  reduce	  the	  number	  produced	  by	  the	  American	  advisors	  
in	  the	  mixed	  departments.	  	  
The	  next	  two	  columns	  of	  Table	  3	  illustrate	  the	  underlying	  mechanism	  behind	  these	  
results.	  Specifically,	  they	  report	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  
and	  American	  students	  mentored,	  respectively.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  the	  supply	  shock	  
increased	  the	  relative	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  produced	  by	  Chinese	  advisors;	  the	  
coefficient	  is	  0.077	  (0.016).	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  however,	  the	  supply	  shock	  reduced	  the	  
relative	  number	  of	  American	  students	  mentored	  by	  these	  advisors;	  the	  coefficient	  is	  -­‐0.050	  
(0.015).	  The	  magnitude	  of	  the	  regression	  coefficients	  implies	  that	  the	  increased	  number	  of	  
Chinese	  students	  mentored	  by	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  was	  almost	  offset	  by	  a	  
reduction	  in	  the	  number	  of	  American	  students	  mentored.	  In	  other	  words,	  the	  supply	  shock	  
led	  to	  a	  substantial	  ethnic	  redistribution	  of	  mentoring	  activities	  by	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors—away	  from	  American	  students	  and	  towards	  Chinese	  students.	  
At	  the	  same	  time,	  the	  American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments	  saw	  both	  an	  increase	  
in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored	  (relative	  to	  the	  control	  group),	  and	  a	  
somewhat	  larger	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  American	  students	  mentored.	  The	  net	  decline	  in	  

	  

21	  

the	  production	  of	  advisees	  by	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  mixed	  departments,	  therefore,	  is	  
entirely	  due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  seems	  to	  have	  
reduced	  the	  number	  of	  American	  students	  that	  they	  could	  mentor.	  
It	  is	  instructive	  to	  illustrate	  the	  raw	  data	  that	  underlies	  these	  results	  on	  the	  
production	  of	  students.	  Figures	  3	  and	  4	  illustrate	  the	  trend	  in	  the	  “unexpected”	  number	  of	  
students	  mentored	  after	  the	  supply	  shock.	  In	  particular,	  we	  calculate	  for	  each	  advisor	  the	  
average	  annual	  number	  of	  Chinese	  advisees	  (in	  Figure	  3)	  or	  American	  advisees	  (in	  Figure	  
4)	  before	  1989.	  We	  then	  calculate	  a	  residual	  giving	  the	  difference	  between	  the	  actual	  
number	  of	  students	  that	  the	  advisor	  supervised	  each	  year	  and	  the	  number	  that	  would	  be	  
expected	  from	  their	  pre-­‐1989	  activities.	  The	  figures	  dramatically	  show	  the	  unexpected	  
increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored	  by	  Chinese	  advisors	  in	  the	  post-­‐
shock	  period,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  relative	  decline	  in	  the	  production	  of	  American	  students	  by	  
American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  the	  mixed	  departments.	  	  
The	  last	  two	  columns	  of	  Table	  3	  continue	  our	  analysis	  by	  estimating	  the	  regression	  
model	  using	  two	  additional	  measures	  of	  output:	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  produced	  in	  a	  given	  
year	  and	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  per	  paper	  published	  that	  year.	  Consider	  initially	  the	  
results	  on	  the	  quantity	  of	  published	  output.	  The	  regression	  coefficients	  clearly	  indicates	  an	  
increase	  in	  the	  relative	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  Chinese	  advisors	  in	  the	  post-­‐shock	  
period;	  the	  coefficient	  in	  Panel	  C	  is	  0.167	  (0.089).	  Put	  differently,	  the	  supply	  shock	  
increased	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  typical	  Chinese	  advisor	  by	  around	  1.7	  
papers	  over	  a	  10-­‐year	  period	  (relative	  to	  the	  output	  of	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  control	  
group).	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  the	  supply	  shock	  led	  to	  a	  relative	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  
published	  by	  the	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  mixed	  departments—a	  decline	  of	  more	  than	  a	  
half-­‐a-­‐paper	  over	  the	  decade.	  In	  sum,	  relative	  to	  the	  control	  group	  that	  was	  presumably	  
least	  affected	  by	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  students,	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  began	  to	  
publish	  more	  and	  their	  American	  colleagues	  in	  the	  mixed	  departments	  began	  to	  publish	  
less.	  
Figure	  5	  illustrates	  the	  raw	  data	  that	  underlies	  these	  regression	  results.	  Specifically,	  
the	  figure	  again	  shows	  the	  trend	  in	  the	  “residual”	  that	  results	  from	  differencing	  an	  advisor’s	  
annual	  number	  of	  papers	  from	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  he	  or	  she	  published	  prior	  to	  
1989.	  The	  figure	  clearly	  documents	  the	  rise	  in	  the	  publication	  rate	  of	  Chinese-­‐American	  

	  

22	  

advisors	  and	  the	  absolute	  and	  relative	  decline	  in	  the	  publication	  rate	  of	  American	  advisors	  
employed	  in	  the	  mixed	  departments.	  
It	  is	  important	  to	  note,	  however,	  that	  the	  productivity	  effects	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  
seem	  to	  be	  restricted	  to	  the	  quantity	  of	  published	  output,	  rather	  than	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  
output.	  The	  regression	  analysis	  reported	  in	  the	  last	  column	  of	  Table	  3	  does	  not	  provide	  any	  
evidence	  to	  indicate	  that	  the	  supply	  shock	  had	  an	  impact	  on	  the	  number	  of	  citations	  
received	  by	  the	  papers	  written	  by	  the	  typical	  advisor	  in	  any	  of	  the	  groups,	  regardless	  of	  
whether	  the	  advisor	  is	  Chinese	  or	  American,	  or	  whether	  the	  advisor	  works	  in	  a	  mixed	  or	  
non-­‐mixed	  department.	  
To	  summarize,	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  sparked	  by	  the	  
opening	  of	  China	  led	  to:	  (a)	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored	  and	  an	  
increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  group	  of	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors	  employed	  in	  American	  universities;	  and	  (b)	  a	  decrease	  in	  the	  number	  of	  students,	  
specifically	  American	  students,	  and	  a	  decrease	  in	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  the	  
pre-­‐existing	  group	  of	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  departments	  that	  were	  most	  likely	  to	  attract	  
the	  Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  The	  remainder	  of	  this	  paper	  shows	  that	  these	  reduced-­‐form	  
results	  are	  consistent	  with	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  there	  exist	  strong	  ethnic	  complementarities	  
in	  knowledge	  production	  in	  an	  institutional	  setting	  where	  the	  size	  of	  departments	  is	  
roughly	  fixed	  so	  that	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  led	  to	  a	  crowdout	  of	  American	  
graduate	  students.	  
	  
V. Ethnic complementarities in production
	  

The	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  affected	  

both	  the	  number	  of	  students	  mentored	  by	  an	  advisor	  and	  the	  advisor’s	  publication	  
productivity,	  and	  that	  these	  effects	  differed	  between	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  who	  had	  
Chinese	  heritage	  and	  those	  who	  did	  not.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  imagine	  how	  this	  differential	  effect	  in	  
publication	  productivity	  might	  arise.	  The	  exogenous	  shift	  in	  the	  size	  and	  composition	  of	  the	  
pool	  of	  advisees	  induced	  by	  the	  opening	  of	  China	  changed	  the	  sphere	  of	  the	  advisor’s	  
network	  of	  potential	  collaborations.	  It	  is	  not	  unusual	  in	  many	  sciences	  for	  advisors	  to	  
coauthor	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  with	  their	  students.	  Further,	  Freeman	  and	  Huang	  (2014)	  

	  

23	  

document	  that	  academic	  collaboration	  tends	  to	  follow	  ethnic	  lines.	  It	  would	  not	  then	  be	  
surprising	  to	  find	  that	  as	  the	  pool	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  in	  the	  United	  States	  
increased,	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  would	  produce	  more	  papers	  because	  of	  an	  
increased	  probability	  of	  coauthoring	  with	  their	  ethnically	  similar	  students.	  Even	  in	  the	  
absence	  of	  any	  additional	  collaboration	  opportunities,	  the	  increased	  size	  of	  the	  Chinese	  
advisee	  pool	  could	  influence	  the	  advisor’s	  research	  activity	  in	  less	  direct	  ways.	  The	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisor	  may	  suddenly	  see	  paths	  to	  research	  questions	  that	  were	  clouded	  
prior	  to	  his	  interaction	  with	  the	  students.	  
	  

It	  is	  easy	  to	  imagine	  why	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  might	  be	  complements	  in	  the	  

production	  of	  a	  particular	  advisor’s	  research	  output.	  The	  advisor’s	  experience	  and	  know-­‐
how	  clearly	  increases	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  student.	  Similarly,	  the	  process	  of	  mentoring	  
and	  teaching,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  new	  perspectives	  introduced	  by	  the	  advisee,	  cannot	  help	  but	  
influence	  the	  advisor’s	  research	  activities.	  The	  key	  question	  in	  the	  context	  of	  this	  paper,	  
however,	  is	  whether	  such	  complementarities	  are	  stronger	  when	  the	  advisors	  and	  the	  
advisee	  share	  an	  ethnic	  background.	  
Suppose	  the	  production	  function	  for	  a	  particular	  advisor’s	  research	  output,	  Q,	  has	  
two	  inputs:	  X1	  and	  X2,	  measuring	  the	  time	  inputs	  of	  the	  advisor	  and	  advisee,	  respectively.	  
The	  advisee’s	  time	  input,	  however,	  is	  “filtered”	  through	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  advisor	  and	  
advisee	  may	  or	  may	  not	  share	  the	  same	  language,	  culture,	  and	  other	  relevant	  
characteristics.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  advisee’s	  “effective”	  time	  input	  may	  differ	  from	  the	  advisee’s	  
actual	  time	  input	  X2.	  
Define	  the	  effective	  time	  input	  as	   X2η ,	  where	  the	  exponent	  η	  (η	  ≥	  0)	  measures	  the	  
“ease”	  with	  which	  the	  personal	  and	  intellectual	  communications	  between	  the	  advisor	  and	  
advisee	  occur.	  Of	  course,	  the	  value	  of	  η	  is	  specific	  to	  any	  particular	  advisor-­‐advisee	  match.	  
For	  example,	  the	  value	  of	  η	  for	  a	  match	  between	  a	  Chinese	  advisee	  and	  a	  Chinese	  advisor	  
may	  be	  different	  (and	  perhaps	  larger	  than)	  the	  value	  of	  η	  for	  a	  match	  between	  the	  same	  
Chinese	  advisee	  and	  a	  non-­‐Chinese	  advisor.	  In	  short,	  the	  similarities	  or	  differences	  in	  the	  
vector	  of	  characteristics	  that	  determine	  the	  ease	  with	  which	  an	  advisor	  and	  an	  advisee	  
interact	  can	  either	  amplify	  or	  contract	  the	  actual	  value	  of	  any	  particular	  time	  input	  by	  the	  
advisee.	  

	  

24	  
We	  write	  the	  CES	  production	  function	  specifying	  the	  process	  of	  producing	  the	  

advisor’s	  mathematical	  output	  as:	  
	  
(3)	  

	  

1

Q = ⎡⎣α1 X1δ + α 2 (X 2η )δ ⎤⎦ δ . 	  	  

	  
where	  δ	  =	  1	  –	  1/σ,	  and	  σ	  is	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  the	  advisor	  and	  the	  
advisee.	  It	  is	  convenient	  to	  interpret	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  as	  an	  
increase	  in	  X2.	  Let	  MP1	  be	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  the	  advisor’s	  time	  input	  in	  the	  
production	  of	  his	  or	  her	  mathematical	  output.	  It	  is	  then	  trivial	  to	  show	  that:	  
	  
(4)	  

	  

d log MP1 1
= s2 η, 	  	  
d log X2 σ

	  
where	  s2	  is	  the	  share	  of	  output	  attributable	  to	  the	  advisee	  input	  ( s2 = α 2 (X2η )δ / Q δ ).	  Note	  
that	  a	  supply	  shock	  of	  advisees	  will	  increase	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  the	  advisor	  as	  long	  as	  
advisors	  and	  advisees	  are	  not	  perfect	  substitutes	  (σ	  <	  ∞).	  Note	  also	  that	  the	  
complementarity	  in	  equation	  (4)	  is	  stronger	  the	  greater	  the	  value	  of	  the	  parameter	  η.	  In	  
other	  words,	  any	  characteristics	  of	  the	  match	  that	  increase	  the	  effective	  value	  of	  an	  
advisee’s	  time	  input	  are	  profitable	  to	  the	  advisor.	  It	  would	  then	  be	  reasonable	  to	  expect	  
that	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  make	  pairings	  that	  specifically	  increase	  the	  value	  of	  η,	  and	  to	  
find	  that	  such	  pairings	  increase	  the	  advisor’s	  productivity.19	  
	  

To	  determine	  the	  intensity	  of	  the	  complementarities	  arising	  from	  shared	  ethnicity,	  

we	  now	  examine	  the	  coauthorship	  patterns	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese	  and	  American	  
advisors	  in	  our	  data.	  Specifically,	  we	  manually	  collected	  the	  entire	  coauthorship	  history	  for	  
each	  of	  the	  219	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  in	  our	  sample,	  so	  that	  we	  are	  able	  
to	  determine	  if	  any	  given	  coauthorship	  involved	  an	  advisee	  and	  if	  that	  advisee	  was	  a	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19	  Although	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  generalize	  the	  model	  to	  examine	  how	  the	  time	  input	  of	  advisors	  responds	  to	  

the	  supply	  shock,	  we	  do	  not	  pursue	  this	  generalization	  because	  we	  do	  not	  have	  any	  data	  that	  would	  allow	  us	  
to	  more	  carefully	  examine	  the	  inputs	  associated	  with	  any	  particular	  advisor-­‐advisee	  pairing.	  	  

	  

25	  

Chinese	  student.	  We	  also	  manually	  collected	  comparable	  data	  for	  a	  random	  sample	  of	  213	  
American	  advisors.20	  
	  

Consider	  a	  particular	  pairing	  between	  advisor	  i	  and	  advisee	  j.	  For	  any	  (i,	  j)	  pairing,	  

our	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  determine	  if	  the	  pair	  coauthored	  at	  any	  point	  during	  their	  careers,	  
and	  we	  can	  also	  count	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  coauthored	  by	  the	  specific	  pair.	  We	  can	  then	  
estimate	  regressions	  of	  the	  type:	  
	  
(5)	  

	  

zij	  =	  α Xit	  +	  β1	  Ci	  +	  β2	  Cj	  +	  β3	  (Ci	  ×	  Cj)	  +	  ε,	  

	  
where	  zij	  is	  a	  variable	  describing	  the	  degree	  of	  collaboration	  between	  advisor	  i	  and	  advisee	  
j;	  and	  Ci	  and	  Cj	  are	  dummy	  variables	  indicating	  if	  the	  advisor	  or	  advisee	  are	  Chinese,	  
respectively.	  The	  coefficient	  of	  interest	  in	  this	  regression	  is	  β3,	  which	  tells	  us	  if	  a	  
collaborative	  relationship	  between	  an	  advisor	  and	  an	  advisee	  is	  more	  likely	  to	  occur	  when	  
both	  parties	  share	  a	  Chinese	  heritage.	  The	  regression	  also	  includes	  a	  variable	  indicating	  the	  
calendar	  year	  in	  which	  the	  (i,	  j)	  pairing	  was	  formed.	  We	  estimate	  the	  regression	  model	  
using	  two	  alternative	  dependent	  variables:	  (a)	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  pair	  (i,	  j)	  ever	  
collaborated;	  and	  (b)	  the	  number	  of	  coauthored	  papers	  resulting	  from	  a	  potential	  
collaboration.	  The	  standard	  errors	  of	  the	  coefficients	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  
	  

Table	  4	  reports	  the	  regression	  coefficients	  from	  the	  basic	  model	  in	  equation	  (5),	  as	  

well	  as	  from	  an	  expanded	  specification	  that	  also	  includes	  advisor-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  
regressions	  clearly	  show	  that	  the	  matching	  of	  a	  Chinese	  advisor	  and	  a	  Chinese	  advisee	  is	  far	  
more	  likely	  to	  lead	  to	  a	  collaboration	  that	  resulted	  in	  a	  published	  paper	  than	  any	  other	  
pairing.21	  In	  fact,	  the	  probability	  of	  a	  successful	  collaboration	  increases	  by	  about	  17	  
percent	  when	  the	  two	  parties	  in	  the	  pair	  are	  Chinese,	  regardless	  of	  whether	  or	  not	  advisor-­‐
specific	  fixed	  effects	  are	  included	  in	  the	  regression.	  The	  matching	  of	  a	  Chinese	  advisor	  and	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20	  In	  fact,	  we	  collected	  the	  collaboration	  networks	  for	  a	  random	  sample	  of	  250	  American	  advisors,	  

but	  the	  effective	  sample	  was	  reduced	  to	  213	  observations	  after	  imposing	  the	  various	  sample	  restrictions.	  
21	  It	  would	  be	  interesting	  to	  compare	  the	  extent	  of	  collaboration	  between	  a	  Chinese	  advisor	  and	  a	  

Chinese	  advisee	  to	  that	  observed	  between	  a	  type-­‐k	  advisor	  and	  a	  type-­‐k	  advisee,	  where	  k	  indexes	  a	  particular	  
ethnic	  background.	  Unfortunately,	  the	  available	  data	  do	  not	  allow	  us	  to	  identify	  the	  specific	  ethnic	  
background	  of	  the	  vast	  majority	  of	  mathematicians.	  

	  

26	  

a	  Chinese	  advisee	  generates	  about	  one	  additional	  paper	  for	  the	  pair	  relative	  to	  the	  number	  
of	  coauthored	  papers	  published	  by	  any	  other	  ethnic	  coupling	  between	  advisor	  and	  advisee.	  
	  

Given	  the	  importance	  of	  intra-­‐ethnic	  coauthorship,	  it	  is	  instructive	  to	  determine	  

how	  much	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  on	  the	  rate	  of	  publication	  documented	  in	  Table	  
3	  can	  be	  attributed	  to	  increased	  (or	  decreased)	  collaboration	  with	  advisees,	  and	  how	  much	  
of	  it	  may	  be	  due	  to	  other	  types	  of	  research	  activity.	  To	  address	  this	  question,	  we	  use	  the	  
information	  we	  collected	  on	  the	  authorship	  of	  every	  single	  paper	  published	  by	  the	  219	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  in	  our	  sample,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  213	  randomly	  chosen	  American	  
advisors.	  
Because	  of	  the	  relatively	  small	  number	  of	  observations,	  we	  aggregated	  the	  data	  into	  
two	  periods—before	  and	  after	  1989.	  We	  then	  calculated	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  
published	  annually	  in	  each	  of	  the	  two	  periods	  for	  each	  of	  the	  three	  groups	  of	  advisors	  (i.e.,	  
Chinese	  advisors,	  American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments,	  and	  American	  advisors	  in	  non-­‐
mixed	  departments).	  We	  also	  calculated	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  resulting	  from	  
alternative	  collaboration	  arrangements.	  We	  then	  estimated	  a	  simpler	  version	  of	  the	  
regression	  model	  in	  equation	  (2)	  to	  measure	  the	  pre-­‐post	  difference	  in	  the	  rate	  of	  output	  
for	  each	  type	  of	  arrangement.	  Table	  5	  summarizes	  the	  results	  of	  this	  regression-­‐based	  
decomposition	  by	  reporting	  the	  coefficient	  of	  the	  interaction	  variable	  between	  the	  post-­‐
1989	  indicator	  and	  the	  type	  of	  advisor.22	  
	  

As	  first	  noted	  in	  the	  previous	  section,	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  Chinese-­‐

American	  advisors	  rose	  rapidly	  between	  the	  pre-­‐	  and	  post-­‐shock	  periods.	  The	  average	  
Chinese	  advisor	  published	  almost	  0.3	  more	  papers	  per	  year	  after	  1989	  than	  before	  1989.	  
The	  change	  in	  the	  publication	  rate	  for	  American	  advisors	  in	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  
(the	  group	  of	  advisors	  that	  presumably	  forms	  the	  control	  group)	  was	  somewhat	  smaller,	  a	  
rise	  of	  only	  0.2	  papers	  per	  year.	  In	  contrast,	  the	  publication	  rate	  of	  American	  advisors	  
affiliated	  with	  mixed	  departments	  rose	  by	  only	  0.1	  papers	  per	  year.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

22	  Because	  we	  are	  looking	  at	  variation	  in	  the	  rate	  of	  publication	  across	  a	  diverse	  group	  of	  advisors	  

over	  long	  periods	  (1975-­‐1988	  and	  1989-­‐200),	  we	  use	  an	  experience-­‐adjusted	  measure	  of	  output	  as	  the	  
dependent	  variable	  in	  order	  to	  adjust	  for	  the	  advisor’s	  age.	  The	  experience-­‐adjusted	  measure	  is	  given	  by	  the	  
residuals	  from	  a	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  where	  the	  left-­‐hand-­‐side	  is	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  
an	  advisor	  during	  each	  period	  and	  the	  regressors	  are	  fixed	  effects	  measuring	  the	  advisor’s	  years	  of	  work	  
experience	  (in	  5-­‐year	  bands).	  

	  
	  

27	  
These	  net	  changes	  for	  the	  three	  groups	  disguise	  a	  lot	  of	  variation	  in	  the	  way	  that	  the	  

productivity	  shifts	  occurred.	  Among	  Chinese	  advisors,	  for	  example,	  the	  data	  indicate	  that	  
part	  of	  the	  increase	  in	  the	  rate	  of	  output	  results	  from	  increased	  coauthoring	  with	  Chinese	  
advisees	  and	  with	  other	  Chinese	  mathematicians.	  The	  additional	  Chinese-­‐Chinese	  
collaborations	  increased	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  annually	  by	  around	  0.15.	  
Of	  course,	  neither	  group	  of	  American	  advisors	  was	  able	  to	  improve	  their	  productivity	  due	  
to	  Chinese	  coauthorship	  by	  anything	  resembling	  this	  rate:	  Increased	  coauthoring	  with	  
Chinese	  mathematicians	  increased	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  by	  0.02	  for	  Americans	  employed	  
in	  mixed	  departments	  and	  by	  0.04	  for	  Americans	  employed	  in	  the	  non-­‐mixed	  departments.	  
American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments,	  however,	  were	  able	  to	  increase	  the	  number	  of	  
papers	  they	  published	  with	  their	  American	  advisees	  despite	  having	  fewer	  such	  advisees.	  
	  

The	  data	  also	  illustrate	  the	  continuing	  trend	  towards	  less	  solo-­‐authored	  work	  and	  

more	  coauthored	  work	  among	  mathematicians.	  Interestingly,	  all	  three	  groups	  experienced	  
a	  decrease	  in	  the	  amount	  of	  solo-­‐authored	  work	  by	  between	  -­‐0.06	  and	  -­‐0.13	  papers	  per	  
year	  during	  the	  period.	  Note,	  however,	  that	  Chinese	  advisors	  were	  able	  to	  more	  than	  offset	  
the	  decline	  in	  solo-­‐authored	  work	  with	  a	  sizable	  increase	  in	  “other”	  coauthoring.	  The	  
American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  mixed	  departments	  seemed	  particularly	  unable	  to	  take	  
advantage	  of	  opportunities	  for	  increased	  coauthoring	  with	  other	  mathematicians.	  This	  
effect	  may	  be	  due	  to	  specialization	  of	  roles	  within	  a	  department:	  faculty	  who	  have	  a	  harder	  
time	  finding	  advisees	  to	  mentor	  may	  be	  asked	  to	  perform	  more	  service	  and	  administrative	  
tasks.	  In	  the	  long	  run,	  this	  reallocation	  of	  administrative	  responsibilities	  could	  easily	  result	  
in	  less	  research	  output	  for	  the	  affected	  professors.	  	  
	  

The	  strong	  role	  played	  by	  intra-­‐ethnic	  collaborations	  and	  the	  exogeneity	  of	  the	  

supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  suggest	  that	  we	  can	  revisit	  the	  reduced	  form	  
evidence	  reported	  in	  the	  previous	  section	  and	  attempt	  to	  estimate	  the	  causal	  effect	  of	  
mentoring	  an	  additional	  student	  on	  an	  advisor’s	  productivity.	  In	  particular,	  consider	  the	  
following	  regression	  relating	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  that	  advisor	  i	  publishes	  in	  year	  t,	  Pit,	  to	  
the	  size	  of	  an	  advisor’s	  “collaboration	  pool”:	  
	  
(6)	  

	  

Pit	  =	  ϕi	  +	  ϕt	  +	  β N! it 	  +	  α Xit	  +	  ε.	  

	  

28	  

	  
We	  define	  the	  collaboration	  pool	   N! it 	  as	  the	  total	  number	  of	  students	  that	  the	  advisor	  has	  
supervised	  in	  the	  five-­‐year	  span	  between	  years	  t-­‐3	  and	  t+1.23	  We	  estimate	  equation	  (6)	  by	  
using	  instrumental	  variables,	  where	  the	  instruments	  are	  the	  interaction	  terms	  (Ci	  ×	  T)	  and	  
( AiM ×	  T)	  employed	  in	  the	  reduced-­‐form	  regressions	  reported	  in	  Table	  3	  (i.e.,	  the	  
interactions	  between	  the	  post-­‐1989	  indicator,	  T,	  and	  dummy	  variables	  indicating	  if	  the	  
advisor	  is	  either	  Chinese-­‐American	  or	  an	  American	  affiliated	  with	  a	  mixed	  department).	  
	  

Table	  6	  reports	  the	  coefficients	  from	  alternative	  specifications	  of	  the	  regression	  

model	  (using	  the	  entire	  sample	  of	  5,496	  mathematics	  advisors).	  Panel	  A	  of	  the	  table	  uses	  
the	  definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department	  that	  requires	  the	  supervision	  of	  at	  least	  one	  thesis	  by	  
a	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisor,	  while	  the	  bottom	  panel	  uses	  the	  more	  stringent	  definition	  that	  
requires	  the	  supervision	  of	  at	  least	  three	  dissertations	  by	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors.	  The	  
regressions	  reported	  in	  the	  first	  column	  define	  the	  collaboration	  pool	   N! it in	  terms	  of	  the	  
total	  number	  of	  students	  supervised	  (in	  the	  five-­‐year	  period),	  regardless	  of	  ethnicity.	  The	  
second	  column	  explicitly	  accounts	  for	  the	  ethnic-­‐based	  spillovers	  and	  defines	  the	  
collaboration	  pool	  as	  the	  total	  number	  of	  ethnically	  similar	  students	  supervised	  (i.e.,	  the	  
number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  supervised	  by	  the	  Chinese	  advisors,	  or	  the	  number	  of	  
American	  students	  supervised	  by	  the	  American	  advisors).	  	  
Regardless	  of	  the	  instrument	  used,	  it	  is	  obvious	  that	  the	  first-­‐stage	  regression	  model	  
that	  specifically	  accounts	  for	  the	  intra-­‐ethnic	  spillovers	  does	  a	  far	  better	  job	  of	  predicting	  
the	  size	  of	  the	  advisor’s	  collaboration	  pool	  (i.e.,	  the	  Angrist-­‐Pischke	  multivariate	  F	  test	  of	  
excluded	  instruments	  is	  significant,	  with	  p-­‐values	  of	  0.0001).	  The	  estimate	  of	  the	  second-­‐
stage	  coefficient	  β	  in	  equation	  (6)	  hovers	  around	  0.5,	  indicating	  that	  the	  exogenous	  and	  
sudden	  appearance	  of	  an	  additional	  student	  in	  an	  advisor’s	  collaboration	  pool	  increases	  the	  
advisor’s	  rate	  of	  publication	  by	  about	  half	  a	  paper.	  In	  short,	  the	  evidence	  unambiguously	  
shows	  that	  supply	  shocks	  which	  expand	  the	  potential	  for	  intra-­‐ethnic	  collaborations	  will	  
raise	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  in	  the	  affected	  ethnic	  group	  substantially.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23	  Our	  results	  are	  very	  robust	  to	  alternative	  definitions	  of	  the	  pool	  (such	  as	  a	  3-­‐year	  or	  7-­‐year	  

aggregate).	  We	  use	  a	  one-­‐year	  lead	  in	  the	  aggregation	  to	  allow	  for	  the	  possibility	  that	  the	  advisor	  is	  
collaborating	  with	  current	  students	  who	  will	  soon	  graduate.	  

	  

29	  

	  
VI. Crowdout Effects
The	  decision	  by	  an	  American	  mathematics	  department	  to	  admit	  Chinese	  doctoral	  
students	  obviously	  depends	  on	  many	  factors,	  including	  the	  relative	  quality	  of	  the	  applicants,	  
the	  possibility	  that	  Chinese	  students	  pay	  for	  a	  higher	  fraction	  of	  their	  education,	  the	  
widespread	  acceptance	  of	  the	  axiom	  that	  “diversity”	  is	  beneficial	  in	  a	  university	  setting,	  and	  
the	  relative	  marginal	  products	  of	  the	  American	  and	  Chinese	  students	  as	  university	  
employees	  (because	  many	  graduate	  students	  typically	  work	  as	  research	  or	  teaching	  
assistants).	  Some	  of	  these	  factors	  might	  imply	  that	  admission	  officers	  might	  prefer	  to	  admit	  
a	  Chinese	  student	  over	  an	  American	  applicant,	  even	  if	  the	  two	  applicants	  had	  the	  same	  
observable	  qualifications.	  
The	  offer	  of	  admission	  to	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  alters	  the	  educational	  
opportunities	  available	  to	  similarly	  qualified	  Americans	  in	  two	  distinct	  ways.	  First,	  the	  
number	  of	  slots	  available	  in	  a	  particular	  doctoral	  program	  may	  be	  relatively	  fixed,	  at	  least	  
in	  the	  short	  run.	  The	  enrollment	  of	  an	  additional	  Chinese	  student	  would	  then	  suggest	  that	  
one	  fewer	  American	  student	  could	  be	  admitted.	  This	  is	  the	  simplest	  and	  clearest	  case	  of	  a	  
crowdout	  effect.	  Even	  if	  the	  university	  were	  expanding	  and	  admitting	  more	  Chinese	  and	  
more	  American	  students,	  there	  may	  still	  be	  a	  crowdout	  effect	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  American	  
enrollment	  would	  have	  increased	  at	  an	  even	  faster	  rate	  if	  the	  university	  had	  not	  increased	  
its	  supply	  of	  Chinese	  students.	  
The	  entry	  of	  large	  numbers	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  into	  American	  
mathematics	  programs	  can	  also	  influence	  the	  enrollment	  decisions	  made	  by	  American	  
students	  in	  a	  less	  direct	  way.	  It	  may	  alter	  the	  incentives	  for	  natives	  to	  pursue	  specific	  
educational	  programs.	  
Suppose,	  for	  instance,	  that	  many	  of	  the	  Chinese	  students	  enrolled	  in	  mathematics	  
doctoral	  programs	  remain	  in	  the	  United	  States	  after	  graduation.24	  If	  there	  were	  little	  
crowdout	  in	  the	  university	  admissions	  process,	  one	  might	  then	  expect	  that	  the	  (eventual)	  
larger	  supply	  of	  newly	  minted	  mathematicians	  would	  lower	  entry	  wages	  and	  the	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24	  The	  evidence,	  in	  fact,	  suggests	  that	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  in	  both	  mathematics	  and	  other	  

fields	  are	  consistently	  more	  likely	  to	  stay	  than	  the	  average	  foreign	  student	  in	  those	  fields;	  see	  National	  
Science	  Board	  (2014),	  Appendix	  Table	  3-­‐22.	  

	  

30	  

occupation	  would	  become	  relatively	  less	  attractive	  to	  Americans.25	  The	  Chinese	  students	  
might	  still	  prefer	  to	  enter	  those	  low-­‐paying	  jobs	  because	  their	  career	  decisions	  are	  mainly	  
guided	  by	  the	  comparison	  of	  employment	  opportunities	  available	  in	  the	  United	  States	  and	  
China.	  In	  contrast,	  American	  students	  might	  have	  many	  other	  career	  choices	  (e.g.,	  a	  quant	  
career	  in	  Wall	  Street),	  and	  would	  shy	  away	  from	  applying	  to	  programs	  in	  educational	  
disciplines	  where	  foreign	  students	  cluster	  and	  subsequent	  wages	  are	  low.	  In	  the	  long	  run,	  
this	  behavioral	  response	  would	  again	  imply	  that	  an	  exogenous	  increase	  in	  the	  enrollment	  
of	  Chinese	  students	  in	  a	  particular	  program	  would	  reduce	  the	  number	  of	  Americans	  who	  
would	  want	  to	  enroll	  in	  that	  program.	  
Note	  that	  the	  first	  of	  these	  two	  crowdout	  effects	  is	  specific	  to	  a	  particular	  
university—and	  indicates	  how	  native	  enrollment	  in	  that	  institution	  changes	  as	  the	  number	  
of	  foreign	  students	  enrolled	  in	  that	  institution	  increases.	  The	  second	  crowdout	  effect	  
results	  from	  an	  economy-­‐wide	  supply	  response	  that	  discourages	  natives	  from	  pursuing	  
particular	  educational	  programs	  in	  all	  universities.	  The	  empirical	  analysis	  presented	  in	  this	  
section	  nets	  out	  these	  economy-­‐wide	  fluctuations	  and	  examines	  the	  shifts	  that	  occur	  in	  the	  
enrollment	  of	  American	  students	  within	  a	  particular	  mathematics	  department	  as	  the	  size	  of	  
the	  Chinese	  student	  population	  in	  that	  department	  grows.	  
To	  estimate	  the	  crowdout	  effect,	  we	  supplement	  our	  data	  with	  aggregate	  counts	  of	  
doctoral	  degrees	  drawn	  from	  the	  public	  use	  version	  of	  the	  Survey	  of	  Earned	  Doctorates	  
(SED).	  The	  SED	  contains	  a	  population	  census	  of	  all	  doctorates	  granted	  by	  a	  U.S.	  institution,	  
and	  reports	  information	  on	  the	  field	  and	  year	  of	  degree,	  as	  well	  as	  on	  the	  degree	  recipient’s	  
ethnicity	  and	  citizenship	  status.	  We	  use	  these	  data	  to	  compute	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  
awarded	  in	  mathematics	  each	  year	  between	  1975	  and	  2000,	  as	  well	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  
awarded	  to	  American	  citizens,	  to	  foreign	  students,	  and	  to	  foreign	  students	  of	  Asian	  
heritage.26	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25	  See	  Borjas	  (2009)	  for	  evidence	  that	  supply	  shocks	  of	  foreign	  students	  affect	  the	  earnings	  of	  newly	  
minted	  doctorates	  in	  specific	  disciplines,	  and	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  (2012)	  for	  related	  evidence	  on	  the	  
competitive	  effects	  resulting	  from	  the	  influx	  of	  Soviet	  mathematicians.	  Freeman	  et	  al	  (2001)	  describe	  how	  
shifts	  in	  the	  bioscience	  job	  market,	  shifts	  that	  are	  partly	  due	  to	  the	  influx	  of	  foreign	  students,	  affect	  career	  
incentives	  in	  that	  sector.	  
26	  The	  public	  use	  data	  are	  available	  at	  https://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/webcaspar/.	  The	  number	  of	  degrees	  

awarded	  to	  American	  citizens	  closely	  approximation	  the	  number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  to	  U.S.-­‐born	  persons	  

	  

31	  
Let	  Ast	  denote	  the	  number	  of	  U.S.-­‐born	  students	  awarded	  a	  degree	  in	  mathematics	  

by	  university	  s	  at	  time	  t,	  and	  let	  Cst	  denote	  the	  respective	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students.	  The	  
generic	  regression	  model	  used	  to	  capture	  the	  crowdout	  effect	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(7)	  

	  

Ast	  =	  ϕs	  +	  φt	  +	  θ	  Cst	  +	  ε,	  

	  
where	  φs	  represents	  a	  vector	  of	  department	  fixed	  effects	  and	  φt	  represents	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  
fixed	  effects.27	  We	  estimate	  the	  regression	  model	  using	  all	  the	  available	  data	  between	  1975	  
and	  2000	  for	  the	  subset	  of	  schools	  that	  produced	  at	  least	  one	  mathematics	  doctoral	  degree	  
during	  the	  period.	  The	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  department	  level	  to	  adjust	  for	  
possible	  serial	  correlation	  in	  the	  error	  term	  within	  a	  particular	  institution.	  
	  

The	  first	  row	  of	  Table	  7	  reports	  the	  estimate	  of	  θ 	  from	  OLS	  regressions	  using	  

alternative	  specifications	  of	  the	  model	  in	  equation	  (7).	  In	  particular,	  each	  of	  the	  columns	  in	  
the	  table	  employs	  a	  different	  measure	  of	  “foreign	  students”	  as	  the	  regressor,	  including	  the	  
total	  number	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  doctoral	  recipients,	  the	  total	  number	  of	  foreign	  students	  of	  
Asian	  ancestry,	  and	  the	  total	  number	  of	  Chinese	  foreign	  students.28	  Regardless	  of	  the	  
definition	  of	  the	  independent	  variable,	  the	  point	  estimates	  of	  θ	  are	  negative.	  The	  
descriptive	  evidence	  provided	  by	  the	  OLS	  regressions,	  while	  imprecise,	  seems	  consistent	  
with	  the	  presence	  of	  a	  crowdout	  effect.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
because	  of	  the	  very	  long	  time	  lag	  required	  for	  a	  foreign	  student	  to	  achieve	  permanent	  residence	  status	  (a	  
“green	  card”)	  and	  then	  wait	  the	  prerequisite	  five	  years	  before	  filing	  a	  naturalization	  application.	  	  
27	  The	  period	  fixed	  effects	  help	  to	  capture	  the	  potential	  crowdout	  that	  arises	  as	  natives	  respond	  to	  
the	  changed	  labor	  market	  opportunities	  caused	  by	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  foreign	  students.	  Any	  adverse	  
wage	  effects	  would	  presumably	  reduce	  the	  incentives	  of	  natives	  to	  enroll	  in	  a	  graduate	  program	  at	  any	  
university.	  
28	  The	  counts	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  and	  foreign-­‐born	  Asian	  students	  are	  drawn	  from	  the	  SED.	  The	  number	  

of	  Chinese	  students	  is	  drawn	  from	  the	  matched	  AMS-­‐MGP	  data	  files,	  and	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  students	  with	  a	  
Chinese	  surname.	  The	  SED	  also	  collects	  restricted	  use	  data	  on	  the	  number	  of	  foreign	  students	  per	  institution	  
per	  year	  who	  were	  specifically	  born	  in	  the	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  China;	  we	  are	  currently	  seeking	  access	  to	  this	  
data.	  Some	  of	  the	  regressions	  reported	  below	  use	  an	  IV	  strategy	  to	  identify	  the	  crowdout	  effect.	  As	  long	  as	  our	  
instrument	  has	  a	  valid	  exclusion	  restriction	  and	  a	  strong	  first	  stage,	  the	  measurement	  error	  resulting	  from	  
using	  either	  the	  SED	  count	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  students	  of	  Asian	  ancestry	  or	  the	  number	  of	  students	  with	  a	  
Chinese	  surname	  (instead	  of	  the	  number	  of	  students	  who	  were	  specifically	  born	  in	  the	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  
China)	  should	  not	  affect	  the	  coefficients	  of	  interest.	  

	  

32	  
One	  problem	  with	  interpreting	  the	  coefficient	  θ	  as	  an	  unbiased	  estimate	  of	  a	  

crowdout	  effect	  is	  that	  the	  inclusion	  of	  the	  school-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects	  in	  the	  regression	  
model	  fails	  to	  account	  for	  a	  key	  factor:	  A	  few	  large	  and/or	  growing	  departments	  likely	  
admit	  large	  numbers	  of	  American	  and	  Chinese	  students	  simultaneously.	  In	  fact,	  many	  of	  the	  
Chinese	  graduate	  students	  who	  came	  to	  the	  United	  States	  after	  the	  opening	  up	  of	  China	  
tended	  to	  gravitate	  to	  these	  large	  and	  growing	  departments.	  Put	  differently,	  there	  are	  
school-­‐year	  interaction	  fixed	  effects	  ϕst	  that	  are	  positively	  correlated	  with	  both	  Ast	  and	  Cst	  
in	  equation	  (7).	  The	  exclusion	  of	  these	  interactions	  from	  the	  regression	  model	  introduces	  a	  
positive	  and	  spurious	  correlation	  between	  the	  number	  of	  foreign	  students	  in	  the	  right-­‐
hand-­‐side	  and	  the	  error	  term.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  negative	  estimate	  of	  the	  crowdout	  effect	  
reported	  in	  the	  first	  row	  of	  Table	  7	  likely	  underestimates	  the	  true	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  
shock	  on	  the	  enrollment	  of	  American	  students.	  
To	  net	  out	  the	  spurious	  correlation,	  we	  would	  need	  to	  specify	  the	  regression	  model	  
in	  a	  way	  that	  lets	  us	  account	  for	  the	  idiosyncratic	  school-­‐year	  “demand	  shocks.”	  Obviously,	  
the	  direct	  inclusion	  of	  school-­‐year	  interaction	  fixed	  effects	  makes	  it	  impossible	  to	  identify	  
the	  parameter	  θ	  in	  (7).	  One	  very	  simple	  way	  of	  bypassing	  the	  problem	  would	  be	  to	  find	  a	  
regressor	  to	  proxy	  for	  the	  demand	  shocks.	  We	  used	  the	  SED	  to	  count	  the	  total	  number	  of	  
degrees	  awarded	  outside	  mathematics	  by	  a	  university	  each	  year,	  and	  added	  this	  measure	  of	  
the	  school-­‐specific	  enrollment	  trends	  to	  the	  regression	  model.	  As	  the	  second	  row	  of	  Table	  7	  
shows,	  adjusting	  for	  demand	  shocks	  in	  this	  rough	  fashion	  increases	  the	  magnitude	  of	  the	  
crowdout	  effect:	  the	  point	  estimate	  in	  the	  last	  column	  is	  now	  -­‐0.233	  (0.074),	  so	  that	  
approximately	  one	  American	  student	  “loses”	  his	  or	  her	  spot	  in	  a	  mathematics	  graduate	  
program	  for	  every	  four	  Chinese	  students	  admitted.	  
Alternatively,	  we	  can	  find	  an	  instrument	  that	  induces	  changes	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
foreign	  students	  admitted	  by	  a	  particular	  university	  that	  are	  independent	  from	  the	  school-­‐
specific	  demand	  shocks.	  Because	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  Chinese	  supply	  shock	  were	  most	  
evident	  in	  a	  subset	  of	  universities	  at	  a	  particular	  period	  of	  time,	  we	  can	  use	  the	  joint	  
exogeneity	  of	  the	  definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department	  and	  the	  timing	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  to	  
create	  such	  an	  instrument.	  In	  particular,	  we	  define	  the	  instrument	  as	  the	  product	  of	  the	  
post-­‐1989	  indicator	  variable	  and	  the	  dummy	  variables	  indicating	  if	  the	  department	  was	  

	  

33	  

mixed	  (either	  the	  department	  had	  at	  least	  one	  active	  Chinese	  advisor	  prior	  to	  the	  supply	  
shock	  between	  1985	  and	  1985,	  or	  the	  department	  had	  at	  least	  three	  active	  Chinese	  
advisors	  prior	  to	  the	  supply	  shock).	  
Panels	  B	  and	  C	  of	  Table	  7	  report	  the	  key	  coefficients	  from	  the	  two-­‐stage	  IV	  models.	  
Regardless	  of	  how	  we	  define	  the	  number	  of	  foreign	  students	  on	  the	  right-­‐hand-­‐side	  of	  
equation	  (7)	  or	  which	  of	  the	  two	  instruments	  we	  use,	  the	  instrument	  has	  a	  very	  significant	  
positive	  effect	  on	  the	  number	  of	  foreign	  students	  awarded	  degrees.	  In	  the	  last	  column,	  for	  
instance,	  the	  coefficient	  is	  1.848	  (0.400)	  when	  we	  use	  the	  less	  stringent	  definition	  of	  a	  
mixed	  department.	  
The	  table	  also	  reports	  the	  IV	  estimates	  of	  the	  crowdout	  effect.	  It	  is	  evident	  that	  the	  
crowdout	  coefficient	  θ	  is	  always	  negative,	  often	  statistically	  significant,	  and	  numerically	  
sizable.	  In	  fact,	  we	  typically	  cannot	  reject	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  crowdout	  coefficient	  is	  
equal	  to	  -­‐1	  in	  any	  of	  the	  specifications.	  Put	  differently,	  the	  IV	  regressions	  provide	  strong	  
evidence	  that	  one	  American	  student	  was	  “displaced”	  for	  every	  Chinese	  graduate	  student	  
admitted	  after	  the	  opening	  of	  China.	  
The	  strong	  crowdout	  effects	  reported	  in	  Table	  7	  allow	  us	  to	  provide	  a	  consistent	  
explanation	  of	  the	  productivity	  results	  discussed	  in	  earlier	  sections.	  The	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  
graduate	  students	  led	  to	  a	  corresponding	  reduction	  in	  the	  number	  of	  American	  students	  in	  
mathematics	  departments.	  Because	  of	  ethnic	  complementarities,	  the	  Chinese	  graduate	  
students	  were	  attracted	  to	  and	  matched	  with	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors,	  
and	  the	  relatively	  fixed	  size	  of	  the	  pool	  of	  graduate	  students	  at	  the	  department	  level	  
implied	  that	  fewer	  American	  students	  were	  available	  to	  the	  American	  advisors	  (perhaps	  
accompanied	  with	  a	  drop	  in	  other	  resources).	  As	  we	  have	  shown,	  this	  redistribution	  helped	  
generate	  important	  productivity	  effects	  in	  terms	  of	  published	  output,	  with	  the	  productivity	  
of	  Chinese	  advisors	  increasing	  and	  that	  of	  American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  the	  mixed	  
departments	  declining.	  
	  
VII. Aggregate Effects
Because	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  created	  both	  winners	  and	  losers	  in	  
the	  pre-­‐existing	  pool	  of	  mathematics	  advisors,	  a	  crucial	  question	  arises:	  Did	  the	  gains	  to	  the	  

	  

34	  

winners	  outweigh	  the	  losses	  to	  the	  losers?	  This	  section	  reports	  the	  results	  from	  an	  
empirical	  exercise	  that	  attempts	  to	  measure	  the	  size	  of	  the	  “surplus”	  resulting	  from	  the	  
supply	  shock.	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  the	  aggregate	  decrease	  in	  productivity	  observed	  among	  
American	  advisors	  was	  almost	  exactly	  offset	  by	  the	  aggregate	  increase	  in	  productivity	  
observed	  among	  Chinese	  advisors.	  
To	  calculate	  the	  size	  of	  the	  surplus,	  we	  adopt	  a	  methodology	  introduced	  in	  Borjas	  
and	  Doran	  (2012).	  Specifically,	  we	  compare	  the	  actual	  aggregate	  product	  produced	  with	  
what	  would	  have	  been	  predicted	  from	  the	  pre-­‐shock	  productivity	  profiles	  of	  each	  
individual	  advisor.	  Suppose	  we	  again	  divide	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  group	  of	  advisors	  into	  three	  
categories:	  Chinese	  advisors,	  American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  mixed	  departments,	  and	  
American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments.	  	  
We	  estimated	  separate	  regression	  models	  that	  trace	  out	  the	  mathematician’s	  age-­‐
product	  profile	  for	  each	  of	  these	  groups.	  Specifically,	  we	  estimated	  a	  regression	  of	  the	  
number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  a	  particular	  mathematician	  in	  a	  particular	  calendar	  year	  on	  
years	  of	  experience	  (introduced	  as	  a	  fourth-­‐order	  polynomial)	  and	  on	  a	  vector	  of	  individual	  
fixed	  effects.	  We	  only	  use	  data	  from	  1980	  through	  1988	  to	  estimate	  the	  regression	  model,	  
so	  that	  the	  path	  of	  the	  age-­‐product	  profile	  is	  estimated	  using	  publication	  data	  prior	  to	  the	  
supply	  shock.	  We	  then	  used	  these	  regressions	  to	  predict	  the	  post-­‐1989	  output	  of	  each	  
mathematician.	  To	  ensure	  that	  we	  do	  not	  extrapolate	  into	  the	  far-­‐off	  future,	  we	  conduct	  a	  
“short-­‐run”	  prediction	  exercise	  for	  the	  five-­‐year	  period	  between	  1989	  and	  1993.	  We	  then	  
added	  the	  total	  number	  of	  predicted	  publications	  across	  years	  and	  across	  all	  
mathematicians	  in	  each	  group.	  Table	  8	  reports	  the	  predicted	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  (per	  
year)	  and	  contrasts	  these	  predictions	  with	  the	  actual	  output	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  
using	  the	  two	  alternative	  definitions	  of	  a	  mixed	  department.	  
	  

Not	  surprisingly,	  the	  exercise	  reveals	  dramatic	  differences	  in	  how	  well	  the	  pre-­‐1989	  

productivity	  history	  predicts	  the	  post-­‐1989	  output	  among	  the	  three	  groups.	  Consider,	  for	  
instance,	  the	  group	  of	  American	  mathematicians	  employed	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments.	  
These	  mathematicians	  were	  the	  least	  likely	  to	  be	  influenced	  by	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  
graduate	  students.	  In	  fact,	  their	  pre-­‐1989	  productivity	  history	  predicts	  that	  they	  would	  
publish	  6,538	  papers	  annually	  in	  the	  subsequent	  5	  years	  (using	  the	  more	  stringent	  
definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department).	  In	  fact,	  they	  published	  6,545	  papers,	  a	  difference	  of	  only	  

	  

35	  

7	  papers.	  Put	  differently,	  the	  pre-­‐1989	  productivity	  history	  does	  an	  extremely	  good	  job	  of	  
predicting	  future	  productivity	  for	  the	  least-­‐affected	  group	  of	  American	  advisors.	  
Consider	  instead	  the	  group	  of	  Chinese-­‐American	  mathematicians.	  Their	  pre-­‐1989	  
productivity	  history	  would	  predict	  that	  they	  would	  publish	  314	  papers	  annually	  in	  the	  
subsequent	  period.	  In	  fact,	  they	  published	  380	  papers,	  or	  65	  papers	  over	  the	  prediction.	  In	  
contrast,	  the	  American	  advisors	  employed	  by	  mixed	  departments	  are	  predicted	  to	  publish	  
1156	  papers,	  but	  published	  only	  1092	  papers,	  a	  “loss”	  of	  64	  papers.	  Given	  the	  evidence	  
presented	  earlier	  in	  this	  paper,	  it	  is	  not	  surprising	  that	  the	  pre-­‐shock	  productivity	  history	  
tends	  to	  under-­‐predict	  the	  actual	  productivity	  of	  Chinese	  advisors	  and	  over-­‐predict	  the	  
actual	  productivity	  of	  American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments.	  
Notably,	  the	  aggregate	  effect	  again	  suggests	  the	  existence	  of	  a	  fixed-­‐sized	  pie.	  In	  the	  
simulation	  that	  uses	  the	  more	  stringent	  definition	  of	  a	  mixed	  department,	  for	  example,	  the	  
prediction	  exercise	  predicts	  a	  total	  output	  of	  8,007	  papers	  annually,	  while	  the	  actual	  output	  
was	  equal	  to	  8,016	  papers,	  an	  insignificant	  difference	  of	  only	  9	  papers.	  	  
The	  crucial	  lesson	  from	  these	  prediction	  exercises	  is	  that	  the	  total	  product	  of	  the	  
pre-­‐existing	  stock	  of	  mathematics	  advisors	  in	  the	  United	  States	  did	  not	  change	  as	  a	  result	  of	  
the	  supply	  shock	  of	  Chinese	  students.	  The	  increase	  in	  productivity	  arising	  from	  ethnic	  
collaboration	  and	  benefitting	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese	  advisors	  was	  met	  with	  an	  equally-­‐
sized	  decrease	  in	  productivity	  among	  the	  American	  advisors	  employed	  in	  those	  
departments	  that	  attracted	  (and	  enrolled)	  most	  of	  the	  Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  In	  short,	  
there	  is	  no	  evidence	  that	  the	  influx	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  greatly	  increased	  the	  
aggregate	  output	  or	  that	  it	  improved	  the	  “quality”	  of	  the	  published	  work.	  The	  evidence	  
instead	  seems	  consistent	  with	  the	  conjecture	  that	  the	  additional	  papers	  that	  were	  written	  
by	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  are	  papers	  that	  would	  have	  been	  written	  by	  Americans	  in	  
the	  mixed	  departments,	  but	  never	  were.	  
It	  is	  crucial	  to	  emphasize	  that	  although	  the	  total	  number	  of	  graduate	  student	  slots	  
available	  to	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  can	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  being	  relatively	  fixed	  for	  
institutional	  reasons,	  there	  is	  no	  mechanical	  constraint	  on	  the	  amount	  of	  research	  output	  
that	  the	  sample	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  American	  and	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  could	  have	  
produced.	  If	  it	  were	  the	  case	  that	  the	  affected	  advisors	  comprised	  all	  of	  the	  mathematics	  
professors	  publishing	  in	  English-­‐language	  journals,	  and	  if	  English-­‐language	  journals	  had	  

	  

36	  

exogenous	  space	  limitations,	  then	  our	  results	  showing	  a	  fixed-­‐sized	  “mathematics	  pie”	  
could	  be	  a	  numerical	  artifact	  of	  such	  restrictions.	  However,	  the	  research	  output	  that	  the	  
affected	  advisors	  were	  producing	  comprised	  only	  a	  small	  fraction	  of	  the	  total	  English-­‐
language	  mathematical	  output	  before	  the	  shock,	  and	  an	  even	  smaller	  fraction	  of	  the	  output	  
after	  the	  shock	  simply	  because	  many	  new	  mathematicians	  would	  continue	  to	  enter	  the	  
profession	  after	  1989.	  As	  a	  result,	  if	  the	  supply	  shock	  had	  indeed	  produced	  larger	  benefits	  
for	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  than	  the	  corresponding	  losses	  for	  their	  American	  
colleagues,	  then	  the	  portion	  of	  the	  worldwide	  English-­‐language	  "mathematics	  pie"	  that	  this	  
group	  comprised	  could	  have	  potentially	  increased.	  
	  
VIII. The Productivity of the Students
	  

Up	  to	  this	  point,	  our	  analysis	  has	  focused	  on	  documenting	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  

supply	  shock	  for	  the	  productivity	  of	  the	  advisors.	  We	  have	  shown	  that	  there	  was	  a	  
redistributional	  impact,	  but	  little	  evidence	  of	  an	  “efficiency”	  effect	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  the	  
aggregate	  output	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  remained	  fixed	  after	  the	  supply	  shock	  of	  
Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  It	  is	  entirely	  possible,	  however,	  that	  the	  beneficial	  efficiency	  
consequences	  of	  the	  supply	  shock	  might	  show	  up	  much	  later,	  after	  the	  Chinese	  doctoral	  
students	  become	  professional	  mathematicians	  themselves.	  Their	  research	  efforts	  would,	  in	  
turn,	  contribute	  to	  “the	  greater	  good”	  of	  mathematical	  knowledge.	  This	  section	  examines	  
whether	  these	  long-­‐run	  effects	  exist	  and	  are	  numerically	  important.	  
	  

Specifically,	  we	  track	  the	  research	  output	  produced	  by	  the	  students	  of	  the	  sample	  of	  

the	  5,496	  pre-­‐existing	  Chinese-­‐American	  and	  American	  advisors	  constructed	  in	  the	  
previous	  sections.	  We	  again	  make	  use	  of	  the	  merged	  AMS-­‐MGP	  data	  to	  create	  a	  new	  file	  
containing	  the	  publication	  records	  of	  the	  27,885	  students	  mentored	  by	  these	  advisors	  
between	  1975	  and	  2004.	  We	  then	  estimated	  regression	  models	  that	  relate	  the	  student’s	  
productivity	  (defined	  in	  various	  ways)	  to	  a	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  student	  was	  Chinese.	  
The	  basic	  regression	  specification	  is:	  
	  
(8)	  
	  

	  

Ykt	  =	  ϕt	  +	  γ	  Ck	  +	  ε.,	  

	  

37	  

where	  Ykt	  measures	  the	  research	  productivity	  of	  student	  k	  who	  graduated	  in	  year	  t;	  Ck	  is	  a	  
dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  student	  k	  is	  Chinese;	  and	  ϕt	  gives	  a	  vector	  of	  fixed	  effects	  
indicating	  the	  year	  in	  which	  the	  doctoral	  degree	  was	  awarded.	  
We	  constructed	  several	  alternative	  measures	  of	  the	  student’s	  productivity	  Ykt.	  Table	  
9	  summarizes	  the	  regression	  results.	  The	  first	  column	  reports	  the	  coefficient	  γ	  from	  the	  
basic	  specification	  in	  equation	  (8),	  while	  the	  other	  columns	  report	  the	  coefficient	  after	  the	  
regression	  includes	  either	  school-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects	  or	  advisor-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects.	  	  
Consider	  the	  regression	  coefficients	  reported	  in	  the	  second	  row,	  where	  the	  dependent	  
variable	  indicates	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  annually	  by	  a	  student	  during	  his	  
career	  (through	  2010).	  The	  coefficient	  is	  positive,	  although	  numerically	  very	  small	  and	  
insignificant.	  After	  controlling	  for	  school-­‐specific	  fixed	  effects,	  for	  example,	  the	  regression	  
suggests	  that	  Chinese	  students	  publish	  only	  0.02	  papers	  more	  per	  year	  than	  the	  American	  
students,	  or	  less	  than	  a	  third	  of	  a	  paper	  more	  per	  decade.	  The	  third	  row	  of	  the	  table	  uses	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  citations	  received	  annually	  by	  a	  student	  during	  his	  career,	  which	  can	  be	  
interpreted	  as	  a	  quality-­‐weighted	  measure	  of	  publications.	  Regardless	  of	  the	  specification,	  
the	  coefficient	  γ	  in	  this	  regression	  is	  uniformly	  negative,	  though	  again	  insignificant.	  	  
We	  interpret	  the	  results	  in	  Table	  9	  as	  providing	  little	  support	  for	  the	  conjecture	  that	  
the	  efficiency	  gains	  from	  the	  Chinese	  supply	  shock	  are	  likely	  to	  become	  more	  evident	  over	  
time,	  as	  the	  Chinese	  students	  enter	  the	  profession	  and	  begin	  to	  influence	  the	  amount	  and	  
quality	  of	  mathematical	  research.	  There	  is	  simply	  no	  evidence	  to	  suggest	  that	  the	  Chinese	  
students	  who	  made	  up	  the	  supply	  shock	  ended	  up	  having	  more	  productive	  or	  more	  
consequential	  professional	  careers	  than	  their	  American	  counterparts.	  
	  
IX. Summary
This	  paper	  examines	  the	  consequences	  of	  perhaps	  the	  largest	  annual	  migration	  of	  
budding	  scientists	  around	  the	  world:	  the	  annual	  flow	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students	  into	  
Western	  universities,	  and	  particularly	  the	  United	  States.	  Our	  analysis	  exploits	  the	  natural	  
experiment	  ignited	  by	  the	  end	  of	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution	  and	  the	  enactment	  of	  Vice	  Premier	  
Deng	  Xiaoping’s	  “Open	  Up”	  policy.	  The	  Cultural	  Revolution	  destroyed	  the	  Chinese	  higher	  
education	  system,	  and	  only	  a	  handful	  of	  Chinese	  students	  were	  able	  to	  study	  abroad	  during	  

	  

38	  

those	  turbulent	  years.	  Deng	  Xiaoping’s	  reforms	  not	  only	  tore	  down	  the	  self-­‐imposed	  
barriers	  to	  a	  Western	  education,	  but	  also	  encouraged	  Chinese	  students	  to	  acquire	  their	  
graduate	  training	  in	  Western	  universities	  in	  order	  to	  accelerate	  the	  modernization	  of	  China.	  
We	  use	  administrative	  data	  created	  and	  maintained	  by	  the	  American	  Mathematical	  
Society	  and	  the	  Mathematics	  Genealogy	  Project.	  These	  data	  provide	  the	  history	  of	  
mathematical	  publications	  for	  all	  mathematicians,	  as	  well	  as	  match	  advisors	  and	  advisees.	  
We	  merge	  these	  data	  and	  identify	  persons	  of	  Chinese	  ancestry	  to	  examine	  the	  productivity	  
of	  mathematics	  advisors	  employed	  in	  American	  universities	  before	  and	  after	  the	  supply	  
shock	  of	  Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  
The	  empirical	  analysis	  uses	  a	  simple	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  strategy.	  The	  data	  
reveal	  that	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  employed	  in	  American	  universities	  who	  had	  Chinese	  
ancestry	  mentored	  a	  disproportionately	  large	  share	  of	  the	  new	  Chinese	  graduate	  students.	  
This	  increase	  in	  mentoring	  opportunities	  led	  to	  a	  large	  increase	  in	  the	  scientific	  output	  of	  
those	  advisors,	  resulting	  not	  only	  from	  increased	  collaboration	  with	  ethnically	  similar	  
students,	  but	  also	  from	  an	  expansion	  in	  their	  other	  non-­‐collaborative	  work.	  The	  evidence,	  
therefore,	  strongly	  confirms	  the	  existence	  of	  knowledge	  spillovers	  among	  ethnically	  similar	  
scientists.	  
At	  the	  same	  time,	  however,	  the	  data	  indicate	  that	  some	  of	  the	  American	  advisors	  
who	  did	  not	  have	  Chinese	  ancestry	  lost	  out.	  In	  particular,	  advisors	  who	  did	  not	  have	  
Chinese	  ancestry	  and	  who	  were	  employed	  in	  the	  departments	  that	  attracted	  most	  of	  the	  
Chinese	  graduate	  students	  were	  unable	  to	  “compete”	  in	  the	  mentoring	  marketplace	  for	  the	  
new	  students.	  Because	  of	  the	  relatively	  fixed	  size	  of	  the	  graduate	  student	  pool	  in	  
mathematics	  departments,	  these	  advisors	  experienced	  a	  substantial	  decline	  in	  their	  
productivity.	  
Our	  data	  allows	  us	  to	  aggregate	  the	  gains	  experienced	  by	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors	  and	  the	  losses	  suffered	  by	  the	  non-­‐Chinese	  advisors	  to	  estimate	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
surplus	  in	  aggregate	  output	  resulting	  from	  the	  supply	  shock.	  It	  turns	  out	  that	  the	  aggregate	  
output	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  stock	  of	  advisors	  remained	  unchanged.	  The	  additional	  research	  
productivity	  of	  the	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  was	  almost	  exactly	  offset	  by	  the	  lower	  
productivity	  of	  the	  American	  advisors	  who	  lost	  out.	  

	  

39	  
It is clear that ethnic complementarities can be very important in knowledge production:

The ability of a supply shock to influence the rate of knowledge accumulation depends crucially
on how the newcomers interact with the pre-existing workforce, and ethnic complementarities
lower the barriers to such interactions. However, it is also clear that the flow of aggregate
knowledge depends on both the supply of knowledge producers and on the demand for
knowledge output. If the demand for knowledge output does not shift out in those areas where a
supply shock has created additional opportunities for productive interactions, the benefits of such
interactions may be greatly attenuated by accompanying losses.
Scientific knowledge is a public good. If a receiving country is to fully benefit from
supply shocks of scientific personnel, it would seem that many institutions—including
universities, non-profits, and governments—may need to proactively reallocate resources to take
advantage of the opportunities created by those supply shocks.	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

40	  
References

	  
	  
Azoulay,	  Pierre,	  Joshua	  S.	  Graff	  Zivin,	  and	  Jialan	  Wang,	  “Superstar	  Extinction,”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  125	  (2010):	  549-­‐589.	  
	  
Borjas,	  George	  J.	  “Immigration	  in	  High-­‐Skill	  Labor	  Markets:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Foreign	  
Students	  on	  the	  Earnings	  of	  Doctorates.”	  In:	  Richard	  B.	  Freeman	  and	  Daniel	  L.	  Goroff,	  eds.,	  
Science	  and	  Engineering	  Careers	  in	  the	  United	  States:	  An	  Analysis	  of	  Markets	  and	  
Employment,	  131-­‐161.	  Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press,	  2009.	  
	  
	  
Borjas,	  George	  J.,	  and	  Kirk	  B.	  Doran,	  “The	  Collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  the	  
Productivity	  of	  American	  Mathematicians,”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  127	  (2012):	  
1143-­‐1203.	  
	  
Chen,	  Changgui,	  “Evolution	  and	  Future	  of	  Chinese	  Overseas	  Student	  Policy,	  1978-­‐
2006,”	  Exploration	  of	  Higher	  Education	  5	  (2007).	  
	  
Deng,	  Treiman,	  “The	  Impact	  of	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution	  on	  Trends	  in	  Educational	  
Attainment	  in	  the	  People's	  Republic	  of	  China,”	  American	  Journal	  of	  Sociology	  103	  (1997):	  
391-­‐428.	  	  
Foley,	  C.	  Fritz,	  and	  William	  R.	  Kerr.	  “Ethnic	  Innovation	  and	  U.S.	  Multinational	  
Activity,”	  Management	  Science	  59	  (July	  2013):	  1529-­‐1544.	  
	  
Freeman,	  Richard	  B.,	  and	  Wei	  Huang,	  "Collaborating	  with	  People	  Like	  Me:	  Ethnic	  Co-­‐
authorship	  within	  the	  US,"	  Journal	  of	  Labor	  Economics,	  forthcoming	  2015.	  
Freeman,	  Richard	  B.,	  Eric	  Weinstein,	  Elizabeth	  Marincola,	  Janet	  Rosenbaum,	  and	  
Frank	  Solomon.	  “Competition	  and	  Careers	  in	  Bioscience,”	  Science,	  December	  14,	  2001,	  pp.	  
2293-­‐2294.	  
Institute	  of	  International	  Education.	  "All	  Places	  of	  Origin	  of	  International	  Students,	  
Selected	  Years:	  1949/50-­‐1999/00."	  Open	  Doors	  Report	  on	  International	  Educational	  
Exchange,	  2009.	  
	  
Lucas,	  Robert	  E.,	  “Ideas	  and	  Growth,”	  Economica	  76	  (February	  2009):	  1-­‐19.	  
	  
Kerr,	  William	  R.	  "Ethnic	  Scientific	  Communities	  and	  International	  Technology	  
Diffusion.”	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics	  90	  (2008):	  518-­‐537.	  
	  
Kerr,	  Sari	  Pekkala,	  and	  William	  R.	  Kerr.	  "Global	  Collaborative	  Patents."	  (2014).	  
	  
Lafraniere,	  Sharon.	  “Name	  Not	  on	  Our	  List?	  Change	  It,	  China	  Says.”	  The	  New	  York	  
Times,	  April	  21,	  2009.	  
	  

	  

41	  

MacFarquhar,	  Roderick	  and	  Michael	  Schoenhals.	  Mao’s	  Last	  Revolution.	  Cambridge,	  
MA:	  Belknap	  Press,	  2008.	  
	  
Mathur,	  Nalini.	  Education	  Reform	  in	  Post-­‐Mao	  China.	  New	  Delhi:	  APH	  Publishing	  
Corporation,	  2007.	  
	  
Nanda,	  Ramana,	  and	  Tarun	  Khanna,	  “Diasporas	  and	  Domestic	  Entrepreneurs:	  
Evidence	  from	  the	  Indian	  Software	  Industry,”	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  and	  Management	  
Strategy	  19	  (2010):	  991-­‐1012.	  
	  
National	  Science	  Board.	  Science	  and	  Engineering	  Indicators	  2014.	  Arlington	  VA:	  
National	  Science	  Foundation	  (NSB	  14-­‐01),	  2014.	  
	  
Song,	  Bocheng.	  “The	  Impact	  of	  the	  Cultural	  Revolution,”	  Working	  Paper,	  (2011).	  
	  
Stuen,	  Eric	  T.,	  Ahmed	  Mushfiq	  Mobarak,	  and	  Keith	  E.	  Maskus.	  "Skilled	  Immigration	  
and	  Innovation:	  Evidence	  from	  Enrolment	  Fluctuations	  in	  US	  Doctoral	  Programmes,"	  
Economic	  Journal	  122	  (2012):	  1143-­‐1176.	  
	  
Rauch,	  James	  and	  Vitor	  Trindade.	  “Ethnic	  Chinese	  Networks	  in	  International	  Trade,"	  
Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics	  84	  (February	  2002):	  116-­‐130.	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian,	  “Quality	  Matters:	  The	  Expulsion	  of	  Professors	  and	  the	  
Consequences	  for	  Ph.D.	  Student	  Outcomes	  in	  Nazi	  Germany,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
118	  (2010):	  787-­‐831.	  
	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian.	  “Peer	  Effects	  in	  Science:	  Evidence	  from	  the	  Dismissal	  of	  
Scientists	  in	  Nazi	  Germany,”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies	  (April	  2012)	  79:	  838-­‐861.	  
	  
Waldinger,	  Fabian,	  Petra	  Moser,	  and	  Alessandra	  Voena.	  “German	  Jewish	  Emigres	  
and	  U.S.	  Invention,”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  104	  (October	  2014):	  3222-­‐3255.	  
	  
Wang,	  You-­‐Qin.	  "Student	  Attacks	  against	  Teachers:	  The	  Revolution	  of	  1966."	  Issues	  &	  
Studies	  37.2:	  29-­‐79,	  (2001)	  
	  
Zedong,	  Mao.	  "On	  the	  People's	  Democratic	  Dictatorship,"	  30	  June	  1949,	  Mao	  Zedong	  
xuanji	  (Selected	  Works	  on	  Mao	  Zedong),	  Beijing:	  The	  People's	  Press,	  IV,	  1477,	  (1965).	  
	  
Zweig,	  	  David	  and	  Stanley	  Rosen,	  “How	  China	  Trained	  a	  New	  Generation	  Abroad,”	  Sci	  
Dev	  Net	  (May	  22,	  2003).	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

42	  
Figure	  1.	  Mathematics	  doctorates	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students	  
by	  American	  universities,	  1960-­‐2004	  

	  

Number'of'Chinese'students''

400"

300"

200"

100"

0"
1960"

1965"

1970"

1975"

1980" 1985"
Year'

1990"

1995"

2000"

2005"

	  

	  

Notes:	  The number of Chinese students is calculated using the merged AMS-MGP data. The student’s name
indicates Chinese ancestry based on the matching procedure described in Section III,	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

43	  
Figure	  2.	  Average	  number	  of	  doctorates	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students,	  	  
by	  type	  of	  department	  

Number'of'Chinese'students'per'school'

9"
8"
7"

Mixed
departments

6"
5"
4"
3"
2"

Non-mixed
departments

1"
0"
1975"

1980"

1985"

1990"
Year'

1995"

2000"

2005"

	  

	  

Notes:	  The	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  produced	  gives	  a	  3-­‐year	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  number	  of	  students	  
with	  Chinese	  heritage	  granted	  a	  doctoral	  degree	  in	  mathematics	  from	  the	  average	  school	  in	  a	  particular	  year.	  
A	  mixed	  department	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  that	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  
and	  1985.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

44	  
Figure	  3.	  Number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored,	  by	  type	  of	  advisor	  
	  
0.16%

Number'of'Chinese'students'

0.14%
0.12%

Chinese
advisors

0.10%
0.08%
0.06%

American advisors in
mixed departments

0.04%
0.02%
0.00%

American advisors in
non-mixed departments

!0.02%
!0.04%
!0.06%
1975%

1980%

1985%

1990%
Year'

1995%

2000%

2005%

	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  annual	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  gives	  a	  3-­‐year	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  residual	  number	  of	  
students	  with	  Chinese	  heritage	  mentored	  by	  an	  advisor	  each	  year,	  where	  the	  residual	  is	  defined	  as	  the	  
difference	  between	  the	  actual	  number	  of	  Chinese	  students	  mentored	  and	  the	  average	  number	  of	  Chinese	  
students	  mentored	  annually	  before	  1989.	  A	  mixed	  department	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  that	  
supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  
non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  affiliation	  in	  1988.	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

45	  
Figure	  4.	  Number	  of	  American	  students	  mentored,	  by	  type	  of	  advisor	  

	  
0.08%

American advisors in
non-mixed departments

0.06%

Number'of'American'students'

0.04%
0.02%
0%
Chinese
advisors

!0.02%
!0.04%

American advisors in
mixed departments

!0.06%
!0.08%
1975%

1980%

1985%

1990%
Year'

	  

1995%

2000%

2005%

	  

Notes:	  The	  annual	  number	  of	  American	  students	  gives	  a	  3-­‐year	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  residual	  number	  of	  
annual	  students	  who	  do	  not	  have	  Chinese	  heritage	  mentored	  by	  an	  advisor	  each	  year,	  where	  the	  residual	  is	  
defined	  as	  the	  difference	  between	  the	  actual	  number	  of	  American	  students	  mentored	  and	  the	  average	  number	  
of	  American	  students	  mentored	  annually	  before	  1989.	  A	  mixed	  department	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  
that	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  
or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  affiliation	  in	  1988.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

46	  
Figure	  5.	  Number	  of	  papers	  published,	  by	  type	  of	  advisor	  
	  
0.4%
Chinese
advisors

0.3%

Number'of'papers'

0.2%
0.1%
0%

American advisors in
non-mixed departments

!0.1%
!0.2%

American advisors in
mixed departments

!0.3%
!0.4%
1975%

1980%

1985%

1990%
Year'

	  

1995%

2000%

2005%

	  

Notes:	  The	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  annually	  by	  an	  advisor	  gives	  a	  3-­‐year	  moving	  average	  of	  the	  residual	  
number	  of	  papers	  published,	  where	  the	  residual	  is	  defined	  as	  the	  difference	  between	  the	  actual	  number	  of	  
papers	  published	  and	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  annually	  before	  1989.	  A	  mixed	  department	  
had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  that	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  
advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  affiliation	  in	  1988.	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

47	  
Table	  1.	  Doctoral	  degrees	  awarded	  annually	  in	  mathematics,	  	  
by	  ethnicity	  of	  advisor	  and	  advisee	  

	  
	  
Number	  of	  degrees	  awarded	  annually	  
	  
Number	  awarded	  to	  Chinese	  students	  
Percent	  with	  a	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisor	  
	  
Number	  awarded	  to	  American	  students	  
Percent	  with	  a	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisor	  
	  

1975-­‐2004	  
1226.9	  
	  
210.6	  
13.2	  
	  
1016.3	  
3.4	  

1975-­‐1988	  
850.4	  
	  
78.6	  
8.3	  
	  
771.8	  
2.8	  

1989-­‐2005	  
1556.3	  
	  
326.1	  
14.2	  
	  
1230.2	  
3.7	  

Notes:	  The	  degree	  counts	  reported	  in	  this	  table	  are	  calculated	  using	  merged	  data	  from	  the	  AMS	  and	  MGP	  files.	  
Inclusion	  in	  the	  sample	  requires	  that	  advisors	  publish	  at	  least	  one	  paper	  between	  1945	  and	  2010.	  A	  student	  is	  
“American”	  if	  he	  or	  she	  does	  not	  have	  Chinese	  heritage.	  

	  

	  

	  

48	  
Table	  2.	  Summary	  statistics	  for	  advisors	  

	  

1975-­‐1988	  

1989-­‐2004	  

Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  
Papers	  published	  per	  year	  
Citations	  received	  per	  paper	  
Advisees	  per	  year	  
Chinese	  advisees	  per	  year	  
Year	  of	  first	  publication	  
Number	  of	  advisors	  
	  
American	  advisors	  

	  
1.532	  
	  
5.667	  
0.168	  
	  
0.039	  
	  
1972	  
219	  
	  
	  

	  
1.696	  
	  
7.077	  
	  
0.258	  
	  
0.137	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
	  
	  

Papers	  published	  per	  year	  
Citations	  received	  per	  paper	  
Advisees	  per	  year	  
Chinese	  advisees	  per	  year	  
Year	  of	  first	  publication	  
Number	  of	  advisors	  

1.387	  
	  
6.100	  
	  
0.177	  
	  
0.015	  
	  
1969	  
5277	  

1.272	  
	  
7.353	  
	  
0.228	  
	  
0.045	  
	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  sample	  consists	  of	  mathematicians	  affiliated	  with	  an	  American	  institution	  who	  published	  their	  
first	  paper	  between	  1945	  and	  1986,	  and	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  one	  student	  between	  1975	  and	  2004.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

49	  
Table	  3.	  The	  supply	  shock	  and	  the	  productivity	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  advisors	  

	  
	  

Dependent	  variable	  
	  
	  
Number	  of	   Number	  of	   Number	  of	   Citations	  
Number	  of	   Chinese	  
American	  
papers	  
per	  paper	  
students	  
students	  
students	  
published	   published	  
A.	  Basic	  specification	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Chinese	  advisor	  
0.027	  
0.075	  
-­‐0.047	  
0.177	  
-­‐0.784	  
	  
(0.022)	  
(0.016)	  
(0.015)	  
(0.089)	  
(0.757)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
B.	  	  Mixed	  department	  had	  some	  Chinese	  presence	  
	  
	  
	  
Chinese	  advisor	  
0.026	  
0.077	  
-­‐0.051	  
0.144	  
-­‐0.889	  
	  
(0.022)	  
(0.016)	  
(0.015)	  
(0.090)	  
(0.764)	  
American	  advisor	  in	  	  
-­‐0.005	  
0.005	  
-­‐0.010	  
-­‐0.088	  
-­‐0.295	  
mixed	  department	  
(0.008)	  
(0.003)	  
(0.007)	  
(0.029)	  
(0.411)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
C.	  Mixed	  department	  had	  frequent	  Chinese	  presence	  
	  
	  
Chinese	  advisor	  
0.027	  
0.077	  
-­‐0.050	  
0.167	  
-­‐0.935	  
	  
(0.022)	  
(0.016)	  
(0.015)	  
(0.089)	  
(0.759)	  
American	  advisor	  in	  	  
-­‐0.004	  
0.012	  
-­‐0.016	  
-­‐0.069	  
-­‐1.027	  
mixed	  department	  
(0.012)	  
(0.004)	  
(0.010)	  
(0.038)	  
(0.629)	  
	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  All	  regressions	  
include	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  a	  vector	  of	  advisor	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  experience	  fixed	  effects	  
(measuring	  the	  advisor’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience	  in	  5-­‐year	  bands).	  A	  mixed	  department	  in	  Panel	  B	  had	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  1	  dissertation	  between	  1981	  and	  1985;	  a	  mixed	  
department	  in	  Panel	  C	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  
and	  1985.	  American	  advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  affiliation	  as	  
of	  1988.	  The	  excluded	  group	  in	  Panels	  B	  and	  C	  are	  the	  American	  advisors	  affiliated	  with	  non-­‐mixed	  
departments.	  The	  regressions	  in	  the	  first	  four	  columns	  have	  155,065	  observations;	  the	  regressions	  in	  the	  last	  
column	  have	  84,748	  observations.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

50	  
Table	  4.	  Ethnicity	  and	  collaboration	  in	  advisor-­‐advisee	  pairings	  

	  
	  
Independent	  variable:	  
Chinese	  advisor	  
	  
Chinese	  advisee	  
	  
Chinese	  advisor	  ×	  Chinese	  advisee	  
	  
	  
Includes	  advisor	  fixed	  effects	  
	  

Probability	  of	  
coauthoring	  
-­‐0.057	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
(0.068)	  
	  
-­‐0.002	  
-­‐0.000	  
(0.056)	  
(0.072)	  
0.174	  
0.178	  
(0.070)	  
(0.090)	  
	  
	  
No	  
Yes	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   	  
	  

Number	  of	  papers	  	  
coauthored	  
-­‐0.320	  
-­‐-­‐-­‐	  
(0.288)	  
	  
0.107	  
0.174	  
(0.326)	  
(0.412)	  
1.439	  
1.120	  
(0.415)	  
(0.488)	  
	  
No	  
Yes	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses,	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  The	  unit	  of	  
observation	  is	  a	  particular	  pairing	  between	  an	  advisor	  and	  an	  advisee.	  The	  regressions	  have	  1,787	  
observations	  that	  include	  all	  possible	  pairings	  between	  advisors	  and	  advisees	  between	  1975	  and	  2004,	  and	  
are	  weighted	  by	  the	  total	  number	  of	  students	  mentored	  by	  the	  advisor	  during	  the	  period.	  The	  “probability	  of	  
coauthoring”	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  set	  to	  unity	  if	  the	  particular	  pairing	  between	  the	  advisor	  and	  the	  advisee	  
ever	  resulted	  in	  a	  published	  paper.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  giving	  the	  “number	  of	  papers	  coauthored”	  gives	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  papers	  coauthored	  by	  the	  advisor-­‐advisee	  pairing	  during	  the	  entire	  period.	  All	  
regressions	  also	  include	  a	  variable	  indicating	  the	  year	  in	  which	  the	  pairing	  was	  formed.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

51	  

Table	  5.	  Pre-­‐post	  differential	  impact	  of	  the	  supply	  shock,	  by	  type	  of	  publication	  
	  
	  
Group	  of	  advisors	  
	  
	  
American	  
American	  advisors	  
	  
Chinese	   advisors	  in	  mixed	  
in	  non-­‐mixed	  
Collaboration	  arrangement:	  
advisors	  
departments	  
departments	  
Total	  number	  of	  papers	  
0.280	  
0.122	  
0.170	  
	  
(0.121)	  
(0.074)	  
(0.119)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Papers	  with	  Chinese	  advisees	  
0.113	  
0.003	  
0.016	  
	  
(0.038)	  
(0.025)	  
(0.019)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Papers	  with	  Chinese	  non-­‐advisees	  
0.058	  
0.021	  
0.026	  
	  
(0.023)	  
(0.007)	  
(0.009)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Papers	  with	  American	  advisees	  
-­‐0.063	  
0.083	  
0.031	  
	  
(0.023)	  
(0.056)	  
(0.035)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
All	  other	  coauthored	  papers	  
0.288	  
0.100	  
0.228	  
	  
(0.081)	  
(0.118)	  
(0.122)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Solo-­‐authored	  papers	  
-­‐0.055	  
-­‐0.085	  
-­‐0.131	  
	  
(0.048)	  
(0.111)	  
(0.065)	  
	  
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses,	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  The	  data	  consists	  
of	  a	  panel	  that	  has	  two	  observations	  per	  advisor.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  mean	  number	  of	  (experience-­‐
adjusted)	  papers	  published	  annually	  either	  between	  1975-­‐1988	  or	  1989-­‐2004.	  The	  statistics	  reported	  in	  the	  
table	  are	  the	  coefficients	  of	  the	  interaction	  between	  the	  post-­‐1989	  indicator	  and	  the	  type	  of	  advisor	  (i.e.,	  
Chinese,	  American	  in	  mixed	  department,	  or	  American	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  department).	  A	  mixed	  department	  had	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  that	  supervised	  at	  least	  1	  dissertation	  between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  
advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  affiliation	  in	  1988.	  All	  
regressions	  include	  a	  vector	  of	  vector	  of	  advisor	  fixed	  effects.	  The	  regressions	  have	  864	  observations.	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

52	  
Table	  6.	  The	  productivity	  effect	  of	  mentoring	  students,	  IV	  estimates	  

	  
	  
	  
A.	  Mixed	  department	  had	  some	  Chinese	  presence	  
First	  stage:	  
Chinese	  advisor	  ×	  Post-­‐1989	  indicator	  
	  
Mixed	  American	  advisor	  ×	  Post-­‐1989	  indicator	  
	  
Angrist-­‐Pischke	  multivariate	  F	  statistic	  
	  
Second	  stage:	  
	  
	  
B.	  Mixed	  department	  had	  frequent	  Chinese	  presence	  
First	  stage:	  
Chinese	  advisor	  ×	  Post-­‐1989	  indicator	  
	  
Mixed	  American	  advisor	  ×	  Post-­‐1989	  indicator	  
	  
Angrist-­‐Pischke	  multivariate	  F	  statistic	  
	  
Second	  stage:	  
	  
	  

Size	  of	  collaboration	  pool	  is	  a	  	  
5-­‐year	  aggregate	  of:	  
Number	  of	   Number	  of	  ethnically	  
students	  
similar	  students	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.211	  
0.319	  
(0.106)	  
(0.080)	  
-­‐0.028	  
-­‐0.045	  
(0.039)	  
(0.034)	  
2.46	  
9.61	  
	  
	  
0.961	  
0.639	  
(0.432)	  
(0.225)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.221	  
0.327	  
(0.105)	  
(0.079)	  
-­‐0.002	  
-­‐0.052	  
(0.057)	  
(0.050)	  
2.22	  
9.35	  
	  
	  
0.696	  
0.527	  
(0.377)	  
(0.222)	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  The	  dependent	  
variable	  in	  the	  second	  stage	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  by	  an	  advisor	  in	  a	  particular	  year.	  The	  
right-­‐hand-­‐side	  variable	  gives	  the	  size	  of	  an	  advisor’s	  collaboration	  pool,	  defined	  as	  a	  5-­‐year	  aggregate	  of	  
either	  the	  total	  number	  of	  students	  supervised	  or	  the	  number	  of	  ethnically	  similar	  students	  supervised.	  All	  
regressions	  include	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects,	  a	  vector	  of	  advisor	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  experience	  
fixed	  effects	  (measuring	  the	  advisor’s	  years	  of	  work	  experience	  in	  5-­‐year	  bands).	  A	  mixed	  department	  in	  
Panel	  A	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  1	  dissertation	  between	  1981	  and	  1985;	  a	  
mixed	  department	  in	  Panel	  B	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  
between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  
their	  affiliation	  as	  of	  1988.	  The	  regressions	  have	  133,081	  observations.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

53	  
Table	  7.	  The	  supply	  shock	  and	  the	  crowdout	  of	  American	  students	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
Model:	  

Number	  of:	  

	  
-­‐0.049	  
(0.039)	  
-­‐0.095	  
(0.038)	  
	  

	  
-­‐0.055	  
(0.053)	  
-­‐0.108	  
(0.052)	  
	  

Chinese	  
foreign	  
students	  
	  
-­‐0.165	  
(0.074)	  
-­‐0.233	  
(0.074)	  
	  

1.439	  
(0.359)	  
-­‐0.749	  
(0.349)	  
	  

0.918	  
(0.253)	  
-­‐1.175	  
(0.530)	  
	  

1.848	  
(0.400)	  
-­‐0.583	  
(0.268)	  
	  

2.569	  
(0.747)	  
-­‐0.800	  
(0.544)	  

1.442	  
(0.578)	  
-­‐1.425	  
(0.962)	  

3.290	  
(0.963)	  
-­‐0.625	  
(0.423)	  

Foreign	  
students	  

A.	  OLS:	  
Basic	  specification	  
	  
Adds	  “demand	  shock”	  
	  
B.	  IV:	  A	  mixed	  department	  had	  some	  
Chinese	  presence	  
First	  stage	  coefficient	  
	  
Second	  stage	  coefficient	  
	  
C.	  IV:	  A	  mixed	  department	  had	  
frequent	  Chinese	  presence	  
First	  stage	  coefficient	  
	  
Second	  stage	  coefficient	  
	  
	  

Asian	  foreign	  
students	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses	  and	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level.	  The	  dependent	  
variable	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  U.S.-­‐born	  students	  awarded	  a	  doctoral	  degree	  in	  mathematics	  by	  the	  school	  in	  a	  
particular	  year.	  The	  independent	  variable	  in	  column	  1	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  doctoral	  recipients;	  
the	  independent	  variable	  in	  column	  2	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  doctoral	  recipients	  who	  are	  foreign-­‐born	  and	  have	  
Asian	  ancestry;	  and	  the	  independent	  variable	  in	  column	  3	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  doctoral	  recipients	  with	  
Chinese	  surnames.	  The	  variable	  measuring	  the	  “demand	  shock”	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  students	  awarded	  
doctoral	  degrees	  outside	  mathematics	  by	  each	  university	  in	  each	  year.	  The	  instrument	  is	  the	  product	  of	  the	  
post-­‐1989	  indicator	  variable	  and	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  mathematics	  department	  had	  Chinese-­‐
American	  advisors	  that	  supervised	  at	  least	  one	  dissertation	  between	  1981	  and	  1985	  (in	  Panel	  B),	  or	  if	  the	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  supervised	  at	  least	  three	  dissertations	  (in	  Panel	  C).	  The	  regressions	  have	  4,706	  
observations.	  All	  regressions	  include	  a	  vector	  of	  year	  fixed	  effects	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  school	  fixed	  effects.	  	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

54	  
Table	  8.	  The	  supply	  shock	  and	  annual	  aggregate	  output	  in	  the	  post-­‐shock	  period	  

	  
	  

Actual	  
number	  of	  
papers	  

A.	  Mixed	  department	  had	  some	  Chinese	  presence	   	  
Chinese	  advisors	  
	  
American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments	  
	  
American	  advisors	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  
	  
Total	  
	  
	  
B.	  Mixed	  department	  had	  frequent	  Chinese	  presence	  
Chinese	  advisors	  
	  
American	  advisors	  in	  mixed	  departments	  
	  
American	  advisors	  in	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  
	  
Total	  
	  
	  
	  

Predicted	  
number	  of	  
papers	  
	  

379.2	  
	  
2700.8	  
	  
4935.8	  
	  
8015.8	  
	  
	  

314.2	  
	  
2759.7	  
	  
4943.1	  
	  
8016.9	  
	  
	  
	  
314.2	  
	  
1155.5	  
	  
6537.6	  
	  
8007.2	  

379.2	  
	  
1092.0	  
	  
6544.6	  
	  
8015.8	  
	  

	  
	  
Difference	  
	  
65.0	  
(8.3)	  
-­‐58.9	  
(8.7)	  
-­‐7.3	  
(9.2)	  
-­‐1.1	  
(15.2)	  
	  
	  
65.0	  
(8.3)	  
-­‐63.5	  
(8.2)	  
7.0	  
(9.2)	  
8.6	  
(14.8)	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses.	  A	  mixed	  department	  in	  Panel	  A	  had	  Chinese-­‐American	  
advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  1	  dissertation	  between	  1981	  and	  1985;	  a	  mixed	  department	  in	  Panel	  B	  had	  
Chinese-­‐American	  advisors	  who	  supervised	  at	  least	  3	  dissertations	  between	  1981	  and	  1985.	  American	  
advisors	  are	  classified	  into	  mixed	  or	  non-­‐mixed	  departments	  based	  on	  their	  employment	  in	  1988.	  The	  
predicted	  annual	  number	  of	  papers	  is	  based	  on	  a	  regression	  estimated	  separately	  in	  each	  of	  the	  three	  samples	  
of	  advisors.	  The	  unit	  of	  observation	  is	  an	  author-­‐year;	  the	  regression	  uses	  observations	  between	  1980	  and	  
1988;	  the	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  and	  the	  regressors	  include	  a	  third-­‐order	  
polynomial	  in	  experience	  and	  a	  vector	  of	  advisor	  fixed	  effects.	  This	  regression	  is	  then	  used	  to	  predict	  each	  
mathematician’s	  output	  in	  each	  year	  between	  1989	  and	  1993	  and	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  relevant	  average	  of	  
those	  predictions.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

55	  
Table	  9.	  The	  eventual	  productivity	  of	  the	  Chinese	  doctoral	  students	  

	  
	  
Dependent	  variable:	  
1.	  Student	  ever	  published	  
	  
2.	  Number	  of	  papers	  published	  
	  
3.	  Number	  of	  citations	  
	  
	  
Includes	  fixed	  effects	  for	  school	  awarding	  degree	  
Includes	  fixed	  effects	  for	  advisor	  
	  

(1)	  
-­‐0.023	  
(0.009)	  
0.021	  
(0.017)	  
-­‐0.062	  
(0.134)	  
	  
No	  
No	  

Specification	  
(2)	  
-­‐0.027	  
(0.009)	  
0.019	  
(0.016)	  
-­‐0.032	  
(0.131)	  
	  
Yes	  
No	  

(3)	  
-­‐0.010	  
(0.009)	  
0.027	  
(0.018)	  
-­‐0.110	  
(0.156)	  
	  
No	  
Yes	  

Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  are	  reported	  in	  parentheses;	  all	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  advisor	  level.	  The	  
dependent	  variable	  in	  row	  1	  is	  a	  dummy	  variable	  indicating	  if	  the	  student	  published	  at	  least	  1	  paper	  at	  any	  
time	  before	  2010;	  the	  dependent	  variable	  in	  row	  2	  gives	  the	  average	  number	  of	  papers	  published	  per	  year	  
between	  the	  time	  the	  degree	  was	  awarded	  and	  2010;	  the	  dependent	  variable	  in	  row	  3	  gives	  the	  average	  
number	  of	  citations	  received	  per	  year.	  All	  regressions	  include	  a	  vector	  of	  fixed	  effects	  denoting	  the	  year	  in	  
which	  the	  doctoral	  degree	  was	  awarded.	  The	  regressions	  have	  27,885	  observations.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

