                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION OF PATENT HOLD-UP

                                          Alexander Galetovic
                                            Stephen Haber
                                             Ross Levine

                                         Working Paper 21090
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21090


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2015




We thank Joanna Tsai and Victor Menaldo for comments and Ian Claras, Adriane Fresh, and Benjamin
Levine for their excellent research assistance. Research support was provided by the Working Group
on Intellectual Property, Innovation, and Prosperity (IP2) of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alexander Galetovic, Stephen Haber, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Empirical Examination of Patent Hold-up
Alexander Galetovic, Stephen Haber, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 21090
April 2015
JEL No. K11,O31,O34,O38

                                                 ABSTRACT

A large literature asserts that standard essential patents (SEPs) allow their owners to “hold up” innovation
by charging fees that exceed their incremental contribution to a final product. We evaluate two central,
interrelated predictions of this SEP hold-up hypothesis: (1) SEP-reliant industries should experience
more stagnant quality-adjusted prices than similar non-SEP-reliant industries; and (2) court decisions
that reduce the excessive power of SEP holders should accelerate innovation in SEP-reliant industries.
We find no empirical support for either prediction. Indeed, SEP-reliant industries have the fastest quality-adjusted
price declines in the U.S. economy.


Alexander Galetovic                                      Ross Levine
Fac. Cs. Economicas y Empresariales                      Haas School of Business
Universidad de Los Andes                                 University of California at Berkeley
Av. San Carlos de Apoquindo 2200                         545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Santiago CHILE                                           Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
alexander@galetovic.cl                                   and NBER
                                                         Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Stephen Haber
Dept of Political Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6044
haber@leland.stanford.edu
1. Introduction
           Economic theory offers conflicting perspectives on whether “patent hold-up” is slowing

American innovation. Based on seminal work by Williamson (1967, 1979), Klein, Crawford, and

Alchian (1978), Joskow (1985,1988) and Grossman and Hart (1986), the patent hold-up

hypothesis asserts that patent holders charge licensing royalties to manufacturing firms that

exceed the true economic contribution of the patented technology, thereby discouraging

innovation by manufacturers and hurting consumers. Recent work, including by Shapiro (2001),

Swanson and Baumol (2005), Farrell, Hayes, Shapiro and Sullivan (2007), Lemley and Shapiro

(2007), Miller (2007) and Kobayashi and Wright (2009), emphasizes that the patent hold-up

problem is particularly acute for Standard Essential Patents (SEPs).1 SEPs are patents on

inventions that form the standards essential for the inter-operability of connected systems, such

as cell phones, personal computers, televisions, and audio-visual systems. Hold-up might be

especially pronounced for SEPs because once manufacturing firms make large investments based

on an accepted technological standard, SEP holders can extract the value of their patents being

part of that standard, not merely the technical contribution of the patent to the final product.

From this perspective, granting too much protection to SEP holders slows innovation.

           Other work, however, argues that the proposed remedies to mitigate SEP hold-up, such as

ex ante determination of royalty rates at the time a patent is declared standard essential, will
result in royalty rates that are too low, thereby reducing the incentives for firms to innovate

(Elhauge 2008, Ganglmair, Froeb, and Werden 2012). In a similar vein, Schmalensee (2009)

Sidak (2009), and Kieff and Layne-Farrar (2013) argue that the ex post bargaining position of a

monopsonistic collection of manufacturers—especially given their abundant legal resources—is

much stronger than the bargaining position of patent holders. This reduces the expected returns

to inventions and lowers investment in the costly, risky process of developing and patenting new

technologies.


1
    See Egan and Teece (2015) for a comprehensive survey.

                                                            1
          These scholarly debates shape policy disputes. Arguing that excessive protection of

patent holders slows innovation, President Obama has issued five executive orders that reform

the current system of patent review and award. In addition, Congress considered, but ultimately

rejected, nine different patent reform bills in 2013-14. The current Congress is focused on two

strikingly different bills—one that strengthens patent holder rights, and one that weakens those

rights.

          In this paper, we contribute to these debates by providing empirical evidence on whether

SEP hold-up slows innovation. While an extensive theoretical literature examines the

possibilities for SEP hold-up, Gerardin, Layne-Farrar, and Padilla (2008) and Barnett (2014)

note that there is very little empirical evidence that SEP hold-up actually occurs, and that such

evidence as exists is inconclusive. Although policy analysts, lawyers, and practitioners provide

anecdotes about SEP hold-up, we are unaware of previous systematic evaluations of the core

predictions emerging from IO-based theories of SEP hold-up.

          We assess one of the central empirical implications of the SEP hold-up hypothesis: If

SEPs are slowing the rate of innovation, then products that are highly reliant upon SEPs will

experience more stagnant quality-adjusted prices than similar products that do not rely heavily

on SEPs. That is, if the patenting system empowers SEP holders to negotiate excessive royalty

payments and this in turn slows innovation by discouraging investment and market entry, then

SEP hold-up will harm downstream consumers in the form of slower price declines and slower

improvements in product quality and variety. This prediction emerges from a wide assortment of

IO-based models of SEP hold-up. Furthermore, this prediction focuses on the essential issue in

the policy debate: Are SEPs impeding improvements in consumer welfare by slowing reductions

in quality adjusted prices?

          To conduct our analyses, we use quality-adjusted price data on a variety of consumer and

producer products. Most of our analyses cover the period between 1997 and 2013. We also

examine the period from 1951 through 2013 for a smaller cross-section of products due to data

availability. We primarily use Consumer Price Series (CPS) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
                                                      2
(BLS). They provide quality-adjusted price data that reflects the prices paid by consumers, not

the prices paid by intermediate producers. However, when firms primarily purchase the product

(e.g., computers), we use the Producer Price Series from the Bureau of Economic Analysis

(BEA), which also provides quality-adjusted prices. We describe these quality adjustments in

Appendix A.

         To assess whether SEP hold-up slows innovation, we use two methods. First, we examine

the evolution of the quality-adjusted prices of different industries. We differentiate industries by

the degree to which their products rely on SEPs. We compare the quality-adjusted price

dynamics of SEP-reliant industries, non-SEP-reliant industries, and a textbook hold-up industry:

electricity distribution.

         We categorize SEP-reliant and non-SEP-reliant industries as follows. A rich literature

emphasizes that the personal computer, smart phone, audio and video equipment, and TV

industries rely heavily on SEPs.2 These are all industries that require interoperability and thus

have formal organizations that meet regularly to agree on industry-wide standards. Firms that

own patents that read on these standards may then declare their patents as standard essential.

Consequently, we categorize products as being SEP-reliant if they are meant to operate as part of

a connected system and if there are one or more formal organizations that set technical standards

for interoperability in that system. Smartphones provide a classic example: they must not only be
interoperable across a variety of different manufacturers and phone service providers, but the

photos and video they produce must be compatible with a variety of other products, such as

personal computers and video monitors, while their internet capabilities must be compatible with
2
  For example, Lemley and Shapiro (2007: 1992) state that: “In the information technology sector in particular,
modern products such as microprocessors, cell phones, or memory devices can easily be covered by dozens or even
hundreds of different patents. As a striking example, literally thousands of patents have been identified as essential
to the proposed new standards for 3G cellular telephone systems.” Their case studies (2025-29) focus on 3G cellular
technologies, Wi-Fi 802.11 technologies, DVD media, the MP3 music format, and RFID chips. Farrell, Hayes,
Shapiro, and Sullivan (2007) also call attention to the potential problem in IT industries. They motivate their paper
with seven cases: three of which are about computer technologies, two of which are about modems, and one of
which is about cell phones. Swanson and Baumol (2005) point to “computers, software, telecommunications,
consumer electronics, and the Internet…” Miller (2007) argues that standard setting organization pervade the
information and communication technology industries.


                                                               3
the technical capabilities of various WiFi routers. Standards for smartphones are established by

the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), which includes a wide variety of network

providers, phone manufacturers, component producers, and chip design firms.

        We compare these SEP-reliant products against a set of industries whose products have

high patent counts, but whose core functions do not require interoperability or compatibility—

and therefore do not rely heavily on SEPs. Automobiles provide a classic example: there are

SEPs in non-core functions such as Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems, or Rear Set Entertainment

Systems, but core functions—most particularly the drive train—are self-contained and thus are

proprietary across manufacturers. Table 1 presents summary information about each of the

products included in each category: SEP-reliant industries, non-SEP-reliant industries, and a

classic hold-up industry.

        The second method for assessing whether SEP hold-up slows innovation involves a

quasi-natural experiment in which we evaluate whether a Supreme Court decision that weakened

the power of SEP holders accelerated the rate of quality-adjusted price reductions in SEP-reliant

industries relative to other industries. The 2006 Supreme Court’s eBay Inc. v. MercExchange

LLC decision made it more difficult for SEP owners to obtain injunctions against infringers than

the holders of non-SEP patents.3 Critically for our analyses, proponents of the SEP hold-up

hypothesis advocate for limiting injunctions by SEP holders (Lemley and Shapiro, 2007). They
argue that such limits would spur innovation by reducing the excessive power of SEP holders.

We examine the impact of this “eBay treatment” effect. Specifically, we employ a difference-in-

differences specification and test whether quality-adjusted prices fall faster in SEP-reliant

industries after the eBay Case, while controlling for industry and year effects. That is, if hold up

had been slowing innovation in SEP-reliant industries prior to eBay, then we should see a more

3
  There is a broad consensus in the legal literature that the firms that license their patents, which by definition
includes the holders of SEPs, face greater difficulty in meeting the Supreme Court’s “four-factor test” for a
permanent injunction. See Balganesh (2008), Beckerman-Rodau (2007), Ellis, Jarosz, Chapman and Oliver (2007),
Diessel (2007), Hand (2007), Golden (2007), Grab (2006), Jones (2007), Klar (2006, 2008), Mersino (2007), Mulder
(2007), Newcombe, Ostro, King and Ruben (2008), Reis (2008); Rendleman (2008), Solomon (2010), Stockwell
(2006), and Tang (2006).

                                                             4
rapid decrease in the quality-adjusted prices of SEP-reliant products relative to non-SEP-reliant

products after eBay.

        In examining the dynamics of quality-adjusted prices, we do not find support for the SEP

hold-up hypothesis. We find that products that are SEP-reliant have experienced rapid and

sustained price declines over the past 16 years. In contrast, the quality-adjusted prices of a classic

holdup industry—electricity distribution— increased. The differences in the movement of the

quality-adjusted prices of electricity distribution and SEP-reliant products have to be expressed

as orders of magnitude. The prices of SEP-reliant products have fallen at rates that are not only

fast relative to a classic hold-up industry, they are fast relative to the patent-intensive products

that are not SEP-reliant.

        Two interrelated concerns are that SEP-reliant products might be more innovative than

non- SEP-reliant products for technological reasons and the rate of innovation of SEP-reliant

products would have been still faster if SEP hold-up were not slowing innovation. We address

these concerns formally when we conduct the quasi-natural experiment based on the eBay case.

We can address these concerns informally be examining only digital technologies that follow

“Moore’s Law.”4 If the SEP Hold-up hypothesis holds, we would find that the quality-adjusted

prices of Moore’s Law products that are non-SEP-reliant would fall faster than the quality-

adjusted prices of products that are SEP-reliant. The data indicate the opposite, however: the
prices of non-SEP-reliant Moore’s Law products fall more slowly than the prices of SEP-reliant

Moore’s Law products. While illustrative, these graphs do not fully address the concern: among

Moore’s Law products, those that rely on SEPs might be more technologically dynamic than

other such products. Thus, we examine the differential impact of the eBay case on SEP-reliant

and non-SEP-reliant industries.

        In examining the quasi-natural experiment involving the eBay case, we also cannot reject

the null hypothesis of no SEP hold-up. The difference-in-differences results do not indicate that

4
 Moore's Law is the observation that the number of transistors in a dense integrated circuit doubles approximately
every two years.

                                                             5
quality-adjusted prices fall faster in SEP-reliant industries after the eBay Case. We use several

specifications and try de-trending the data to control for potential differences in underlying

innovation rates by product. But, in contrast to the SEP hold-up view, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis that the eBay case did not differentially affect SEP-reliant industries.

       It is important to emphasize that we are not claiming that the patent system as currently

defined cannot be improved. Rather, we offer evidence on two interrelated predictions of the

SEP hold-up hypothesis. First, if SEPs are holding up innovation, then products that are highly

reliant upon SEPs should experience more stagnant quality-adjusted prices than similar non-

SEP-reliant products. Second, if SEPs are holding-up innovation, then changes in the legal

system (the eBay Case) that weaken the excessive negotiating strength of SEP holders should

accelerate reductions in quality-adjusted prices in SEP-reliant industries relative to non-SEP-

reliant industries. We find no evidence for either prediction.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes patent hold-up

and uses a simple theoretical model to frame its empirical implications. Section 3 evaluates the

testable implications by simply graphing the evolution of quality-adjusted prices of the products

in different industries. Section 4 assesses whether SEP-reliant industries experienced a decrease

in quality-adjusted prices, relative to non-SEP-reliant industries, following the Supreme Court’s

eBay decision. Section 5 concludes.



2. Holdup and Its Testable Implications


       2.1 Patent Hold-Up

       The term “hold-up” describes the following situation. Firm A makes a large investment

that is specific to an input produced by Firm B and difficult to redeploy to some other use. Firm

A contracts with Firm B for the crucial input, but no contract is ever complete and there are

always unforeseen contingencies. Thus, after Firm A has made its asset-specific investment,


                                                     6
strategically-timed claims by Firm B allow it to engage in ex post opportunistic negotiation.

Oliver Williamson (1985, p. 47) famously described this situation as “self-interest seeking with

guile.” Firm A is not a sheep to be fleeced, however; it knows that Firm B can behave

opportunistically, and it therefore behaves in ways that protects itself, but that may increase

costs, lower output, or slow the rate of innovation.

       The quintessential example of hold-up is a mine located in a mountainous area accessible

by a single pass. The miner sinks a huge investment in purchasing the subsoil rights, digging and

reinforcing shafts and adits, purchasing specialized equipment, and the like—during which time

the owner of the pass assures the miner of a reasonable toll for a right of way to get the ore to a

distant processing plant. Once the miner has started to produce ore, however, and now faces

large sunk costs, the owner of the pass demands a new, higher, toll by exploiting an incomplete

element of the initial contract, such as differences in the size or weight of the trucks being used,

changes in the constructions costs for necessary improvements to the roadway, or any number of

similar “problems” that were not originally foreseen. Her new toll rates allow her to extract all

of the quasi-rents of the mine, leaving the miner only enough income to cover her variable costs

of production.

       Knowing that this might happen, the mine owner either makes no investment in the mine

in the first place, or invests in the mine in an inefficient fashion, resulting in less mining output at

a higher cost of production than would occur otherwise. The result is an increase in the miner’s

fixed and average costs, which imply that the mine owner must receive a higher price for her

minerals than would be the case otherwise. This scenario is played out across the mining




                                                       7
industry, resulting in higher costs of production in the short run and less entry, competition, and

incentives to innovate over the long run.5

         SEP hold-up is a variety of this general hold-up problem. Instead of a land owner levying

an excessive toll for a right of way, SEP hold-up takes place by an SEP holder erecting her own

version of a toll booth—a licensing fee for the use of her patent in excess of its “true economic

contribution” to a manufactured product. As defined by the Federal Trade Commission (2011, p.

191), “‘Hold-up” is [...] a patentee’s ability to extract a higher licensing fee after an accused

infringer has sunk costs into implementing the patented technology than the patentee could have

obtained at the time of design decisions, when the patented technology competed with

alternatives.” Since complex products involve hundreds, if not thousands, of SEPs, and because

SEP holders do not know the royalties charged by one another, the SEP hold-up hypothesis

implies that SEP holders may jointly extract most, if not all, of the quasi-rents of the

manufacturing company via multiple “toll booths”—a theoretical construct known as “royalty

stacking.”



         2.2 Implications of Patent Hold-Up

         The extraction of the manufacturing firm’s quasi-rents by the SEP holder (or holders) has

at least four negative implications for the prices paid by consumers and the rate of innovation.

First, the manufacturer might respond by accepting the demands of SEP holders, and then pass

on the additional costs to consumers, resulting in higher prices than would obtain otherwise.

5
  The mine owner could respond by investing in lobbying in order to change the contracting environment, by, for
example, getting the government to decree that miners can set toll rates ex ante for rights of way on other people’s
land—but this option requires the miner to share some of the quasi rents with politicians, again driving up both fixed
and average costs, with an attendant drop in output and/or increase in price. During the Porfirio Díaz dictatorship in
Mexico (1877-1911) miners successfully lobbied for such a property rights system; landowners were only entitled to
price their land in its normal use (not as a right of way), and landowners could be forced to accept the miner’s offer
by a government agent via mandatory arbitration. For an analysis of that system, and its attendant political costs,
see Haber, Razo, and Maurer (2003, ch. 7).

                                                              8
Second, the manufacturer might respond by investing inefficiently. She might, for example,

employ an outdated technology in her product in order to avoid paying the excessive royalties,

with a concomitant lack of improvement in product quality. Third, she might vertically integrate

by purchasing all of the necessary SEPs—but that would allow the SEP holders to capitalize the

quasi-rents they extract via royalties into the market price of their patents, thereby driving up the

manufacturer’s fixed and average costs. The manufacturer must either accept lower profit

margins, with concomitant reductions in R&D spending for future rounds of innovation, or pass

these additional costs on to consumers. Fourth, the manufacturer might infringe the SEP

holders’ patents, forcing them into expensive litigation, the cost of which will either be passed on

to consumers or be absorbed by profit margins, hence reducing the R&D budgets for future

rounds of innovation. These tough choices are then played out across the entire industry of

which this manufacturer is a part, raising costs in the short run, and reducing market entry,

competition, and the incentives to innovate in the long run.

          In short, the equilibrium outcome of the SEP hold-up hypothesis is that consumers either

face higher prices or lower quality products than they would if hold-up was not taking place.

This yields the core testable hypotheses discussed in the Introduction:

          (1) If SEPs are holding up innovation, then products that are highly reliant upon SEPs

should experience more stagnant quality-adjusted prices than similar non-SEP-reliant products.

          (2) If SEPs are holding up innovation, then changes in the legal or regulatory system that

reduce the excessive power of SEP holders should accelerate reductions in quality-adjusted

prices.




                                                      9
       2.3 SEP Hold-Up and Quality-Adjusted Prices: A Model

       In this subsection, we use a simple model to illustrate the impact of SEP hold-up on

quality-adjusted prices. The model shows that under quite general conditions, factors that slow

the rate of innovation will slow the rate of decline of the quality-adjusted price. The thrust of the

result is as follows. Take two industries, A and B, and suppose that A’s productivity and quality

grow one percentage point faster than in B. Then, A’s quality-adjusted relative price falls one

percentage point faster than B’s.


2.3.1 A simple model

Production Let

                                          Yi = ϕi Ai Lαi i Ki1−αi

be the aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function of industry i . Y is output, and L and K are

labor and capital respectively; A is the standard total factor productivity parameter, and ϕ is a

quality parameter.

Goods markets The inverse nominal demand for good i is Pi and


                                                        Pi
                                             ηi ≡ −
                                                       Yi Pi′

is the elasticity of demand. Let ci be the (constant) nominal marginal and average cost of

producing good i, and pi represents its nominal price. Then we assume that in equilibrium


                                         pi − ci θi
                                                = ,             (1)
                                           pi    ηi

where θ i is a conduct parameter which summarizes the outcome of competition among firms in



                                                         10
industry i. It is equal to one under monopoly, zero under perfect competition and equal to 1 / n in

a symmetric Cournot model with n firms. More generally, it nests most oligopoly models and

summarizes the intensity of competition.6

         Simple manipulation of (1) yields


                                                        ⎛ ηi         ⎞
                                                   pi = ⎜            ⎟ ci ≡ mi ci
                                                        ⎝ ηi − θ i   ⎠

Thus the margin, mi , measures markup over costs—a standard measure of market power.

Factor demands We assume perfectly competitive factor markets. Let w be the nominal wage r

the nominal rental price of capital. Then profit maximization implies that K i and Li solve

                                               {
                                     max Pi (Yi )ϕi Ai Lαi i Ki1−αi − rKi − wLi .
                                     Li , Ki
                                                                                         }
Now let yLi be the marginal product of labor in sector i and yKi the marginal product of capital.

First order conditions imply that value marginal revenue products equal factor prices, viz.

                                                                            1−αi
                                      p       p           ⎛K ⎞
                                   w = i yLi ≡ i α iϕi Ai ⎜ i ⎟                     ,    (2)
                                      mi      mi          ⎝ Li ⎠

and

                                                                                    αi
                                 p       p                     ⎛L ⎞
                              r = i yKi ≡ i pi (1 − α i )ϕi Ai ⎜ i ⎟ ,                         (3)
                                 mi      mi                    ⎝ Ki ⎠




6
    We follow Genesove and Mullin’s (1998) variation on Bresnahan (1989).

                                                                      11
2.3.2 Some results

Define xˆ ≡ d ln x . Total differentiation of (2) and (3) and some simple manipulation yield

                      pˆ i = wˆ + mˆ i − yˆ Li
                         = wˆ + mˆ i − ( Aˆi + ϕˆi ) − (1 − αi )( Kˆ i − Lˆi )                  (4)

and

                           pˆ i = rˆ + mˆ i − yˆ Li
                                                                                          (5)
                               = rˆ + mˆ i − ( Aˆi + ϕˆi ) − α i ( Lˆi − Kˆ i )

The first line in (4) and (5) says that industry’s i nominal price increases with nominal factor

prices and market power but falls with factor productivity growth. The second line decomposes

the change in factor productivity. Note that the nominal price of industry i falls one-for-one with

( Aˆi + ϕˆi ) , the sum of total factor productivity increases and quality improvements. That is,

innovation directly influences prices.

      Now it is easy to show that

                                 yˆ Li − yˆ Ki = Kˆ i − Lˆi = wˆ − rˆ,              (6)

The first equality says that in equilibrium, differences in factor productivity growth reflect

changes in factor proportions. The second equality links changes in factor proportions with

changes in relative factor prices. Substituting (6) into (4) or (5) and rearranging yields

                           pˆ i = −( Aˆi + ϕˆi ) + α i wˆ + (1 − α i )rˆ + mˆ i .         (7)

Thus industry’s i quality-adjusted nominal price falls one-by-one with increases in total factor

productivity and quality growth, and rises with increases in factor prices and market power.




                                                                   12
2.3.3. The differential rate of innovation and the rate of change of relative prices

Let p be a price index such that



                                                      p ≡ Πi ( pi ) i , (8)
                                                                      λ




where λi is the share of industry i in the index, and ∑ iλi = 1 . Then pi / p is industry’s i

relative price and pˆ i − pˆ is the rate of change of i ’s relative price. Now substituting (7) into (8),

taking logs and differentiating yields

                                           n

                                              ⎣       (           )
                                pˆ ≡ ∑ i =iλi ⎡ − Aˆi + ϕˆi + α i wˆ + (1 − α i )rˆ + mˆ i ⎤
                                                                                           ⎦
                                       (          )
                                   ≡ − Aˆ + ϕˆ + α wˆ + (1 − α )rˆ + mˆ ,

which is the rate of change of the price index. Thus the price index varies inversely and one-by-

one with average total factor productivity and quality growth. The change in its relative price is

thus

                         (⎣        ) (
            pˆ i − pˆ = − ⎡ Aˆi + ϕˆi − Aˆ + ϕˆ   )⎤⎦ + (α − α )wˆ + (1 − α − 1 − α )rˆ + (mˆ − mˆ )
                                                              i                   i                     i
                                                                                                            (9)
                         (         ) (
                      ≡ − ⎡ Aˆi + ϕˆi − Aˆ + ϕˆ
                          ⎣                       )⎤⎦ + ε i



with ∑in=iε i = 0 by construction.

       Expression (9) says that in equilibrium, the rate of change of industry i ’s relative price

equals the inverse of industry’s i differential rate of productivity and quality growth,

( Aˆ + ϕˆ ) − ( Aˆ + ϕˆ ) , up to a mean-zero error term. In other words, fast relative price declines are
   i    i



strong indicators of differences in the rates of innovation.

       Similarly, the difference between the growth rate of two nominal prices,

                                       pˆ i − pˆ j = ( Aˆi + ϕˆi ) − ( Aˆ j + ϕˆ j ) + (ε i − ε j ) ,

reflects the differential rate of productivity and quality growth up to a mean-zero error term.

                                                                      13
Hence, if productivity and quality in X grow one percentage point faster than in Y, then X’s

quality adjusted relative price should fall one percentage point faster than Y’s on average.

        Indeed, empirical studies show that there is virtually a one-to-one relationship between

relative price changes and differential rates of productivity growth across industries. Salter

(1960) found this when he examined the differential productivity performance of 28 British

manufacturing industries between 1924 and 1950, as well as the differential productivity

performance of 27 U.S. industries between 1923 and 1950. Oulton and O’Mahoney (1994)

replicated this result by studying 136 manufacturing industries in Britain between 1953 and

1986. Kendrick and Grossman (1980) looked at the entire U.S. economy (20 manufacturing

industries, plus agriculture, public utilities, construction, and several service industries) and

found a coefficient that was similar to that in Salter (1960). Nordhaus (2008) extended Kendrick

and Grossman’s (1980) data to 2001, with similar results.



2.3.4. Relative price change and the hold-up hypothesis: observable implications

      The hold-up hypothesis argues that hold-up will slow innovation. It follows that it should

                                       ˆ − ϕˆ ) − ( Aˆ − ϕˆ ) ⎤ of the quality-adjusted relative price.
lead to a slower rate of decline − ⎡ ( A
                                    ⎣   i    i              ⎦

Hence, if hold-up is materially reducing the rate of innovation in SEP industries, the relative

price of SEP goods should be stagnant relative to all other goods and to goods that exhibit fast

rates of innovation but no holdup problem (e.g. those that benefit from Moore’s law but are not

SEP-reliant).

      Second, if SEPs are holding up innovation, then changes in the legal system (the eBay

Case) that reduce the power SEP holders should accelerate reductions in quality-adjusted prices.




                                                       14
3. Empirical Analyses: The Evolution of Quality-Adjusted Prices

       In this section, we examine the implications of the SEP hold-up hypothesis regarding the

movement of the quality-adjusted prices of SEP-reliant products relative to that of other

products.

       3.1 Categorizing Industries

       SEPs have become particularly common over the past two decades in the production and

operation of digital electronic products—e.g., personal computers, phones, televisions, and audio

systems. The reason is that these products must be inter-operable and compatible; they are

connected systems. The owner of Smartphone A must be able to talk with, and share pictures,

video, and other media with the owner of Smartphone B—even though A and B are made by

different manufacturers and operate on networks owned by different companies. The owner of

Smartphones A and B must also be able to transfer that media to laptops C and D, and those

laptops must be able to project the audio and video on televisions E and F, as well as burn them

onto disks that can be played on DVD players G and H. The numerous technical problems

created by the requirements of this connected system are solved by standard setting organizations

(SSO’s), which include upstream component manufacturers and downstream device

manufacturers, as well as firms that operate the networks that link devices together. Owners of

patents that read on the technical standards established by the SSO can then declare those patents

as standard essential, and the SEP owner and a user of that SEP can then negotiate a royalty for

its use. We therefore follow the SEP hold-up literature, by categorizing as SEP-reliant those

products whose core functions require inter-operability and compatibility, and which also have at

least one formal organization that sets technical standards for that industry. We categorize

products that embody patents, but that do not meet this two-fold test, as non-SEP-reliant. We



                                                    15
note that none of the products we place in the non-SEP-reliant category is mentioned in the SEP

hold-up literature. Table 1 summarizes the information about the products in both categories.7

        One potential concern with our examination is that SEP-reliant products tend to cluster

in digital electronics, and those products might have inherently different rates of innovation than

non-digital products that are non-SEP reliant. Fortunately, there are digital products that do not

require high degrees of inter-operability and compatibility, such as watches, coin operated

gaming machines, electrical test equipment, and multi-user (e.g., mainframe) computers.

Quality-adjusted price data on these products therefore provides us with a second source of

analytic leverage. When we turn to the difference-in-differences estimation in Section 4, we

further control for inherent differences in rates of innovation across industries by de-trending

each product’s quality-adjusted price data.

        As a benchmark, we use the evolution of the quality-adjusted long-run price data for a

product that is a textbook case of hold-up, retail electricity. Retail electricity production has three

stages: generation, high-voltage transmission, and low voltage distribution. Two of those stages,

transmission and distribution are natural monopolies. Because the assets in each of these stages

are site-specific, sunk for decades, and electrons, once produced, cannot be stored efficiently,

electricity is particularly susceptible to ex-post contractual opportunism. For example, the

generating companies, which tend to be located far from major consumption sites (large

industrial users and cities), can be held up by the transmission companies that transport the

power. What is to stop the transmission company from offering a lower price per kilowatt-hour

by claiming that some circumstance has changed in an unexpected fashion? Similarly, what is to

stop the generating company from reducing output, thereby holding up the transmission


7
 We checked our categorizations with expert practitioners. We are grateful to Lew Zaretzki of Hamilton IPV for
guidance on the various standards and SSOs governing the products covered in this paper.

                                                           16
company and the distribution company for a higher price per kilowatt-hour when they need a

rapid increase in power, say, on a hot day when demand for air conditioning skyrockets? The

same problems of ex-post contractual opportunism plague the relationship between the

transmission company and the distributors to households and business enterprises. What is to

keep the transmission company from demanding higher prices from distributors when demand

spikes?

          Historically, many electricity systems were initially built and operated by unregulated

private firms. High prices and coordination failures among generators, transmission companies,

and distributors were pervasive (Gilbert and Khan 1996). Eventually, these problems were

“solved” by the creation of vertically integrated regulated monopolies (in the United States) or

state-owned firms (in Western Europe)—none of which were known for their innovativeness.

          In order to spur efficiency and innovation, in recent decades governments around the

world unbundled these vertically integrated monopolies and privatized them. What now tends to

exist are independent and regulated monopolies in transmission and distribution, but multiple

firms in generation. The fundamental problem of transmitting and distributing a product that

cannot be stored and that is characterized by scale economies remains, however. Thus, the

electricity industry is still characterized by hold-up and the potential for the exercise of market

power, which governments have tried to prevent by regulating competition and the bidding

process in markets for wholesale power. The results have been mixed at best and the

possibilities for opportunistic behavior are numerous. For example, Enron’s energy traders were

able to encourage electricity generating companies in California in the early 2000s to reduce the

supply of power during times of peak demand in order to “perform maintenance,” producing

both “rolling blackouts” and exponential increases in the prices charged to energy distribution



                                                      17
companies. It is unsurprising that technological progress in the electricity industry has been slow:

the last major breakthrough in generation technology was the introduction of combined-cycle gas

generation in 1965; most homes and businesses still use a Shallenberger induction meter,

invented in 1888; and the digital revolution has yet to reach energy management and use within

homes, businesses, and public buildings.

       Figure 1 shows the real (inflation adjusted) price of electricity for urban consumers in the

United States from 1997 to 2013, and compares those prices against the quality-adjusted, real

prices of seven SEP-reliant products; telephone equipment, televisions, portable / laptop

computers, desktop computers, video equipment, audio equipment, and photographic equipment.

All series are converted to a base year of 100, so as to make price movements relative to each

other. We discuss the sources for each series in Appendix A. The data show that the price of

electricity has barely moved over those 16 years, which is exactly what one would expect of a

hold-up industry characterized by slow rates of innovation.



       3.2 Do relative prices of patent-intensive SEP industries stagnate?

       The contrast between the behavior of the relative price of products that are SEP-reliant

and the price of electricity is stark. Even the product with the slowest decline in quality-adjusted

relative prices, audio equipment, fell by 7 percent per year—a striking result considering that the

maximum rate of long-run productivity growth for an industry is typically less than 6 percent per

annum. The quality-adjusted relative price of telephone equipment fell 10 percent per annum.

By 2013, the price of a phone, taking into account inflation, changes in the prices of phones, and

improvements in phone technology, was 79 percent lower than in 1997. If you ever wonder

why you see a massive, flat-screen television just about everywhere you look, consider the



                                                     18
following fact: between 1997 and 2013, the relative, quality-adjusted price of TVs fell by 19

percent per year. The relative quality-adjusted price of portable and laptop computers fell fastest

of all, by 31 percent per annum.

       Figure 2 graphs the average of the quality-adjusted relative prices of the seven SEP-

reliant products displayed in Figure 1 and compares them to another complex product of wide

use, automobiles. Automobiles employ thousands of patents, but their core functions are non-

interoperable and non-compatible: the drive trains of Porsches and Hondas are separate closed

systems. Figure 2 reveals that on average, the relative, quality-adjusted price of SEP-reliant

electronic products—the same goods that the literature claims to be subject to SEP Hold-up—fell

by 14 percent per year. The contrast with automobiles is unambiguous: the quality-adjusted

relative price of new cars fell by less than 3 percent per year between 1997 and 2013, roughly

five times slower than SEP-reliant products.

       These figures indicate that SEP-reliant industries do not stagnate relative to patent-

intensive, non-SEP-reliant industries. These figures do not, however, address the possibility that

patent-intensive SEP-reliant industries were—for technological reasons—more technology

dynamic than other industries. If this is were the case, then the figures would not rule out the

possibility that the rate of innovation in patent-intensive SEP-reliant industries would have been

still faster if SEP hold-up were not slowing down the rate of innovation in SEP-reliant products.

We address this potential concern in two ways. First, we focus only on digital technologies that

follow “Moore’s Law” and hence restrict our analysis to digital products that differ only in their

reliance on SEPs. Second, we address this more formally by conducting a quasi-natural

experiment based on the eBay case.




                                                     19
       3.3 “Moore’s Law” Digital Products

       Perhaps, there are fundamental differences between digital electronic products and

automobiles such that one would not expect them to display the same rates of innovation.

Perhaps, the SEP-reliant, digital electronic products graphed in Figure 1 are all subject to

“Moore’s Law” (the observation that the number of transistors in a dense integrated circuit

doubles approximately every two years), and hence—for technological reasons having nothing to

do with the patent system—experience much faster rates of innovation than other products.

       We can both address and exploit this “Moore’s Law Critique.” In terms of addressing it,

there are two points. First, if the rate of innovation in digital electronic products is only dictated

by some inherent characteristic of the underlying technology, then the entire debate about SEP

hold-up is beside the point. The pace of technology is moving so fast that SEPs are irrelevant;

today’s “standard” is tomorrow’s museum piece. Second, Moore’s Law is not a law of nature,

like the speed of light, but is a rule of thumb about an empirical regularity in a particular

institutional context. An historical case illustrates the point. In 1984 Brazil tried to catch up in

personal computer technology through infant industry protection and other supports to its IT

sector, and the result was disastrous: there was no Brazilian version of “Moore’s Law,” just lots

of high priced, badly-made, slow clock speed PCs. The implication is that the empirical

regularity called “Moore’s Law” is observed in the United States because the institutions that

govern the specification of intellectual property rights here is conducive to very fast rates of

innovation.

       More importantly, we can exploit the “Moore’s Law” critique by comparing the rate of

innovation across a variety of products that all employ densely packed integrated circuits, but

which vary in the intensity with which they employ SEPs because they require different levels of



                                                      20
inter-operability and compatibility. For example, DVD player X must be able to play all the

same music and video as DVD player Y—and both must be able to project images on televisions

C and D, or load software onto personal computers E and F. This high degree of inter-

operability and compatibility is, however, much less important in products such as digital

watches, digital gaming machines, or multi-user computers. Digital watch A and digital watch B

do not have to communicate with each other or any other device. Mainframe computers are

constructed to run customized software on proprietary architectures. Thus, we ask whether

digital products that make intensive use of SEPs demonstrate slower rates of innovation, as

measured by quality adjusted relative prices, than digital products that make less intensive use of

SEPs.

        Figure 3 therefore presents data on the quality adjusted, relative prices of digital watches,

test equipment for electrical radio, and communication circuits, and coin operated gaming

machines against the average of the seven SEP-reliant products analyzed in Table 1. There are

big differences in the series: the SEP-reliant products demonstrate differential rates of innovation

between two and four times faster than less SEP-reliant digital products. In fact, even if we look

at the SEP-reliant digital product with the slowest rate of innovation (audio equipment, whose

quality adjusted relative price fell at a rate of seven percent per year), we still find that its rate of

innovation is more than twice as fast as any of the three non-SEP-reliant products.

        We can push this a bit further, since it might be the case that SEP-reliant products have

greater innovation possibilities than digital products that are not SEP-reliant. For example, there

might be fundamental differences between audio equipment and watches. Therefore, in Figure 4,

we compare the quality adjusted relative prices of three products that perform similar functions

using similar underlying technologies—but two (desktop and laptop computers) are SEP-reliant,



                                                       21
while the third (multi-user computers, which includes mainframes, Unix computers and PC

servers) is much less SEP-reliant. If the SEP hold-up hypothesis holds, we should expect to see

slower rates of innovation in desktops and laptops than their more powerful, specific purpose

cousins. Due to data availability, these analyses cover the period from 2004 through 2013. As Figure 4

demonstrates, however, we see exactly the opposite. In fact, laptops and desktops illustrate rates

of innovation almost twice that of multi-user computers, with average annual quality adjusted

price declines of 26 percent, 25 percent, and 14 percent per year respectively.



        3.4 Taking a Longer-Run View of the Data

        So far, we have restricted the analyses to the post-1996 period to have the broadest

possible coverage of products. What happens if take an even longer time span to look at the data

on a smaller number of products?

        Figure 5 therefore compares the quality adjusted relative prices of electricity, telephone

equipment, televisions, and an index of video, audio, photographic, and information processing

equipment from 1951 to 2013 (with 1951 equal to 100 for all series, so as to make price

movements relative to each other).8 The relative price of electricity declined only slightly over

this six-decade period, which is exactly what one would expect of an industry characterized by

hold-up. The quality adjusted relative price of televisions, however, fell like a stone. By 2013,

the price of a television (taking into account inflation, price changes, and improvements in

quality) was less than one percent of what it had been in 1951. The same is true for the index of

video, audio, photographic, and information processing equipment.




8
 Video (other than televisions), audio, photographic, and information processing equipment were grouped together
by the BLS prior to the 1990s.

                                                           22
       Telephone equipment displays an interesting pattern, one that allows us to get analytic

leverage on what happens when a product changes from being produced by a vertically-

integrated monopoly to a SEP-reliant industry. Until 1982, local telephone services in the United

States were provided by a single company, ATT, which leased telephones made by its Western

Electric subsidiary to businesses and households. Until the FCC’s 1968 Carterphone Decision,

equipment produced by other manufacturers could not be operated on ATT’s network. Not

surprisingly, the quality adjusted, relative price of phone equipment barely moved at all. Once

business enterprises and households began to purchase equipment made by other manufacturers

in the 1970s, the quality adjusted relative prices of phone equipment began to fall gradually.

Between 1970 and 1980, the price of a phone, adjusting for inflation and quality, fell by 14

percent.

       This pattern reversed in the 1980s when the first mobile phones—all produced by a single

manufacturer, Motorola—entered the U.S. market. Motorola’s initial product, the DynaTAC

8000X, had a price of $3,995 (about $9,000 in today’s dollars), weighed more than a kilo, and

had a battery life of half an hour. The quality adjusted relative prices of phones continued to

climb until 1997, by which point there were multiple manufacturers of 2G cell phones competing

for market share. From that point onwards, through both the 3G and 4G revolutions, the quality-

adjusted price of telephone equipment fell by ten percent per year.

       Note that the trajectory of the relative price of telephone equipment is the opposite of

what the patent hold-up hypothesis would predict. As long as telephone equipment was produced

by a subsidiary of ATT, and thus by definition could not have been subject to hold-up, its

relative price remained constant. Once the cell phone diffused in the late 1990s, however, and




                                                    23
telephone equipment became the quintessential SEP industry, prices plummeted, the opposite

prediction of the SEP hold-up hypothesis.

        While illustrative, these figures do not fully address the concern that technologies that

rely on standards are technologically more dynamic. Thus, next we study the differential effect

of the eBay case on SEP-reliant and non-SEP-reliant industries.



4. Empirical Analyses: The eBay Case as a Quasi-Natural Experiment

        One argument made in the SEP hold-up literature is that the ability to obtain injunctions

against manufacturers allows SEP owners to extract royalties above their “true economic

contribution.” In 2006, however, the Supreme Court decision in eBay Inc. v. MercExchange LLC

made it relatively more difficult for SEP owners to obtain injunctions against infringers.9 The

eBay decision therefore allows us to leverage variance across time as well as variance across

products. If hold-up was taking place in the manufacture of products that were highly reliant on

SEPs prior to eBay, after eBay we should see a more rapid decrease in the quality-adjusted prices

of those products, relative to the quality-adjusted prices of products that that are non-SEP-reliant.

If we fail to detect that more rapid decrease, it implies that hold-up was not slowing the rate of

innovation prior to the eBay decision.

        We use the following difference-in-differences structure to assess whether eBay spurred

the relative rate of innovation in SEP-reliant industries:


                  Pi ,t = α + β [SEPi × Post2006t ] + γ SEPi + δ i + δ t + ε i ,t ,                   (10)

9
  As numerous legal scholars have pointed out, the eBay decision has made it more difficult for a firm that licenses
its patents rather than practices them to meet the “four-fold test” for an injunction, particularly the ability to
demonstrate “irreparable injury” from infringement. See Balganesh (2008), Beckerman-Rodau (2007), Ellis, Jarosz,
Chapman and Oliver (2007), Diessel (2007), Hand (2007), Golden (2007), Grab (2006), Jones (2007), Klar (2006,
2008), Mersino (2007), Mulder (2007), Newcombe, Ostro, King and Ruben (2008), Reis (2008); Rendleman (2008),
Solomon (2010), Stockwell (2006), and Tang (2006).

                                                             24
where Pi,t is the quality-adjusted price of products in industry i in year t, SEPi is a dummy

variable that equals one if industry i is a SEP-reliant industry and zero otherwise, Post2006t is a

dummy variable that equals zero until 2006 and one from 2007 onward, and δi and δt represent

the fixed effects on industry and year dummy variables. If β enters negatively and significantly,

then this would be consistent with the view that the eBay Case spurred the comparative rate of

innovation in SEP-reliant industries. If the regression analyses do not reject the hypothesis that

β=0, then we the data would not reject the null hypothesis that the eBay Case did not influence

the relative rate of innovation in SEP-reliant industries. The regression is estimated over the

period from 1997 through 2013. We experimented with different ways of clustering the standard

errors, including no clustering, clustering at the industry level, and clustering at the year level.

We obtain similar results and report the results with no clustering.

       Table 2 indicates that the analyses do not reject the null hypothesis that the eBay Case did

not accelerate the relative rate of innovation in SEP-reliant industries. The eBay decision

coefficient on SEPi × Post2006t is positive and insignificant in column (1). In searching to

find a specification that is consistent with the SEP hold-up hypothesis, we extend the analyses in

two ways. One might think that different products have inherently different potential rates of

innovation (i.e., that automobiles cannot be improved as quickly as smartphones). In Column 2,

we therefore de-trend the data, by subtracting from each observation that product’s pre-2007

average price decline. This did not alter the results. We also extend the analyses by restricting the

sample to products that are subject to “Moore’s Law.” In Column 3, we therefore truncate the

data so that the non-SEP-reliant category only includes digital electronic products. Once again,

we get a coefficient with the “wrong” sign that is not statistically significant. We also employ a

jackknife approach, serially dropping products from the regression, and never obtain a


                                                      25
statistically significant negative coefficient on SEPi × Post2006t . In short, we could not reject

the null hypothesis that there was no change in the relative rates of innovation in SEP-reliant

industries after the eBay decision.



5. Conclusions

        In this paper, we find that the rate of innovation—as reflected in quality adjusted relative

prices—has rarely, if ever, been faster than it is today in exactly those products that scholars

agree are theoretically subject to SEP hold-up. We find that prices of SEP-reliant products have

fallen at rates that are not just fast compared to a classic hold-up industry, but that are fast

against patent-intensive, non-SEP-reliant products. Moreover, when the courts made it harder for

SEP holders to hold-up manufacturing firms, we find that this did not accelerate the rate of

innovation in SEP-reliant industries relative to other industries. We cannot reject the hypothesis

of no SEP hold-up.

        One might wonder why there is such a noticeable mismatch between the evidence and

theories that articulate how SEP holders can charge royalty rates that capture the value of the

standard itself, rather than just their patent’s technical contribution to it. We would speculate that

markets find ways of ameliorating the adverse effect from patent hold-up. A decentralized

system of incomplete contracts involving actors engaged in a repeated game and who coordinate

around a focal point in order to expand the boundaries of the market—in this case a standard

setting organization—is particularly well suited for facilitating innovation (Egan and Teece,

2015). Indeed, such a defuse system in which the common interest dominates conflicts of interest

describes one of the modern world’s most innovative organizations: the American research

university.


                                                      26
References

Balganesh, S., (2008), “Demystifying the Right to Exclude: Of Property, Inviolability, and
     Automatic Injunctions,” Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 31, 593-661.

Barnett, J., (2014), “From Patent Thickets to Patent Networks The Legal Infrastructure of the
     Digital Economy,” Hoover IP2 Working Paper N° 15001.

Beckerman-Rodau, A., (2007), “The Aftermath of eBay v. MercExchange, 126 S. Ct. 1837
     (2006): A Review of Subsequent Judicial Decisions,” Journal of the Patent and Trademark
     Office Society 89, 631-660.

Bresnahan, T. (1989), “Empirical Studies in Industries with Market Power,” in R. Schmalensee
     and R. Willig (eds.) Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2. Amsterdam: North
     Holland.

Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, (2013), National Income and Product
      Accounts Handbook. Washington: Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Department of Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics, (2013), Handbook of Methods.
      Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Department of Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics, (2008), “How the BLS Measures Price
      Change for Personal Computers and Peripheral Equipment in the CPI,” mimeo, Bureau of
      Labor Statistics, June 26 version.

Diessel, B. H., (2007), “Trolling for Trolls: The Pitfalls of the Emerging Market Competition
     Requirement for Permanent Injunctions in Patent Cases Post-eBay,” Michigan Law Review
     106, 305-345.

Egan, E. and D. Teece, (2015), “Untangling the Patent Thicket Literature,” mimeo.

Elhauge, E. (2008), “Do Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking Lead to Systematic Excessive
     Royalties?” Journal of Competition Law and Economics 4, 535-570.

Ellis, D., J. Jarosz, M. Chapman and L. S. Oliver, (2007), “The Economic Implications (and
       Uncertainties) of Obtaining Permanent Injunctive Relief After eBay v. MercExchange,”
       The Federal Circuit Bar Journal 17, 437-471.

Farell J., J. Hayes, C. Shapiro and T. Sullivan (2007), “Standard Setting, Patents and Hold-up,”
      Antitrust Law Journal 74, 603-670.

Federal Trade Commission (2011), The Evolving IP Marketplace: Aligning Patent Notice and
     Remedies with Competition. Washington: Federal Trade Commission.




                                                   27
Ganglmair, B., L. Froeb and G. Werden, (2012), “Patent Hold Up and Antitrust: How a Well-
     Intentioned Rule Could Retard Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics 60, 249-273.

Gerardin, D. A. Layne-Farrar and J. Padilla, (2008), “The Complements Problem Within
     Standard Setting: Assessing the Evidence on Royalty Stacking,” Boston University Journal
     of Science and Technology Law 14, 144-176.

Genesove, D. and W. Mullin (1998), “Testing Static Oligopoly Models: Conduct and Cost in the
     Sugar Industry, 1890-1914,” Rand Journal of Economics 29, 355-377

Gilbert, R. and E. Kahn, (1996). International Comparisons of Electricity Regulation. New
     York: Cambridge University Press.

Golden, J. M., (2007), “Commentary: ‘Patent Trolls’ and Patent Remedies,” Texas Law Review
      85, 2111-2161.

Grab, L. T., (2006), “Equitable Concerns of eBay v. MercExchange: Did the Supreme Court
       Successfully Balance Patent Protection Against Patent Trolls?” North Carolina Journal
       of Law and Technology 8, 159-203.

Grossman, S. and O. Hart. 1986. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
     and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.

Haber, S., A. Razo and N. Maurer, (2003), The Politics of Property Rights: Political Instability,
     Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, 1876-1929. New York:
     Cambridge University Press.

Hand, R. A., (2007), “EBay v. MercExchange: Looking at the Cause and Effect of a Shift in the
     Standard for Issuing Patent Injunctions,” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment. 25, 461-84.

International Monetary Fund, (2004), Producer Price Index Manual: Theory and Practice.
        Washington: IMF.

Jones, M., (2007), “Permanent Injunction, a Remedy by any Other Name is Patently Not the
       Same: How Ebay V. Mercexchange Affects the Patent Right of Non-Practicing Entities,”
       George Mason Law Review 14, 1035-1070

Joskow, P., (1985). “Vertical Integration and Long-term Contracts: The Case of Coal-Burning.
     Electric Generating Plants,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 1, 33-80.

Joskow, P., (1988), “Asset Specificity and the Structure of Vertical Relationships: Empirical
     Evidence,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 4, 95-118.

Kendrick, K. and E. Grossman, (1980). Productivity in the United States: Trends and Cycles,
     Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.



                                                   28
Kieff, F. S. and A. Layne Farrar (2013). “Incentive Effects from Different Approaches to Holdup
      Mitigation Surrounding Patent Remedies and Standard-Setting Organizations,” Journal of
      Competition Law and Economics 9, 1091-1123.

Klar, R. B., (2006), “EBay Inc. v. MercExchange, LLC: The Right to Exclude Under U.S. Patent
      Law and the Public Interest,” Journal of the Patent and Trademark Society 88, 852-858.

Klar, R. B. (2008), “The United States Supreme Court’s Decision in Ebay V. MercExchange:
      How Irreparable the Injury to Patent Injunctions?” Widener Law Review 14, 239-253.

Klein, B., Crawford, V. and A. Alchian, (1978), “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents, and
      the Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law and Economics 21, 297-326.

Kobayashi, B. H. and J. D. Wright, (2009), “Federalism, Substantive Preemption, and Limits on
    Antitrust: An Application to Patent Holdup,” Journal of Competition Law and Economics
    5, 469-516.

Kokoski, M., K. Waehrer, and P. Rozaklis, (1999), “Using Hedonic Methods for Quality
      Adjustment in the CPI: The Consumer Audio Products Component”, paper presented at
      the Conference on the Measurement of Inflation, Cardiff, Wales.

Lemley, M.A. and C. Shapiro, (2007), “Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking,” Texas Law Review
     85, 1991-2049.

Mersino, P. M., (2007), “Patents, Trolls, and Personal Property: Will eBay Auction Away a
     Patent Holder’s Right to Exclude?” Ave Maria Law Review 6, 306-340.

Miller, J. S. (2007), “Standard Setting, Patents, and Access Lock-In: RAND Licencing and the
      Theory of the Firm,” Indiana Law Review 40, 351-396.

Mulder, J., (2007), “The Aftermath of eBay: Predicting When District Courts Will Grant
      Permanent Injunctions in Patent Cases,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 22, 67-88.

Newcombe, G. M., J. E. Ostro, P. E. King and G. N. Ruben, (2008), “Prospective Relief for
    Patent Infringement in a Post-eBay World,” NYU Journal of Law and Business 4, 549-577.

Nordhaus, W., (2008), “Baumol’s Diseases: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” The B.E. Journal of
     Macroeconomics 8, 1-39.

Oulton, N. and M. O’Mahony (1994). Productivity and Growth: A Study of British Industry,
     1954-1986. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Reis, R I., (2008), “Rights and Remedies Post Ebay v. Mercexchange – Deep Waters Stirred,”
      Akron Intellectual Property Journal 2, 133-162.




                                                  29
Rendleman, D., (2008), “The Trial Judge’s Equitable Discretion Following eBay v.
     MercExchange,” Review of Litigation 27, 63-98.

Salter, W.E.G., (1960). Productivity and Technical Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press.

Schmalensee, R., (2009), “Standard-Setting, Innovation Specialists and Competition Policy,”
    Journal of Industrial Economics 57, 526–552.

Shapiro, C., (2001), “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard
     Setting,” in Adam Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the
     Economy: Volume 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 119-150.

Sidak, G., (2009), “Patent Holdup and Oligopsonistic Collusion in Standard-Setting
     Organizations,” Journal of Competition Law & Economics 5, 123–188.

Solomon, N., (2010), “Analysis of the “Four-Factor Test” in Patent Cases Post-eBay,” SSRN
     working paper.

Stockwell, M. G., (2006), “Implementing eBay: New Problems in Guiding Judicial Discretion
      and Enforcing Patent Rights,” Journal of the Patent and Trademark Society 88, 747-60.

Swanson, D. and W. Baumol, (2005), “Reasonable And Nondiscriminatory (Rand) Royalties,
      Standards Selection, And Control Of Market Power,” Antitrust Law Journal 73, 1-58.

Tang, Y. H., (2006), “The Future of Patent Enforcement After eBay v. MercExchange,” Harvard
       Journal of Law and Technology 20, 235-252.

Wasshausen, D. and B. Moulton, (2007), “The Role of Hedonic Methods in Measuring Real
      GDP in the United States,” in 31st CEIES Seminar, Are we Measuring Productivity
      Correctly? Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.

Williamson, O., (1967). “Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size.” Journal of Political
       Economy 75, 123-38.

Williamson, O., (1979). “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
       Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics 22, 233-61.

Williamson, O., (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: Free Press.




                                                  30
Appendix A: CPI Series Definitions and Quality Adjustment Methods10

In this appendix we describe each price series that we use and mention the method used to adjust

for quality. Column references are to the spreadsheet “Basic Data” in the file Consolidated Data

Set for Holdup.xlsx which holds the data we use.

     Our default source is the BLS’s Consumer Price Series. We prefer this data because it reflects

prices paid by consumers, not prices paid by intermediate producers. We only depart from this

rule if two conditions are met. First, there is a much longer non-Consumer Price series. Second,

the Non-Consumer Price Series and the Consumer Price Series are materially similar for the

overlapping years, suggesting that the underlying data is pulled from the same source. In

choosing an alternative series (when the CPI has a shorter run of data), we give priority to series

the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product,

from Table 2.4.4 of the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (2013).



Electricity; CPI code: CUUR0000SEHF01

ELI11 definition: Data are collected on service charges (a fixed charge per bill); consumption

charges (for total monthly energy usage); additional charges and credits; taxes.

     The prices for electricity include seasonal changes, such as summer or winter rates. Also

included are additional charges and credits, such as purchase fuel adjustments. It also includes

electricity service to individually-metered residential units.

Quality adjustment method: Electricity is not quality-adjusted.

10
   Series definitions come from BLS’s internal ELI series definitions. They were retrieved by email from Steve Reed
of the CPI office.
11
   “The CPI item structure has four levels of classification. The 8 major groups are made up of 70 expenditure
classes (ECs), which in turn are divided into 211 item strata. Major groups and ECs do not figure directly in CPI
sample selection [...]. Within each item stratum, one or more substrata, called entry-level items (ELIs), are defined.
There are a total of 305 ELIs, which are the ultimate sampling units for items as selected by the BLS national office.
They represent the level of item definition from which data collectors begin item sampling within each sample
outlet.” (Department of Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics 2013, ch. 17, p. 13).

                                                              31
Telephone hardware, calculators, and other consumer item; BEA code: DCTERG3

The BEA uses the CPI series for telephone hardware, calculators, and other consumer items

(code: CUUR0000SEEE04), which is subdivided into two subcomponents:

      Subcomponent (i): Telephones, peripheral equipment, and accessories (ELI: EE041) ELI

definition: Home-based and cellular telephones, telephone answering devices, Caller ID units,

additional cordless handsets, and accessories. Excluded are home telephone and cellular

telephone services.

   This price series is divided into 3 specification clusters: Cluster 01C: Cellular telephones;

Cluster 02B: Home-based telephones; Cluster 03B: Telephone peripheral equipment and

accessories.

Subcomponent (ii): Calculators, typewriters, and other information processing equipment (ELI:

EE042). ELI definition: Calculators, typewriters, and other information processing equipment for

non-business use. ELI excludes equipment referred to as Personal Digital Assistants (PDA’s) or

handheld PC’s. These items are priced in ELI EE011. This ELI is divided into 2 specification

clusters: Cluster 01A: Calculators; Cluster 02A – Typewriters and other information processing

equipment. The CPI office at the BLS states that this subcomponent price series is primarily

comprised of calculators.

Quality adjustment method: The BEA does not adjust the series for quality. However, the CPI

does a hedonic quality adjustment.



Televisions CPI code: CUUR0000SERA01

ELI definition: All non-portable, electronic video displays with television tuners. Televisions

with built-in DVD or other media players are included. Televisions included in component



                                                     32
systems are eligible as long as there is an individual price for the TV. Televisions including

separate speakers or stands are also included.

   ELI excludes: Computer monitors (displays without television tuners), and televisions

designed for portable viewing (those with battery power) are priced in RA031. Also excluded are

television/audio component systems (audio components are priced in RA051) and

television/video component systems (video components are priced in RA031).

Quality adjustment method: Quality is adjusted with the hedonic price method since 1999

(Kokoski, Waehrer and Wright (1999)).



Other video equipment –CUUR0000SERA03

ELI definition: Includes purchased hardware used for displaying or making video. Set-top boxes,

devices used to stream video between devices (Apple TV, Slingbox, etc.), video cassette

recorders (VCRs), digital and personal video recorders (DVR or PVR), video disc

players/recorders (DVD or Blu-ray), portable DVD players and other portable video players with

screens larger than 7", handheld portable TVs that are designed to operate on batteries, video

cameras (camcorders), satellite television equipment, video accessories, and other video

products.

   ELI excludes: Excludes all stationary televisions including televisions designed to be installed

in an automobile. Also excluded are video tapes and discs for sale or rent, rental of video

equipment, digital video recorder services, and satellite dish programming services. Portable

media players with screens smaller than 7" are excluded unless they include a DVD player. Also

excluded are digital/personal video recorder subscription services. Cameras primarily intended

for still photography are excluded even if they have a video feature.



                                                    33
  Cluster Definitions: This list is divided into four clusters: Cluster 01D - Video

Players/Receivers: Devices that obtain video from another source-whether through a

telecommunications line such as cable or the internet, or from another home device such as a

personal computer-so that the video can be displayed or recorded for display on a television,

monitor, or projector. Examples include VCRs, DVD players, cable set-top boxes, DVRs, and

Apple TV. Portable video players belong in cluster 02C. Cluster 02C - Portable Video Players:

Devices that combine a screen, a video source, and battery power so video can be viewed on the

go. Included are DVD players, televisions, satellite TV players, and DVRs designed for portable

viewing. Cluster 03C - Video Cameras/Camcorders: Motion photography devices used to record

video. Cameras primarily intended for still photography are excluded from this ELI. Cluster 04B

- Other Video Products/Accessories: All video products eligible in the ELI that do not fall in one

of the above clusters. Examples include video cables, antennas, and television remote controls.

Quality adjustment method: The BLS does a hedonic quality adjustment since 2000 (Kokoski,

Waehrer and Wright (1999)).



Audio equipment CPI Code: CUUR0000SERA05

ELI definition: All types of home, portable, and automobile audio equipment and accessories.

ELI excludes: Portable media players with screens larger than 7" are excluded (these are priced

as video equipment). Personal audio players that can run Apps and browse the internet are priced

under handheld computers. DVD, Blu-Ray, video streamers, and all other video players are

excluded unless the unit functions primarily as receiver or is part of a bundled "Home Theater

System."




                                                    34
   This price series is divided into five clusters: Cluster 01B - Personal audio devices: Audio

players and recorders designed for mobile use with headphones. Cluster 02B - Audio systems,

components, and speakers: Receivers, stereo components and systems, speakers, and home

theater systems. Cluster 03B - Automobile audio equipment: Audio equipment designed for

installation and use in an automobile. Cluster 04A - Compact audio including boomboxes and

docks: Complete audio systems that include built-in speakers including clock radios and docks

for personal audio devices. Cluster 05 – Accessories: Headphones, audio cables, and other

accessories.

   Quality is adjusted using imputation, wherein the BLS estimates the price change between a

newly discontinued stereo and the new stereo via the price change of all other comparable

stereos in the area. Since 2000, the BLS uses the hedonic price method to adjust quality.

(Kokoski et al. (1999).)



Video, audio, photographic, and information processing equipment and media (75, 76, and part

of 93) BEA code: DVAPRG3

Quality adjustment method: Quality is adjusted with the hedonic price method since 2000.



Photographic equipment CPI code: CUUR0000SS61023

ELI definition: Digital cameras and lenses intended primarily for still photography. Included in

ELI but excluded from pricing: Other photographic equipment (including film cameras, tripods,

and camera bags) are included in the ELI but not priced. ELI excludes: in ELI RD011 digital

memory cards and readers (included in ELI EE021), office/document printers and scanners




                                                    35
(included in ELI EE011), photo printer paper (included in ELI GE011), photo printer ink

cartridges (included in ELI EE021), and digital picture frames (included in ELI HL012)

   This price series is divided into two specification clusters: CLUSTER 01C - Fixed lens

cameras: Cameras with a built-in lens. These cameras may be referred to as point-and shoot.

CLUSTER 02C - SLR, interchangeable lens cameras, and lenses: Cameras designed to work

with removable lens including SLRs and mirrorless ILC (interchangeable lens camera). This

cluster also includes lenses designed to work with these cameras.

Quality adjustment method: Quality adjusted using imputation, wherein the BLS estimates the

price change between a newly discontinued piece of photography equipment and the new piece

of photography equipment via the price change of all other comparable photography equipment

in the area.



Electronic computers and workstations PPI code: WPU11510114; Portable Computers, Laptops,

PDAs, and other single user Computers PPI code: WPU11510115; Portable Computers,

Laptops, PDAs, and other single user Computers PPI code: WPU11510116 (See International

Monetary Fund (2004, pp. 261-263)).

Quality adjustment method: Hedonic price method (See Department of Commerce, Bureau of

Labor Statistics (2008) and Wasshausen and Moulton (2006)).

Test equipment for electrical, radio, & communication circuits & motors PPI code:

WPU11720501

Quality adjustment method: Production cost-based quality adjustment




                                                   36
Coin operated amusement machines PPI code: WPU119308

Includes electronic casino gaming devices, slot machines, juke boxes, arcade games, pinball

machines, “wood machines” that could be in an arcade (such as a wooden shuffle board), ticket

dispensers, and parts for the aforementioned machines. Excludes games that require a computer,

personal gaming devices, or games that could be considered a sport.

Quality adjustment method: Production cost-based quality adjustment



Watches – CPI code: CUUR0000SEAG01

ELI definition: All types and styles of wrist watches, pocket watches, and other types of watches

meant to be worn on the body (i.e. ring watches) for men, women, and children. ELI excludes:

Single purpose stopwatches which are not part of a standard watch.

Quality adjustment method: Imputation. The BLS estimates the price change between a

discontinued watch and new watch via the price change of all other comparable watches in area.



New cars – CPI code: CUUR0000SS45011

ELI definition: All new automobiles, trucks and multi-purpose vehicles purchased for personal

use. The vehicles are classified as either car or light truck segment. The light truck cluster

includes pickup, vans, and sport utility vehicles. The body style term “crossover vehicle” is used

in the industry to describe both cars and light trucks and to assist you with the appropriate cluster

placement, please reference the SO 725 New Car and Truck List. ELI excludes: Optional

extended warranties, titling, and registration; Used, commercial, “demonstrator”, and

recreational vehicles.

Quality adjustment method: Production cost-based quality adjustment.



                                                     37
Table 1: Products by category


   Hold-Up Industry        SEP-Reliant Industries           Non-SEP-Reliant
                                                            Industries


   Electricity, Urban      Telephone and facsimile          Test equipment for
   Consumers               Equipment merged with            electrical, radio, and
                           Telephone Hardware               communication circuits
                                                            and motors
                           Calculators, & Other
                           Consumer Information Items       Watches

                           Televisions                      New Cars

                           Other Video                      Host Computers, Multi-
                                                            users (Mainframes, UNIX,
                           Computers and Workstations       and PC Servers)
                           (excluding portable)
                                                            Coin Operated
                           Audio Equipment                  Amusement Machines

                           Photographic Equipment

                           Portable Computers, Laptops,
                           PDAs, and Other Single User
                           Computers

                           Video, audio, photographic,
                           and information processing
                           equipment and media (Figure
                           5 only)


  Note: For precise definitions and BLS or BEA Code see Appendix A.




                                                38
Table 2: The effect of e-bay on the rate of price change in SEP industries


                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                        Price change          Price change          Price change
                                                              (detrended)            (detrended,
                                                                                    Moore's law
                                                                                        only)


Dummy SEP*Post 2006                         0.012                 0.012                 0.013
                                           (0.012)               (0.012)               (0.014)

SEP industry                              ─0.058***              0.0094               ─0.053**
                                           (0.013)                (0.013)              (0.019)

Constant                                   -0.039               ─0.035                  0.050
                                           (0.021)               (0.021)               (0.032)

Industry fixed effects                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes

Year fixed effects                           Yes                   Yes                   Yes

Observations                                 201                   201                   169

R-squared                                   0.807                 0.311                 0.344


Note: The dependent variable is the quality adjusted change in the price of products in a particular
industry and year. SEP industry is a dummy variable that equals one if the industry is a SEP-reliant
industry, as defined in the text and listed in Table 1, and equals zero otherwise. Post 2006 is a dummy
variable that equals one before 2007 and one from 2007 onward. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses, and the designations, *, **, ***, indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one
percent, respectively.




                                                         39
                                                                                                  Figure 1
                                                                    Quality‐Adjusted Relative Prices of SEP‐Intensive Consumer Products
                                                                                 Compared to Electricity Prices 1997‐2013
                                                       110                                                                                                                                  110


                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                      Electricity                           100
                                                                                                                                                      (Hold up
                                                                                                                                                      industry)
                                                       90                                                                                                                                   90
Inflation adjusted prices, 1997=100 for all products




                                                       80                                                                                                                                   80


                                                       70                                                                                                                                   70


                                                       60                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                      Audio
                                                                                                                                    equipment
                                                       50                                                                                                                                   50

                                                                                       Video
                                                       40                            equipment                                       Photographic                                           40
                                                                                                                                      equipment
                                                       30                                                                                                                   Telephone       30
                                                                                                                                                                            equipment
                                                       20                    Portable                                                           TVs                                         20
                                                                            computers                     Desktop
                                                                                                         computers
                                                       10                                                                                                                                   10


                                                        0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                             1997    1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006     2007   2008     2009    2010   2011     2012   2013
                                                               Figure 2
                                      Quality‐Adjusted Relative Prices of SEP‐Intensive Products
                                                  Versus Automobiles , 1997‐2013
                  100                                                                                                                              100


                  90                                                                                                                               90


                  80                                                                                                                               80


                  70                                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                                         Automobiles
                                                                                                                       (less SEP‐reliant)
                  60                                                                                                                               60
Index, 1997=100




                  50                                                                                                                               50


                  40                                                                                                                               40


                  30                                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                          Average
                  20                                                                                               SEP intensive products          20


                  10                                                                                                                               10


                   0                                                                                                                               0
                        1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010    2011     2012    2013
                                                         Figure 3
                          Quality‐Adjusted Relative Prices of SEP‐Intensive Products Compared
                                    with other "Moore's Law" Products, 1997‐2013
                 100                                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                        Coin‐operated
                                                                                                                         amusement
                  90                                                                                                                                        90
                                                                                                                          machines

                  80                                                                                          Test equipment                                80
                                                                                                           for electrical & radio
                                                                                                            & communication
                  70                                                                                         circuits & motors                              70


                                                                                                                                           Watches
                  60                                                                                                                                        60
Index 1997=100




                  50                                                                                                                                        50


                  40                                                                                                                                        40


                  30                                                                                                                                        30


                  20                                                                                                                  Average               20
                                                                                                                                    SEP industry

                  10                                                                                                                                        10


                  0                                                                                                                                         0
                       1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008     2009      2010         2011     2012    2013
                                             Figure 4
         Quality Adjusted Relative Prices of Multi‐User Mainframe Computers & Servers
          Compared with SEP‐Intensive Desktop and Portable Computers, 2004‐2013

100                                                                                                  100


90                                                                                                   90


80                                                                                                   80


70                                                                                                   70


60                                                                                                   60


50                                                                                                   50


40                                                                                                   40
                                                                         Host computers,
                                                                  (Mainframes, Unix, & PC Servers)
30                                                                                                   30


20                                                                         Desktop                   20
                                                                          computers

10                                                                                                   10
                                                                           Portable & Laptop
                                                                              computers
 0                                                                                                   0
      2004    2005     2006     2007     2008     2009    2010     2011         2012         2013
                                                       Figure 5
                        Quality‐Adjusted Relative Prices of Electricity, Telephone Equipment ,
                         TVs and an Index of Video, Audio, Photographic and Information
                                   Processing Equipment and Media, 1951‐2013
                  140                                                                                                        140

                  130                                                         2G Cell phones                                 130
                                                                                introduced
                  120                                                                                  Telephone             120
                                                                                                       equipment
                  110                                                                                                        110

                  100                                  1G Cell phones
                                                                                                                             100
                                                         introduced
                  90                                                                                       3G Cell phones    90
                                                                                                             introduced
                                                                      ATT
Index, 1951=100




                  80                                                breakup                                                  80
                                                                                         Electricity
                  70                                                                                                         70

                  60                                                                                                         60

                  50                                                                                                         50

                  40                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                            4G Cell phones
                  30                     Televisions                                                          introduced     30

                  20                                                          Video, audio, etc.                             20

                  10                                                                                                         10

                   0                                                                                                         0
