                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DO FIRMS FORM THEIR EXPECTATIONS? NEW SURVEY EVIDENCE

                                         Olivier Coibion
                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                           Saten Kumar

                                       Working Paper 21092
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21092


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2015




We are grateful to Graham Howard for sharing data from the survey of households in New Zealand
and seminar participants at UCLA, Bank of Canada, Bank of France, Cleveland Fed, AEA 2015 conference,
CESifo conference for comments. We are also grateful to our discussants: Brent Meyer (November
2014 Southern Economics Conference), Fernanda Nechio (July 2014 Western Economics Conference)
and Justin Wolfers (January 2015 AEA Conference). We thank Doreen Chandra, Intaaz Joseph, Pengfei
Jia, Aditya Raj, Anand Kumar, Peter Whitehead, Andrew Gould, Tom Markus, Jerry Koong, Todd
Bloomfield, Kamakshi Singh, Adev Raj, Wein Chaddah and Matt Hunt for outstanding research assistance.
Kumar thanks the AUT Business School for financial support. Gorodnichenko thanks the NSF and
Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Firms Form Their Expectations? New Survey Evidence
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 21092
April 2015
JEL No. E3,E4,E5,E6

                                             ABSTRACT

We implement a new survey of firms’ macroeconomic beliefs in New Zealand and document a number
of novel stylized facts from this survey. Despite nearly twenty-five years under an inflation targeting
regime, there is widespread dispersion in firms’ beliefs about both past and future macroeconomic
conditions, especially inflation, with average beliefs about recent and past inflation being much higher
than those of professional forecasters. Much of the dispersion in beliefs can be explained by firms’
incentives to collect and process information, i.e. rational inattention motives. Using experimental
methods, we find that firms update their beliefs in a Bayesian manner when presented with new information
about the economy. But few firms seem to think that inflation is important to their business decisions
and therefore they tend to devote few resources to collecting and processing information about inflation.


Olivier Coibion                                     Saten Kumar
University of Texas at Austin                       Auckland University of Technology
7600 Pitter Pat                                     55 Wellesley St
Austin, TX 78736                                    Auckland, 1010, New Zealand
and NBER                                            saten.kumar@aut.ac.nz
ocoibion@gmail.com

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction
Central banks like the U.S. Federal Reserve or the European Central Bank target inflation and
employment rates, both of which depend on firm-level decisions. Because of their dynamic nature, the
employment and pricing choices made by firms depend directly upon their expectations of future
economic conditions. Measuring and understanding these expectations is therefore fundamental to the
effective use of monetary policy. And yet, information on firms’ beliefs is scant.1 Economists have access
to detailed surveys of consumers’ expectations, along with those of professional forecasters, financial
market participants, and even those of FOMC members. But comparable quantitative surveys of firms’
beliefs are inexplicably lacking.
         In this paper, we take a first step toward filling this gap by reporting results from a new large
quantitative survey of firms in New Zealand. This survey, which includes over three thousand firms,
provides detailed information about general managers’ economic beliefs, including their expectations of
recent and future macroeconomic conditions. This allows us to characterize firms’ attentiveness to recent
macroeconomic developments as well as their expectations about the future. We also study the
determinants of each, using a rich set of quantitative firm-level controls from the survey.
         This survey of firms is unique in several ways. First, the survey is quantitative in nature. While
some surveys of firms’ expectations exist (e.g. Conference Board, Ifo), they tend to be primarily
qualitative (e.g. “do you expect prices to rise, fall or stay the same in the next twelve months?”), thus
making it difficult to extract quantitative measures of expectations (Bachmann and Elstner 2013). In
contrast, we extract quantitative answers from firms about their beliefs in the same manner as existing
surveys of households’ or professional forecasters’ expectations. In addition, we ask firms to provide
probability distributions for their forecasts so that we can examine not only distributions of point forecasts
across respondents but also construct measures of firm-specific uncertainty about the future path of
macroeconomic and microeconomic variables.
         Second, the survey covers a wide range of firms. The few quantitative surveys which include
some firms (e.g. Livingston survey) consider only very large firms. Because these firms typically employ
macroeconomists on staff who are likely to be the respondents of any such survey, the reported forecasts
mimic those of professional forecasters. But it is unclear whether these reported forecasts are in any way
characteristic of other agents in the firm or are utilized in actual economic decisions made by the firm. In
contrast, our survey includes both small and medium-sized firms, with respondents being the general
managers of each firm.
         Third, we ask firms not only about their expectations of future economic outcomes but also their
beliefs about recent economic conditions. Given that macroeconomic data is readily available to firms,


1
  We refer to the beliefs of decision-makers within firms as “firms’ beliefs” as short-hand, with obvious abuse of
terminology.

                                                                                                                     2
this allows us to study how attentive firms are to macroeconomic developments as well as what factors
determine how much attention firms devote to tracking macroeconomic conditions. Such potential factors
include differences by industry, age, size, number of competitors, access to international markets, or
expected duration until subsequent pricing decisions, among many others that we collect in the survey.
        Fourth, in addition to the main survey, we conducted three follow-up surveys. This panel
dimension of the survey contrasts with repeated cross-sections in typical surveys of economic agents and
allows us to study the evolution of firms’ beliefs about past, current and future economic conditions. We
also use follow-up surveys to verify the accuracy of firms’ responses.
        The quality of the survey responses appears to be quite high. We verified that reported answers
about the age of the firm and current prices conform to those available in administrative and online
records as well as independent inquiries. We also show that firms which report higher frequencies of price
reviews report more frequent price changes over the preceding twelve months on average. The panel
dimension to the survey allows us to verify that firms report consistent answers across surveys. For
example, we ask firms to report prices over each of the preceding four quarters, with the follow-up survey
being approximately five months after the first survey. There is widespread consistency in price reports
over the overlapping periods. We can also verify the quality of some of firms’ expectational answers. For
example, we ask firms in the main survey when they next expect to change their prices and by how much.
Given that firms provide us with their prices in a follow-up survey, we can check whether firms did
indeed change their prices when they expected to and by how. We document remarkable agreement
between firms’ expectations of their future price changes and their subsequent price decisions. In short,
each test confirms that the quality of the reported data is high.
        Using this novel data, we document a number of new stylized facts about the macroeconomic
beliefs held by those agents in charge of running firms. First, we document significant heterogeneity in
attentiveness across firms to recent macroeconomic conditions. For example, while 49% of firms report
beliefs of inflation over the previous twelve months between one and three percent—we call these firms
“informed” since actual inflation averaged slightly under 2%—almost 20% of firms report beliefs that
inflation was 10% or more during this time period. This is despite the fact that New Zealand was the first
country to implement formal inflation targeting in 1990 and has experienced relatively low and stable
inflation since then. In contrast, no firms reported believing that prices had fallen during this time period,
so errors about recent inflation were highly asymmetric. This asymmetry is absent in firm beliefs about
GDP growth, unemployment rates, exchange rates, interest rates and industry-specific inflation rates.
However, for each macroeconomic variable, there is a wide dispersion in beliefs about recent economic
conditions that is strongly at odds with the assumption of common beliefs but is a priori consistent with
models of inattention such as sticky information models (e.g. Mankiw and Reis 2002) or noisy



                                                                                                            3
information models (Woodford 2001, Sims 2003). Also consistent with these models, there is high
persistence in firms’ forecast errors, a feature we can assess due to the panel nature of this survey data.
        Second, given the richness of firm, industry and manager-specific information in the survey, we
can study the sources of variation in inattention across firms. Focusing on inflation backcasts, we find that
the characteristics of the manager account for very little of the variation in beliefs about recent inflation,
nor do recent price changes made by the firm or in the firm’s industry. Instead, we find robust evidence
that firms’ inattentiveness to recent macroeconomic information is systematically related to their
incentives to process or track such information: firms which face more competitors and firms which
expect to change their prices sooner are more likely to be better informed than firms with fewer
competitors or those which do not expect to change their prices in the near future. In the same spirit, firms
with steeper average profit functions (for whom information is more valuable) also tend to have better
information. These patterns are consistent with rational inattention explanations of agents’ expectations
formation process, as in Sims (2003), Reis (2006), or Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009).
        Third, firms’ forecasts resemble those of households much more than those of professional
forecasters. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the mean forecast of inflation across firms, for example, was
about 5% while that of households was over 3% whereas professional forecasters in Consensus
Economics were forecasting an annual inflation rate of only 2.0%. Second moments reveal even larger
disparities. Professional forecasters disagreed very little about inflation forecasts, whereas both
households and firms display significant heterogeneity in inflation forecasts. This heterogeneity is again
highly asymmetric: while 56% of firms expect inflation to be between 0 and 5%, all other firms expect
inflation to be higher than this range. The diversity of views among firms is also not limited to inflation:
we document similar heterogeneity in beliefs about future output growth, the interest rate and the
unemployment rate.
        Fourth, we focus on macroeconomic forecasts and their relationship to firms’ beliefs about recent
macroeconomic conditions. Across macroeconomic variables, there is a very strong correlation between
firms’ backcasts and forecasts, which suggests that inattention to recent conditions is a primary source of
differences in beliefs about the future. For example, firms which are “informed” about recent inflation
rates tend to report inflation forecasts much closer to ex-post true values than do “uninformed” firms and
tend to do so with more confidence. Questions that extract the uncertainty around firms’ inflation
forecasts reveal much higher levels of uncertainty for firms which report higher forecasts of inflation. But
how “informed” a firm is not time-invariant: firms classified as “informed” in the first wave of the survey
display a similar distribution of inflation forecasts by the time of the fourth wave as do firms originally
classified as “uninformed.” This feature reflects the fact firms often make large revisions in their forecasts
across survey waves.



                                                                                                              4
         Our fifth set of facts therefore focuses on how firms revise their forecasts in light of new
information. Specifically, we implemented an experimental design in the fourth wave of the survey in
which we provided random subsets of firms with additional information about recent macroeconomic
variables, forecasts of professional forecasters, the value of the central bank’s inflation target, or the
average forecast of other firms in the survey. Firms were asked to quantify their forecasts and the
uncertainty around their forecasts prior to this information being revealed to them, then were asked for
new forecasts after the additional information was provided to them. Consistent with models of Bayesian
learning, firms systematically adjusted their forecasts in response to this new information and did so in
the expected direction. The responses to information about inflation were generally stronger than those
for information about GDP growth or unemployment and were particularly large in response to
information about the central bank’s inflation target. Also consistent with Bayesian learning is the fact
that those firms with higher levels of a priori uncertainty revised their forecasts by more than did firms
who were more confident in their original forecasts. This novel experimental evidence supports the notion
that firms update their beliefs as in noisy information models and suggests that firms’ inflation forecasts
are particularly sensitive to new information.
        Finally, we explore how firms seek out and process macroeconomic information. For example,
firms report a striking asymmetry in how they would respond to positive versus negative news about the
economy on TV: over 70% of firms would seek out more information if the economic news were
negative, while less than 30% would do so if the economic news were positive. This cyclicality is
consistent with empirical evidence in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) and points toward important
state-dependence in the acquisition and processing of information by firms, as in Gorodnichenko (2008)
or Alvarez et al. (2011).
        Rational inattention models suggest that agents should devote more resources to tracking
variables which affect their profits or utility more. The survey asked firms to rank macroeconomic
variables in terms of their importance for their business decisions. Consistent with rational inattention
models, firms make systematically smaller errors about recent values of the variables that are important to
their business decisions and report less uncertainty about them. There is also a strong correlation between
the variables that firms identify as being important to business decisions and those which they track.
Strikingly, well under half of firms report that they track inflation (whereas 80% report tracking GDP)
and the average inflation backcast errors of these firms are five times larger on average than those made
by firms which track inflation. One reason why some firms’ inflation forecast errors are so large may
therefore be that these firms do not view aggregate inflation as important to their business and do not
devote resources to tracking its evolution.
        Another prediction of models with endogenous acquisition of information is that strategic
complementarities should induce firms to focus relatively more on public signals. We find a strong

                                                                                                         5
positive correlation between the degree of strategic complementarity in price setting of firms and their
preference for receiving public over private signals, which is in agreement with predictions of Hellwig
and Veldkamp (2009). Higher strategic complementarity is also positively associated with firms
preferring to wait for other firms to change their prices first when facing uncertainty—a finding consistent
with Gorodnichenko (2008). Hence, these predictions of models with endogenous acquisition of
information also receive support in the survey data.
        Our results build on a growing literature studying the properties of agents’ expectations.
Theoretical work has long found that departures from full-information rational expectations can have
profound consequences for economic dynamics and optimal policy (e.g. Lucas 1972). More recent work
has studied the empirical properties of agents’ expectations and how these relate to different models of the
expectations formation process. Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers (2003), for example, document that the
dispersion in U.S. households’ inflation forecasts is much larger than that of professional forecasters.
Carroll (2003) studies the transmission of macroeconomic information from professional forecasters to
households. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) estimate the rates at which different agents’ forecast
errors respond to structural shocks while Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) test for predictability of
forecast errors from past forecast revisions as implied by models of imperfect information. Andrade and
LeBihan (2013) assess the ability of imperfect information models to match key facts of the expectations
of professional forecasters. Carvalho and Nechio (2014) find that many households report expectations
that are inconsistent with monetary policy actions. This line of research has documented pervasive and
systematic deviations from full-information rational expectations, with much of the empirical evidence
being consistent with models of inattentiveness.
        We differ from this previous work primarily in that we implement and study the results of a new
survey of firms’ macroeconomic expectations, whereas previous research has relied primarily on forecasts
of households (such as from the Michigan Survey of Consumers), professional forecasters (Survey of
Professional Forecasters, Consensus Economics surveys), financial market participants (expectations
extracted from asset prices) or policymakers (Greenbooks, FOMC member forecasts). Like this prior
work, we find pervasive departures from full-information rational expectations but now for the case of
firms. In addition, we document not only the heterogeneity in firms’ beliefs about future macroeconomic
outcomes but also dramatic differences in their perceptions of recent economic developments, a key
feature of imperfect information models. Furthermore, and again consistent with predictions of rational
inattention models, we find systematic evidence that the quality of firms’ information about
macroeconomic conditions in part reflects their incentives to track and process such information, as in e.g.
Gorodnichenko (2008) or Alvarez et al. (2011). We therefore interpret our results as not only filling an
important gap in the literature by studying quantitative measures of firms’ expectations but also as



                                                                                                          6
providing some of the most direct evidence for rational inattention motives in the determination of agents’
macroeconomic expectations.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes how the survey was implemented as well
as evidence on the quality of firms’ responses to survey questions. Section 3 focuses on firms’
attentiveness to recent macroeconomic developments. Section 4 examines the forecasts of firms and how
these forecasts relate to their beliefs about recent conditions. Section 5 provides additional results on how
firms seek out and process information about macroeconomic conditions. Finally, section 6 concludes by
discussing some implications of these results.


2        Implementation of the Survey and Quality Control
In this section, we first describe the way in which the survey was implemented (sampling frame, response
rates, etc.). We also assess the quality of the responses provided by firms. Specifically, we cross-check
firms’ response against publicly available information, we make independent inquiries to verify the
accuracy of survey responses, and check consistency of responses over time. We find that the quality of
the survey is quite high: failure rates hover between 1 and 5 percent.


2.1     Implementation of the Survey
The survey of firms in New Zealand was done in four waves. The primary survey was implemented
between September 2013 and January 2014 and included 3,153 firms. We selected firms using two
directories: Kompass New Zealand (KNZ) and Knowledge Management Services (KMS). Around 10,000
firms were selected from the former and an additional 5,000 new firms from the latter. Both directories
were purchased and they contain a comprehensive profile on New Zealand businesses including details on
their activities, brands, management, products and services. Firms were randomly selected from both
directories.
        Firms were selected according to the Australia and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification
2006 (ANZSIC06). To this end, we chose firms from four broad industrial groups: manufacturing; retail and
wholesale trade; construction and transportation; professional and financial services. We selected firms that
had an annual GST turnover greater than NZ$30,000 and at least 6 workers. Firm size within each industry
could be classified as small (= 6-19 workers), medium (= 20-49 workers) and large (= beyond 50 workers).2
        Since manufacturing and professional and financial services account for relatively large shares of
GDP (Statistics NZ, 2012), we aimed to have two third of our sample from these two industries. The
remaining one third is a combination of firms from other industries. We excluded industries related to the
government, community service, agriculture, fishing and mining, and energy, gas and water from the


2
 Consistent with Statistics New Zealand surveys, see http://www.stats.govt.nz/browse_for_stats/businesses/business
_growth_and_innovation/business-op-survey-2011-tables.aspx.

                                                                                                                7
sample. These sectors are often dominated by a handful of extensively regulated firms or by very small
firms.
         Using the KNZ directory, we chose around 10,000 firms from a total of 15,000, thus rejecting
5,000 because they were very small in size. Smaller firms can be very unpredictable in their continuity;
we therefore exclude all firms with less than 6 workers. The KMS directory contains around 30,000 firms
and we randomly selected around 5,000 new firms not included in the KNZ directory. This yielded a
population of around 15,000 firms. The general managers of these firms were surveyed by phone and the
response rate was around 20 percent, yielding slightly over 3000 responses.
         Firms received the information sheet and questionnaire through email about ten days before the
phone call. This gave participants some time to consider their participation.3 The phone survey occurred
as follows: a research assistant (RA) called the general manager and asked questions. The RA recorded
the answers in the questionnaire by hand and also recorded the responses in the phone. Then, an
independent RA confirmed that the answers written in the questionnaire corresponded to the recorded
responses in the phone. To maintain confidentiality of the participants and information, the phone records
were then deleted at the end of the survey. The collected data was verified by two independent RAs.
Specifically, they checked whether the spreadsheet responses matched the answers in the hardcopy
questionnaire. Responses that were observable outliers were deleted from the sample, for instance, a firm
that claims to have employed around 300 workers and sells about $10,000 worth of goods in three
months. At the onset, we ran a pilot survey of 60 firms (which are not included in the main survey) to
verify if the questions made sense to firms or if there were some questions which they systematically
refused to answer.
         The survey included a number of detailed questions about the firm, including its age, the size and
composition of employment in the firm, questions about the composition of costs (share of labor, share of
materials), exposure to foreign trade, as well as questions about the competitiveness of the firm’s
industry. Table 1 presents summary statistics from some of these questions, across all firms as well as
across subsets of firms. We group firms into four main industries: a) Manufacturing, b) Trade, c)
Professional and Financial Services, and d) Construction and Transportation. This is a slightly more
aggregated grouping than SIC1. We then also consider more disaggegrated classifications, which we will
refer to as “sub-industries,” and which are more aggregated than SIC2 (Appendix 2 describes ANZSIC
codes associated with each sub-industry). We implement this more aggregated classification to ensure that
each sub-industry has more than 100 firms in the survey, as illustrated in Table 1. Note that the
Construction and Transportation industry is not further decomposed as this sector contains significantly


3
  The most frequently mentioned reason for not participating was a concern for confidentiality, and especially an
unwillingness to answer questions regarding total production value and capacity, as well as questions about profit
margins.

                                                                                                                     8
fewer firms in the survey than other industries. In Appendix 3, we describe the construction of sampling
weights to correct for possible imbalances in the sample relative to the population of firms. Using weights
makes little difference for most of our estimates.
        The average age of firms in our sample is 14.5 years and the average number of employees is just
under 30. Both mask substantial underlying heterogeneity. For example, the largest firm in our sample
has just under 700 employees. The combined employment of firms in our sample represents about 5% of
total employment in New Zealand. The share of total revenues going to labor costs varies significantly
across sectors but averages nearly 50% across all firms in the survey, with significantly lower shares in
manufacturing firms and significantly higher shares in professional services. The share of revenues from
foreign sales also varies widely: manufacturing firms have much higher shares of revenues coming from
abroad than do other firms. We also asked about firms’ current profit margins as well as their historical
or average profit margins. Firms in professional and business services reported significantly higher
margins both at the time of the survey as well as on average than did firms in other industries, with
finance having the largest average margin while construction and transportation firms report the lowest
average margins. Firms in all industries report, on average, that current margins are below historical
margins.
        A significant portion of the first wave was devoted to price setting and information collection
decisions by firms. For example, we asked firms how frequently they formally review their prices (e.g.
weekly, monthly, quarterly, etc.). The average duration between price reviews for all firms is 7.4 months,
with much higher durations in construction and transportation (almost 11 months) and non-food retailing
(over 11 months). We also asked firms when they expected to change the price of their main product and
by how much. The average firm reported an expectation of nearly six months before their next price
change, which would be a 5.6% increase in price on average. Within industries, sectors in which firms
report longer durations until their next price change also report, on average, larger expected price
changes. In the trade sector for example, food retailers state that they expect to change their price in under
three months by less than 5% on average while non-food retailers expect to keep their prices unchanged
for over seven months but then raise them by over 7% on average.
        We also executed three follow-up surveys. The first follow-up (wave #2) was between February
and April 2014. We contacted all firms from the main survey and achieved around 23 percent response
rate from our initial set of firms, or slightly more than 700 responses. The second follow-up (wave #3)
was between August and September 2014 and received 1,607 responses. The third follow-up (wave #4)
was between December 2014 and January 2015 and received 1,257 responses. Follow-up surveys
repeated some of the questions from the main survey but also included new questions not in the original
survey. For example, the first follow-up expanded the set of macroeconomic variables which firms were
asked about, the second follow-up primarily focused on collecting individual characteristics of the

                                                                                                            9
respondent (e.g. age, income, education), and the third follow-up explored how firms acquire and process
new information. We provide questionnaires for each wave in the Appendix.


2.2    Assessing the quality of the survey data
Because firms have no direct incentive to participate in the survey or to provide thoughtful or truthful
answers, one may be concerned about the quality of the responses to the questions. To ascertain the
quality of the survey responses, we considered a number of checks.
           The first is to directly verify the quality of those responses which can be checked against other
sources. For example, respondents were asked about the age of their firm. Since firms must be registered
with the government, we can check administrative records to verify whether the reported age of the firm
and administrative records conform. We performed this check for all firms in the survey and found that,
for 87% of the firms in the sample, the reported age of the firm conformed to administrative records.
When the two did not match, we inquired with the general managers as to the source of the mismatch. In
almost all cases, the source of the difference was either that the firm had been registered before it started
operating or that there had been a change in ownership. There were only three cases in which general
managers had simply made a mistake as to the age of the firm, a failure rate of less than one-tenth of one
percent.
           A second response provided by firms which we could independently verify was the stated price of
their main product. Because some firms maintain an online presence that includes prices of their goods,
we verified two forms of firms’ responses. First, does the firm actually sell the good which they claimed
constitutes their primary revenue-generating product? For the 300 (randomly selected) firms for which we
performed this check, only forty-seven did not explicitly list their main product on their website. We then
called each of these firms to verify that they indeed sell the product. There were six firms for which we
found that the product was not sold by the firm, a failure rate of 2%. Second, we verified the listed price
of the good online against the price reported in the survey. Out of the 300 firms we checked, many did not
have prices listed online. In these cases, we verified via online enquiries what price was available for the
“main product” in the survey. There were 55 firms for which we were not able to verify prices. For the
remaining 245 firms for whom we could either identify prices on their websites or via direct online
enquiry, only nine reported prices different from those in the follow-up survey, a failure rate of 3.7%.
           A third response which we could asses was whether the firm exports products or services abroad.
To verify this, we again checked 300 firms. Of these 300 firms, 87 claimed in the survey to receive a
positive share of revenues from foreign sales. We visited the websites of the 300 firms to determine
whether they appeared to export products or services. For the 213 firms who claimed no foreign sales,
only four reported clear export availability on their websites. Of the 87 firms who claimed foreign sales,
we checked their websites to determine whether they appeared to export. If this could not be verified from


                                                                                                           10
the website, we then called the firms to enquire about their ability to sell products and services abroad.
Only seven of the 87 firms reported that they do not export despite having claimed positive shares of
foreign sales in the survey. Jointly, this again yields a failure rate of 3.7%.
        Another dimension of the survey that we could independently verify is the quality of answers to
questions about individual characteristics of the survey respondent, primarily from the third wave of the
survey. Many firms maintain an online profile of their staff, especially directors and managers. We
randomly selected 10 percent of respondents from the third wave of the survey to assess whether the
responses given by them about their position, qualifications and experiences were consistent with the
publicly available data. We were unable to find names (position details) of only around 5% (8%) of the
survey respondents. This is because some firms do not have an online profile of their staff. For those that
had online details about qualification and experiences of their staff, we found a very strong match with
the survey responses (≈99%).
        In addition to verifying firms’ survey responses against outside sources, we can also assess the
internal consistency of their responses. For example, the survey includes a question about the average
frequency at which firms review their prices, which we convert to an average number of months between
price reviews, and also includes questions about their actual prices over the previous twelve months.
Specifically, we asked firms to report their current price as well as their price three months, 6 months, 9
months and 12 months prior. From this last set of questions, we can measure the number of times prices
were changed at this quarterly frequency. One would expect that firms who report higher frequencies of
price reviews should, on average, report more frequent price changes as well. We test this in our data by
regressing the number of price changes over the previous twelve months on the average number of
months between price reviews from the main survey. The results are reported in Panel A of Table 2.
Longer durations between price reviews are negatively related to the number of price changes reported by
firms for the previous twelve months, regardless of the inclusion of different industry fixed effects or the
use of sampling weights.
        Second, we can verify whether firms report the same answers in response to the same question
across the two surveys. We do this in two ways. The first is that, in both surveys, we asked firms to report
the average frequency of price reviews. We can then compare whether firms report the same answer
across surveys. As documented in Panel B of Table 2, the coefficient on the time between price reviews in
the main survey is approximately one, and the R2 is extremely high. A second way comes from the fact
that we ask firms to report their prices at 3-month intervals going back one year in each survey. Because
the surveys are separated in time by less than a year, there are overlapping periods for which firms
reported prices in the first two waves of the survey. We can then assess whether these prices are
consistent across the two surveys. As documented in Panel C of Table 2, when we regress the prices in



                                                                                                         11
the follow-up survey on those in the main survey for these common periods, we find coefficients not
statistically different from one and very high R2.4
        Ultimately, because we will focus on firms’ beliefs about macroeconomic conditions, we would
like to verify the quality of reported expectations of firms. We can do so using two survey questions.
First, we asked firms in the main survey in how many months they expected to next change their price.
Given that the follow-up survey includes reported price changes since the main survey, we can therefore
verify whether firms who expected to change their prices soon did so at a higher frequency than firms
who expected not to change their prices for an extended period. For each firm, we determine whether the
firm has changed its price between the follow-up survey and the time of the first survey, by comparing the
“current” price in the follow-up survey with either the “current price” from the first survey or the 3- or 6-
month prior price in the follow-up survey. We then construct the fraction of firms who changed their price
within each bin of possible durations until next price change reported in the main survey. As illustrated in
Panel A of Figure 1, for firms who expected to change their price within the next four months at the time
of the first survey, approximately 90% did indeed change their price by the time of the follow-up survey.
For firms who originally expected not to change their price for at least seven months, almost none of the
firms changed their price (exactly none when price changes are measured relative to the price from the
main survey). In between four and seven months of expected price duration, there is a sharply falling
share of firms which changed their prices, consistent with the time difference between the surveys. Hence,
firms’ original answers about when they next expected to change their prices have very strong predictive
power for their ex-post decisions about whether to change prices.
        One possible limitation of this test is that if firms change their prices at very fixed frequencies (as
in Taylor 1980), then their ability to predict the date of the next price change may not be very informative
about the quality of their expectations. An alternative test is to examine their expectation of the size of
their next price change. We do so in Panel B of Figure 1, which plots the expected percentage price
change reported in the main survey against actual price changes (percentage difference between “current”
prices in the follow-up survey and “current” prices in the main survey). Note that these can differ because
firms changed prices by a different amount than expected or changed them more than once. Nonetheless,
there is a strikingly strong correlation between the ex-ante expectation of firms about the amount by
which they will change their prices and their ex-post price changes from the follow-up survey, with most
of the observations laying very close to the 45 degree line. Panel D of Table 1 confirms the fact that the
estimated slope of the relationship is not statistically different from ones. These results are therefore
consistent with firms reporting their true expectations in the survey.



4
 One should not expect perfect correlation between the two because the time periods for which firms are reporting
prices may not perfectly overlap.

                                                                                                                12
        While one should always bear in mind the limitations of survey data, these results suggest that the
quality of this survey data is quite high. For questions which can be independently verified against
external sources, we find a lot of consistency between responses and outside sources, including for the
reported age of the firm, prices of main products, and participating in foreign trade. There is also a lot of
consistency across different questions within the survey. Firms which report reviewing their prices
frequently also reported more frequent price changes on average. Similarly, reported prices across the
main and the follow-up survey match up very closely, despite the time lags involved. And importantly,
firms’ responses about their expectations line up very closely with their subsequent actions, suggesting
that we can be confident about the quality of respondents’ answers about their beliefs and that firms’
actions are based on these beliefs.


3      (In)Attentiveness to current and recent economic conditions
A unique dimension of the survey is that we ask firms about their beliefs regarding recent macroeconomic
conditions. Whereas full-information rational expectations models assume that agents can immediately
observe economic developments, models of inattention imply that agents find it optimal to limit the
resources they devote to tracking information about the economy, leading to imperfect information about
current and past economic conditions. The questions in the survey about perceptions of recent and current
economic conditions can therefore provide a metric to evaluate the amount of inattention to aggregate
economic conditions on the part of firms. In this section, we first describe the degree of inattention using
different macroeconomic variables then discuss possible sources of inattention.


3.1    Degree of Inattention
To measure inattention to aggregate conditions, we rely primarily on questions in which respondents were
asked about recent macroeconomic outcomes. For example, in the case of inflation, we asked respondents
how much they believed overall prices in the economy had changed over the last twelve months. At the
time of the first survey, annual CPI inflation in New Zealand was 1.5%, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Inflation has been relatively stable in New Zealand since it became the first country to put in a place a
formal inflation target in 1990, with only a few brief episodes in which inflation peaked around 4%. We
then construct the “errors” made by firms with respect to inflation over the preceding 12 months by
subtracting their reported belief about recent inflation from the actual inflation rate over this time period.
Panel A of Figure 3 plots the distribution of these errors vis-a-vis recent inflation. First, approximately
half of firms (49%) made relatively small errors, within 2 percentage points of the actual inflation rate,
and we refer to these as “informed” firms. Approximately one in three firms made errors of more than 5
percentage points, and one in ten firms in the survey made errors of more than 10 percentage points. This
points to very large heterogeneity in firms’ attentiveness to recent inflation dynamics, with a wide range


                                                                                                           13
of beliefs about recent price changes in the New Zealand economy despite the fact that actual inflation
has consistently been low and fairly stable for 25 years.
        A second point to note from Panel A of Figure 3 is that the distribution of inflation errors is
highly asymmetric. Large errors are systematically negative, with these firms believing that price changes
have been much larger than what actually happened. Only 5% of firms report a perception of recent
inflation that is lower than actual inflation. Thus, the distribution of firm beliefs about recent inflation is
very unevenly distributed around the actual value, despite the fact that inflation at the time of the survey
was not exceptionally low. Armantier et al. (2012) document a similar distribution of perception errors on
the part of U.S. households in a 2011 survey.
        The dramatic heterogeneity in beliefs about recent inflation is not unique to inflation. In the
fourth wave of the survey, we also asked firms about their perceptions of the growth rate of GDP over the
last twelve months and the current unemployment rate, from which we can construct analogous backcast
errors made by firms. The distributions of these errors are also plotted in Panel A of Figure 3. As with
inflation, there is significant heterogeneity in beliefs across firms about the recent GDP growth rate and
unemployment rate, although the dispersion of beliefs for these variables is significantly lower than for
inflation and is largely symmetric around true values. In the fourth wave of the survey, we also asked
firms to report their beliefs about price changes in their industry over the last 12 months. Using PPI
inflation rates at the two-digit industry (SIC2) level, we also display the distribution of errors made by
firms about industry-specific inflation rates in Panel A of Figure 3. Unlike errors about aggregate
inflation, the distribution of errors about industry-specific inflation rates is symmetric and centered
around zero, with the same order of dispersion as errors about GDP growth and unemployment. Hence,
these results suggest that aggregate inflation generates unique patterns of errors on the part of firms that
differ both qualitatively and quantitatively from those that arise for other macroeconomic variables or
industry-specific price changes.
        One can assess the extent to which inattention to economic conditions varies across
macroeconomic variables. To do so, we regress the absolute value of a firm i’s “error” with respect to a
macroeconomic variable z on the absolute value of the inflation error, i.e.
            −        =   +         ,   −      ,     +       +                                          (3.1)
where Bi denotes the belief (backcast or nowcast) of firm i,    ,     is the inflation rate over the last twelve
months, and δj is a sub-industry fixed effect. We implement this test for each macroeconomic variable
about which firms were asked in different waves and report all results in Table 3. The evidence is mixed:
while inflation errors are positively correlated with errors in other macroeconomic variables in waves 1
and 2 of the survey, there is no such correlation in the final wave of the survey. These results suggest that
while there is some sense in which inattention by firms extends across macroeconomic variables, the
correlation is generally weak, especially when looking at inflation errors. This is consistent with the

                                                                                                               14
evidence in Panel A of Figure 3 that firms make qualitatively different errors about inflation than other
macroeconomic variables.
        There is also significant heterogeneity in the dispersion within industries of firm-level errors
about inflation. Panel B of Figure 3 plots these inflation errors for the four broad industry groupings:
manufacturing; trade; professional and financial services; construction and transportation. In both
manufacturing and trade, the majority of firms are well-informed. For example, two-thirds of firms in the
manufacturing sector and eighty percent of firms in the trade sector have inflation errors of less than two
percentage points. In contrast, the equivalent shares for the professional and financial services sector and
the construction and transportation sector are only thirteen percent and twenty percent respectively.
Furthermore, these last two sectors also have much larger fractions of firms making large errors than do
firms in manufacturing or trade. These features systematically occur within each sub-industry as well,
suggesting that inattention to inflation reflects deeper structural characteristics of firms or respondents.


3.2    Sources of Inattention
What accounts for the degree of inattention paid by firms to recent inflation dynamics? Panel B of Figure 3
highlights pronounced industry characteristics as one potential source. But as documented in Table 1, there
are many economic differences between these sectors. For example, manufacturing and trade firms have,
on average, a smaller share of costs coming from labor, lower profit margins, more exposure to foreign
trade, and more frequent price reviews than do firms in construction, transportation, and professional
financial services. There could also be differences in the recent pricing decisions of firms in these
industries which affect their perceptions of overall price changes. Alternatively, differences in inattention
could be driven by the personal characteristics of respondents, such as their age, income or education.
        To assess the relative importance of these potential determinants of firm-level inattention, we
regress firms’ inattention to inflation, as measured by their absolute errors about recent inflation rates, on
four groups of variables. The first group includes firm-level characteristics, such as the (log) age of the firm,
its (log) total employment, labor costs as a share of revenues, and the share of foreign sales in total revenues.
        The second group of explanatory variables focuses on the amount of competition faced by firms.
Specifically, we include the number of direct competitors faced by the firm in its primary product, the
average profit margin of the firm (similar results obtain using contemporaneous margins), as well as the
firm’s perception of how its price compares to those of its main competitors (as a percentage differential).
Rational inattention arguments would imply that more competition should induce firms to devote more
resources to collecting and processing information about their economic environment. The last variable in
this block is the absolute value of the slope of the profit function. We calculate the slope as the ratio of by
how much a firm could increase its profit (as a percent of revenue) if it could reset its price freely at the
time of the survey relative to the percent price change the firm would implement if it could reset its price


                                                                                                               15
freely at the time of the survey. Economic theory (e.g., Gorodnichenko 2008, Alvarez et al. 2011)
suggests that if the slope of the profit function around the current price is close to zero, then a firms’
incentive to change its price or to acquire information is low since the incremental gain is profits is
approximately second-order while the costs could be first order. One should therefore expect that a
greater slope in the profit function should be associated with better information and hence smaller
forecast errors.
        The third block of variables that we include focuses on price changes, both at the level of the firm
and the industry. These include the percentage change in the firm’s price over the previous twelve months.
One might expect that firms which have raised their prices more could be extrapolating from their own
behavior to that of others in forming beliefs about recent inflation, leading to larger errors about recent
inflation. Similarly, we include the PPI inflation rate over the preceding twelve months for the firm’s
industry.5 Again, one might expect that firms in industries where prices have gone up more rapidly would
extrapolate these patterns to the broader economy leading to larger errors over recent inflation dynamics.
Rational inattention motives suggest an opposite effect: firms who have raised their prices by more (or who
are in industries where prices have gone up by more) face higher incentives to track economic conditions
because of this greater volatility, potentially leading to smaller errors about recent inflation. We also include
firms’ reports about the expected size of their next price change as well as the number of months until they
expect to change their price next. There is a clear rational inattention interpretation for the latter: firms have
an incentive to collect information prior to changing prices (e.g. Gorodnichenko 2008, Alvarez et al. 2011)
so one would expect firms which report short durations until the next price change to have more precise
information about economic conditions. An alternative source of correlation with these variables could be
going in the opposite direction: if firms think inflation has been high, then they should be more likely to
change their prices sooner and by more. This channel would induce a positive correlation between inflation
errors (since these are almost exclusively driven by beliefs of high inflation) and the expected size of price
changes and negative correlation between inflation errors and expected durations until the next price change.
         The fourth and final group of variables focuses on the characteristics of the individual respondent
rather than the firm. These include the age of the respondent, income, education, and tenure at the firm.6
Unlike all other variables, which were collected in the first wave of the survey, personal characteristics of
respondents were collected in the third wave are therefore available only for a subset of firms. We therefore
present results excluding individual characteristics but using all firms in the first wave in Table 4 (columns
1-2), results using only individual characteristics of respondents (columns 3-4) for firms participating in the

5
  PPI inflation rates are not made available at a consistent aggregation level. We use the most detailed level of
industry inflation rates available for each firm. For some firms, these inflation rates are available at a more
disaggregated level than the sub-industry sector while for others, inflation rates are available only at more
aggregated levels than our sub-industry classification.
6
  Respondents are asked to report their income by choosing one of six income bins. We construct a continuous
variable by assigning the mid-point of each income bin.

                                                                                                               16
third wave, and results using all variables (columns 5-6). In each case, we use the absolute value of inflation
errors made by firms in the first wave as the dependent variable since some control variables (such as
expected duration until next price change) are not time-invariant and were only measured in the first wave
of the survey.
        As documented in Table 4, the correlations in the data are broadly supportive of rational
inattention motives. We find negative correlations between firms’ and industry inflation rates and the size
of firms’ inflation errors, consistent with firms devoting more attention to collecting and processing
macroeconomic information in the face of more volatile price changes. The correlation between inflation
errors and the expected duration until the next price change is negative, again as suggested by rational
inattention motives. The coefficient on the slope of the profit function is negative, such that firms with
steeper slopes in their profit functions have better information on average. Firms facing more competitors
also make smaller errors on average. These results are robust to including sub-industry fixed effects and
controlling for individual characteristics of respondents and therefore point squarely toward rational
inattention motives in firms’ decision about tracking inflation dynamics.
        Two other results stand out from Table 4. First, larger firms make systematically larger errors
about inflation, even after controlling for other firm or industry characteristics. However, firms in New
Zealand are much smaller on average than firms in larger economies like the U.S. (for example, the
largest firm in our sample has 698 employees), so it is unclear to what extent this result would apply in
other countries. Second, the personal characteristics of respondents play little role in determining inflation
errors once firm-level characteristics are included. This may reflect selection issues, since all respondents
are general managers of firms and thus are not representative of the broader population, in which
household surveys typically reveal systematic differences in beliefs about inflation according to
individual characteristics.


3.3    Persistence of Inattention
Because our data has a panel component, we can assess the average persistence of inattention among
firms, i.e. do firms with bigger errors in one period also tend to make bigger errors in the following
period? To assess the persistence of inattention, we regress firms’ absolute errors in later survey waves on
the absolute errors they made in the previous waves:
            −        =    +          −             +     +                                            (3.2)
where x is the variable being predicted by firms,        denotes firm i’s belief (nowcast or backcast) about
variable x, and δj is a fixed effect for the industry or sub-industry.
        Panels A and B of Table 5 presents results using beliefs about inflation over the last twelve
months across the first two waves of the survey as well as between the first and fourth waves (no question
about inflation backcasts was asked in the third wave). Without fixed effects, we find a persistence level

                                                                                                              17
of 0.60, with over 30% of the variation in inattention in the first follow-up survey being predictable given
inattention in the initial survey. With the average time between waves 1 and 2 of the survey being 5
months, an estimate of 0.60 in the persistence of inflation errors at this frequency is equivalent to a
quarterly rate of 0.74, almost identical to the convergence rate of 12-month ahead inflation forecast errors
made by consumers in the Michigan Survey of Consumers (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2012). The
persistence parameter declines to 0.39 with industry or sub-industry fixed effects, but is even higher when
we use sampling weights (0.72). The estimates are systematically lower in Panel B when we compare
errors in the fourth wave to those in the first wave, which reflects the longer time span between these
waves.
         In Panel C, we reproduce these results using beliefs about the contemporaneous output gap from
the first two waves of the survey. The estimated persistence of inattention is now between 0.5 and 0.6
depending on the specification, and past errors account for over forty percent of the cross-sectional
variation in errors during the follow-up survey. Panel D presents equivalent results for errors about
unemployment between the second and fourth waves, again yielding even higher estimates of the
persistence in inattention. In all cases, the persistence of inattention is statistically significantly different
from zero at the 1% level.
         While previous work has studied the persistence of forecast errors by different agents (e.g.
Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2012, 2014), this survey is unique in that it allows us to characterize the
persistence in firms’ inattention to past and current macroeconomic conditions, yielding the result that
there seems to be only slow convergence in beliefs about past and current macroeconomic variables. This
gradual convergence in beliefs even about past or current macroeconomic conditions is consistent with
models in which agents are subject to information frictions limiting agents’ ability or willingness to track
recent economic developments, as in sticky information models (Mankiw and Reis 2002) or noisy
information models (Woodford 2001, Sims 2003).


4      Beliefs about future macroeconomic conditions
The previous section characterizes the dispersion in beliefs among firms about recent macroeconomic
conditions. In this section, we turn to firms’ forecasts of future macroeconomic outcomes. We first
describe how the macroeconomic forecasts of firms compare to those of other agents in New Zealand.
Second, we discuss how differences in beliefs about recent economic conditions relate to differences in
forecasts about future economic outcomes. Third, we describe a unique experiment that illustrates how
firms adjust their forecasts when presented with new information.


4.1     The Macroeconomic Forecasts and Firms and Other Economic Agents
In Table 6, we report means and standard deviations of macroeconomic forecasts, both from firms in our
survey as well as other agents’ forecasts for New Zealand over the same periods. In December 2013, the

                                                                                                              18
Reserve Bank of New Zealand was predicting that annual CPI inflation for September 2014 would be
1.3%, just slightly below the 1.5% annual CPI inflation rate experienced over the preceding twelve
months. Professional forecasters included in the December 2013 Consensus Economic survey for New
Zealand were forecasting annual CPI inflation of 2.0% over the next twelve months. The cross-sectional
standard deviation of these forecasts was very low, at 0.2%, indicating widespread agreement among
professional forecasters about the likely future dynamics of inflation. Household forecasts of 1-year ahead
annual inflation are available from a quarterly survey of 1,000 households run by the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand. Reported values from this survey are trimmed, dropping all inflation forecasts above 15%
and below -2%. In the December 2013 survey, households in New Zealand were on average forecasting
an inflation rate of 3.4%, with a much higher level of disagreement indicated by a cross-sectional standard
deviation of 2.0%. The much wider disagreement in inflation forecasts among households than for
professional forecasters has been widely documented in the literature, especially for the U.S. (e.g.
Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers, 2003). The higher mean of household inflation forecasts, which is also
observed in the U.S. over the same time period, is another unique characteristic of household forecasts,
although this difference is not always historically present and appears to be driven largely by gasoline
price movements (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015).
        We find that the mean forecast of inflation among firms, after applying the same trimming
procedure as that used for households, was 5.3%, with a cross-sectional standard deviation of 3.1%. Thus,
firms in New Zealand, at least during this time period, exhibited the same upward bias in inflation
forecasts as households relative to professional forecasters and the same characteristic of widespread
disagreement. This is despite nearly twenty-five years of official inflation targeting on the part of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. These large disparities in means and dispersion also suggest that
professional forecasts are unlikely to be representative of firms’ macroeconomic beliefs. The same
qualitative results obtain using the follow-up surveys: the mean forecast and the standard deviation of
firm inflation beliefs are both significantly higher than what is observed for professional forecasters.
        Table 6 also reports means and standard deviations of forecasts from the second wave for other
macroeconomic variables, including interest rates, the unemployment rate and the growth rate of real GDP.
Unfortunately, no household forecasts of these variables are available for households in New Zealand, so we
can only compare forecasts of firms to those of professional forecasters and the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand. For unemployment rates, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand projected in its March 2014 Monetary
Policy Report that the unemployment rate in March 2015 would decline to 4.9%, from its value of 6.0% in
December 2013. Professional forecasters in March 2014 were predicting an unemployment rate of 5.3%,
again with very little disagreement as displayed by a standard deviation of only 0.3%. In contrast, while
firms in the follow-up survey were predicting a mean unemployment rate twelve months later of 5.2%, there
was again much more disagreement among firms than professionals, with a standard deviation of firm

                                                                                                           19
forecasts of 1.2%. Very similar results obtain for the expected change in interest rates over the next twelve
months or the expected annual growth in real GDP over the next twelve months: in both cases, mean
forecasts of firms and professionals are broadly similar, but the disagreement among firms is much larger.7
Nonetheless, it is clear that inflation forecasts present the largest disparities between firms and professionals.
         These properties of firms’ inflation forecasts are insensitive to the wording of the question. The
specific phrasing that we use is: “During the next twelve months, by how much do you think prices will
change overall in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms” whereas surveys of
professional forecasters typically ask for predicted inflation rates rather than “changes in prices”. Bruine
de Bruin et al. (2012) and Drager and Fritsche (2013) find that inflation expectations of households are
higher and more dispersed when they are asked about “overall price changes” rather than “inflation rates”,
so one reason for the extra heterogeneity in firm forecasts could be if this wording choice is important. To
investigate this possibility, we presented a different language for the inflation question to 100 firms in the
first follow-up survey, specifically asking firms: “During the next twelve months, what will be the overall
inflation rate in the economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.” As documented in more
detail in Appendix 4, we find no evidence that firms who were presented this alternative language in the
follow-up survey either had different inflation expectations at that period or changed their expectations
between the two surveys by an unusual amount. This result obtains both for forecasts and backcasts of
inflation.
         Another possible source of variation is the use of point forecasts. Engelberg, Manski and
Williams (2009) find that there can sometime be significant differences between the point estimates and
the means from forecasters’ probability distributions, and that it is better to construct point forecasts from
agents’ responses to questions about possible distributions of outcomes. In the first follow-up survey, we
asked all firms to assign probabilities to different bins of inflation outcomes as well as to provide point
forecasts of inflation. After constructing the implied point forecasts from the probability distributions and
comparing them to the explicit point forecasts, we find a strong positive correlation between firms’ point
forecasts and those extracted from the distribution, with a slope coefficient of close to 1, as documented
in Appendix 5. In short, we find little evidence that the properties of firms’ inflation forecasts are
sensitive to the language of the survey or the use of point vs distributional forecasts.
         However, there is a pronounced difference in terms of firms’ expectations of overall inflation
versus their expectations of their own future price changes or changes in their unit costs. In the second
follow-up survey (wave #3), firms were asked about their expectations of aggregate price changes in the

7
  We focus on forecasts of the change in interest rates because interest rate forecasts by the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand and Consensus Economics are for a 90-day interest rate, while the survey question posed to firms inquired
about a 1-year interest rate. For firms’ forecasts of real GDP, the survey did not ask for a point forecast but rather for
firms to assign probabilities to different outcomes (see Appendix 1). We use midpoints of each bin, a maximum real
GDP growth of 6% (for the top bin), and a minimum growth of GDP of -1% (for the bottom bin) to construct point
forecasts of real GDP growth for each firm.

                                                                                                                       20
economy as well as about their expectations of changes in their own unit costs over the same time
horizon. As documented in Appendix 6, the correlation between their answers to these two questions is
essentially zero. This means that correctly measuring firms’ expectations of aggregate inflation requires
the survey to explicitly ask firms about their expectations about aggregate inflation, and that one cannot
draw any immediate inference about their aggregate expectations from their expectations over their own
price changes or unit costs. Some surveys of firms, such as the Business Inflation Expectations survey of
the Atlanta Federal Reserve, unfortunately ask firms only about expectations over their own unit costs and
not about their expectations of aggregate inflation. The absence of any correlation between the two
suggests that these surveys are largely uninformative about firms’ beliefs about aggregate inflation.
        The cross-sectional differences in beliefs about future inflation that we document are important, in
the sense that firms appear to incorporate their beliefs about future inflation into their economic decisions.
Specifically, we asked firms in the third wave the following four hypotheticals, one for each of prices,
employment, investment and wage decisions: “If you thought overall prices in the economy over the next
12 months were going to rise by more than what you are currently forecasting, would you: a) be more
likely to increase your (prices/employment/investment/wages), b) no change, c) more likely to decrease
your (prices/employment/investment/wages).” Approximately 75 percent of firms reported that higher
inflation expectations would affect at least one of their economic decisions. Appendix Table 1 documents
the breakdown of individual answers. Higher inflation expectations induce 25-35% of firms to report that
they are more likely to increase prices, employment, investment, and/or wages. The correlation amongst
the answers to these questions is typically low, however, so most firms would not adjust their decisions
along more than one or two of these margins. But firms’ responses to these questions suggest that their
inflation expectations do have a direct impact on their economic decisions.


4.2   Beliefs about the Past and Beliefs about the Future
What accounts for the pronounced heterogeneity in firm forecasts relative to those of professional
forecasters? Jonung (1981) documents that in a survey of Swedish households from 1978, those
households who believed recent inflation to have been higher than other households also tended to have
higher forecasts of future inflation. Armantier et al. (2012) find similar patterns in a 2011 survey of U.S.
households. One natural hypothesis in light of this prior work is that firms’ different beliefs about future
economic conditions reflect in part their different beliefs about recent economic activity. To assess this
possibility, we estimate the following regressions:
                 =    +         +    +                                                               (4.1)
where           denotes the 12-month ahead forecast of firm i for variable x, which we regress on the
firm’s belief (nowcast or backcast) about recent values of that variable (       ) allowing for sub-industry
fixed effects ( ). We implement these regressions using each macroeconomic variable and survey wave

                                                                                                             21
for which we have both backcasts and forecasts and present results in Table 7. For inflation and
unemployment, two or more survey waves are available, so we also estimate a version of this
specification augmented with firm-level fixed effects using each of the waves available. In all cases but
one (inflation in wave #2), we find statistically significant positive correlations between beliefs about
recent values and firms’ forecasts of future economic outcomes, including in specifications with firm-
level fixed effects. These results corroborate the findings of Jonung (1981) that differences in beliefs
about past economic conditions play an important role in accounting for differences in beliefs about the
future, but in this case for firms.
        Another way to assess the role played by different information sets is to compare the distribution
of inflation forecasts for “informed” firms, i.e. those with absolute errors about recent inflation of less
than 2 percentage points, with that for “uninformed” firms. This is illustrated in Panel A of Figure 4,
using data from the first wave of the survey. The distribution of forecasts for informed firms is much
more concentrated than that for uninformed firms, with the latter having a much more pronounced tail of
very high inflation forecasts, a pattern which is repeated in each wave of the survey. Few firms that are
aware of recent inflation levels predict inflation rates above 10%, in contrast to uninformed firms. But as
noted in Table 5, inattention to recent inflation by firms varies over time. If we classify firms as informed
and uninformed using their errors in the first wave of the survey and compare the distributions of inflation
forecasts of these two groups in the fourth wave, as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 4, we find that the two
distributions are much closer to each other than in the first wave. This suggests that as firms’ information
about recent inflation dynamics evolves over time, their forecasts change as well. In the next section, we
test this notion using an experimental design.
        This strong correlation between beliefs about the past and forecasts of the future implies that the
same forces which account for the heterogeneity in beliefs about recent inflation also account for much of
the variation in beliefs about future inflation. We illustrate this in Figure 5 for the three rational
inattention variables which had significant effects on the size of inflation backcast errors in Table 4. In the
figure, we show both average backcasts and forecasts of inflation for firms grouped by each of these
characteristics: number of competitors, duration until the next price change, and slope of the profit
function. Firms which face more competitors, firms which expect to change their prices sooner, and firms
with steeper profit functions have not only lower backcasts of inflation on average but also lower
forecasts.


4.3    How Firms Revise their Forecasts with New Information
The robust link between firms’ beliefs about the past and their forecasts of the future suggests that
different information sets play a leading role in accounting for the heterogeneity in macroeconomic
forecasts of firms. A key question is therefore how firms adjust their forecasts when they receive new


                                                                                                            22
information. We investigate this question using an experimental approach. Specifically, firms in the
fourth wave of the survey were asked to assign probabilities to different outcomes for future inflation,
output growth and unemployment rates, from which we can compute their mean forecasts and the
uncertainty surrounding these forecasts. 700 firms were then randomly allocated to one of 7 groups of 100
firms each which were treated with additional information about the economy. After receiving this
information, firms were asked for a point forecast for the variable about which they received the
information, allowing us to measure the extent to which they revised their forecasts in response to new
information. The remainder of the firms did not receive additional information.
        There were two groups of firms which received information about unemployment rates or GDP
growth. For each of these groups, firms were told the most recent outcomes for one of these two variables
(the most recent unemployment rate was 5.4% or the most recent annual real GDP growth rate was 3.9%).
The remaining five groups were provided with information about inflation: 1) the most recent
professional forecast of inflation over the next twelve months (2.0%), 2) the central bank’s inflation target
(2%), 3) both the professional forecast and the central bank’s inflation target, 4) the most recent value of
inflation (1.0%), and 5) the average inflation forecast of other firms in the survey (4.9%). Firms in each
treatment group received only one piece of additional information.
        Figure 6 plots, for each macroeconomic variable, the priors of each firm against their posteriors
after receiving the information. Firms whose beliefs were above average tended to revise their forecasts
down while those whose beliefs were below average tended to revise their forecasts up, as indicated by
the regression lines having slopes of less than one. This pattern is what one would expect if firms engage
in Bayesian learning.
        To see the workings of Bayesian learning more formally, suppose firm i has prior with mean
and precision    (one can relate precision to the standard deviation of the “forecast/nowcast error”         =
1/   ). We assume that the prior is normally distributed. Each firm receives a common signal (this is
equivalent to the information treatment in each group) with precision      . The precision can vary with the
type of signal depending on, for example, the credibility that firms attribute to the source. We assume that
the signal is also normally distributed. Firms use Bayesian updating to obtain posterior ! :
                    "#                               "#
        ! =     +"       &   −   ' ⟹ &! −      '=         &   −   '.                                 (4.2)
                    # $%                            "# $%

Firms should revise their forecasts in the direction of the signal and should do so by more when the signal
they receive is further from their prior. This revision should also be larger when the source of the signal is
more credible, i.e. interpreted as having a greater precision     .
        We can evaluate this insight more formally using the following regression:
        ! =*+           +                                                                            (4.3)




                                                                                                             23
where we present estimates pooled across the different inflation treatment groups (with fixed effects for
                                                                                                         "#
each treatment group), as well as for each group separately. In this specification,           =1−             and the
                                                                                                     "# $%

constant term absorbs the common signal. Panel A of Table 8 and Figure 6 show that the pooled estimate
of    for inflation is 0.31, much lower than the estimates of 0.76 and 0.69 for unemployment and GDP
growth respectively. Thus, the sensitivity of firms’ inflation beliefs to new information is much higher
than it is for real macroeconomic variables. This does not appear to reflect the source of the information:
when we estimate the sensitivity of inflation revisions to information about the most recent values
(equivalent to the information provided about unemployment and GDP growth), the coefficient is similar.
         There is considerable variation in the sensitivity of inflation forecast revisions depending on the
source of the information. Firms revised their forecasts by the most when presented with information
about the central bank’s inflation target or recent inflation values, and responded by less when presented
with professional forecasts and even less so with the forecasts of other firms in the survey. This suggests
that firms assign the highest precision to the signal about the central bank’s inflation target and recent
inflation dynamics, more so than to predictions of professional forecasters or those of other firms.
         A related prediction of Bayesian updating is that the precision of the firm’s prior also matters in
determining by how much it revises its forecast in light of new information. To demonstrate this intuition
formally, we can approximate the revision in firm forecasts as
                 /% 0%
         log .           1 = − " × 345 6 + ℎ. . 8.                                                            (4.4)
                   0%           #        %


Firms with more uncertainty about their priors (high            ) should revise their forecasts by more for a given
difference between the signal and their prior. This effect should be weaker when the precision of the
signal is high. In the limit, if the signal is perfectly informative, the prior uncertainty does not matter as
                             /% 0%
! =     and hence log .            1   = 0. We examine this prediction using the following regression:
                                0%
         /% 0%
                 =*+           +                                                                              (4.5)
           0%

where we expect β > 0 and to be lower for signals that are associated with higher levels of credibility.
With the exception of GDP growth, we indeed find that firms with more uncertainty about their priors
tend to revise their forecasts by more, as illustrated in Panel B of Table 8. In addition, the magnitudes of
the coefficients conform to those found in the previous set of regressions: the implied precision of the
signal is highest when firms are told about the central bank’s inflation target and lowest when they are
told of other firms’ forecasts.
         In short, when presented with new macroeconomic information, firms update their beliefs in a
Bayesian manner, both in that they revise their forecasts toward the signal they receive and do so more
when they are more uncertain. This updating is particularly strong for inflation forecasts, which likely



                                                                                                                      24
reflects the lack of information firms seem to have about recent inflation dynamics and the high levels of
uncertainty that they report around their forecasts.


5          How Do Firms Seek Out New Information?
We now turn to why firms have more precise information about some variables than others. We first
focus on which variables firms report as being important to their business decisions and how this
correlates with the errors firms make about these variables. We then investigate which macroeconomic
variables firms actually track and the ways in which they acquire information about economic conditions.
Finally, we consider the degree of strategic complementarity in firm decisions and how this relates to
their information acquisition decisions.


5.1        Which Variables Do Firms Care About?
In rational inattention models (e.g. Mackowiack and Wiederholt 2009), agents face limited information
processing capacity and endogenously choose how to allocate these limited resources to tracking
information which most matters for their objective function. In such a setting, one would expect firms to
be therefore have better information about recent values of the variables that affect their profits more. In
the fourth wave of the survey, firms were asked to rank inflation, GDP and unemployment in terms of
their importance for firms’ business decisions. Approximately half of firms ranked inflation as the least
important variable among the three while just over a third ranked it as most important. GDP was the most
commonly top-ranked macroeconomic variable.
           We can utilize these firm rankings of the relative importance of different macroeconomic
variables to determine whether a variable’s relative importance to a firm’s business decisions is reflected
in the quality of the firm’s information about that variable. For each possible pair of macroeconomic
variables (among inflation, unemployment and GDP), we create two metrics to capture their relative
importance to firm i. The first is a dummy variable equal to one if firm i identifies variable X as more
important than variable Y and zero otherwise. The second is the difference between the rank of variable X
and the rank of variable Y. We use each of these metrics as an explanatory variable in regressions where
the dependent variable is either the relative uncertainty in forecasts about the two variables reported by
              4:
firms, log 3 %; 6 , or the relative size of backcast errors made by firms about the two variables,
            4   %

     |= ?      ?    |
log . |=> >@A >@A| 1.   Note that given the structure of the survey, we compare uncertainty and inattention
        > B>@A B>@A

across variables within a firm and thus one can interpret these regressions as controlling for firm fixed
effects.
           Using either the relative uncertainty in forecasts (Panel A, Table 9) or the relative size of backcast
errors (Panel B, Table 9) as well as either metric for the relative rank of two macroeconomic variables, we

                                                                                                              25
find robust evidence that when firms rank one variable as more important than another for their business
decisions, then they tend to have better knowledge of recent dynamics of that variable and have less
uncertain forecasts of that variable. The only exception is when comparing the effect of UE and GDP
relative ranks on the relative uncertainty surrounding firms’ forecasts of these variables, in which case the
estimates are not significantly different from zero (they are statistically significant in the case of relative
backcast errors). Jointly, these results are supportive of rational inattention channels through which firms
have better knowledge of those variables which matter for their objective functions.


5.2     Which Variables Do Firms Track and How?
Better knowledge of those variables which matter more for firms’ business decisions could reflect an
endogenous information acquisition decision or it could reflect stronger procyclicality in a firm’s
production. To assess whether the previous results reflect firms choosing to collect more information
about specific macroeconomic variables, we asked them to identify which macroeconomic variables (out
of inflation, unemployment and GDP) they keep track of. The responses are summarized in Table 10.
Approximately 60 percent of firms report that they do not track inflation, compared to only 21 percent of
firms who report not tracking GDP. Hence, consistent with what firms reported about the relative
importance of macroeconomic variables to their business decisions, inflation is tracked by a much smaller
fraction of firms than real variables like GDP. In fact, the modal answer (32% of firms) is that they track
both unemployment and GDP but not inflation. Conditional on tracking multiple variables, the vast
majority of firms (over 90%; column 2, Table 10) try to synchronize their acquisition of information
across the variables they track. This feature of the data is strongly predicted by the canonical sticky
information model where updates of information are perfectly synchronized across variables. It is
consistent with noisy information models in which firms track variables continuously and thus obtain new
information about macroeconomic aggregates at the same time.
        The mapping between firms’ answers as to which variables they track and the relative importance
of different macroeconomic variables is summarized in Table 11 and illustrates the consistency of
answers across these questions. For example, of the firms who reported that inflation was the most
important out of the three macroeconomic variables for their business decisions, 99% of them reported
that they track inflation. Similarly, 98% of the firms who ranked inflation as the least important of the
three macroeconomic variables choose not to track inflation dynamics. Interestingly, of the firms who
rank inflation as second most important to their business decisions, only one in five actually report
tracking inflation. This is significantly at odds with what we observe for unemployment and GDP, where
even among firms who rank these variables as least important, around 50% of them still track that
variable.



                                                                                                            26
        These answers do not appear to be cheap talk on the part of firms, as the answers that they
provide are very strongly associated with the forecasts and backcasts that they report. Table 12 presents
the mean size of backcast errors for each variable depending on whether firms reported tracking that
variable or not, as well as corresponding mean forecasts and mean uncertainty around the forecasts. There
are pronounced differences between firms that report tracking a variable and those that do not, especially
for inflation. Firms that track inflation have average absolute backcast errors of approximately one
percentage point compared to an average error of five percentage points for those which do not track
inflation. Differences in average forecasts of inflation are also very pronounced: firms that track inflation
have an average year-ahead forecast of 3.5% while those that do not track inflation forecast inflation of
5.9% on average with higher levels of uncertainty around their forecasts. Thus, the endogenous decisions
of firms as to whether or not to track a macroeconomic variable have profound consequences on their
knowledge about this variable’s recent dynamics and future values.
        One reason why only those firms which rank inflation highest in importance for their business
decisions may choose to track inflation is that firms seem to value synchronized information updates. As
documented in Table 10, firms which track more than one macroeconomic variable systematically prefer
to update their information about each variable simultaneously (over 90%). Because information about
inflation often comes in news articles that are distinct from those about GDP and unemployment, some
firms may not find the additional effort to collect information about inflation in addition to one or both of
these real variables worthwhile unless they view inflation as the most important macroeconomic variable
for their business decisions.
        One can also relate a firm’s decision about whether or not to track inflation or the relative rank of
inflation in terms of their business decisions to observable and time-invariant characteristics of firms and
managers, as done in section 3.2 to explain the size of errors about recent inflation made by firms.
Because inflation backcast errors and a firm’s decision about whether or not to track inflation are so
highly correlated, as documented in Table 12, the results are qualitatively similar (see Appendix Table
5.2) in that rational inattention forces go a long way in accounting for how important firms view inflation
or whether they track inflation. Firms facing more competitors and firms with lower average profit
margins are more likely to track inflation and to view inflation as important to their business decisions.
We also find that firms for which foreign sales account for a larger share of revenues are less likely to
track inflation in New Zealand, as are firms which receive larger shares of their revenues from long-term
contracts. The personal characteristics remain statistically insignificant predictors of firms’ decision to
track inflation, and industry-fixed effects add little once these other explanatory variables have been
accounted for. In short, much of the cross-sectional variation in firms’ knowledge of recent inflation
dynamics can be reconciled with rational inattention motives.



                                                                                                          27
         In addition to choosing which macroeconomic variables to track and whether to synchronize their
updating about different variables, firms must decide when to collect new information. To better try and
understand the circumstances that induce firms to seek out information, we presented them with two
hypothetical questions. One was if they heard bad news about the economy on TV, would they be more or
less likely to look for more information? This question targets whether there is state-dependence in the
acquisition of information (if they say it is more likely), or whether information updating is time-
dependent (if they say it makes no difference). The results, presented in Table 13, strongly support state-
dependence in the information updating process: over 75% of firms report that they are much more likely
or somewhat more likely to seek our new information when they receive bad news about the economy.
This evidence is in line with the lower levels of information rigidity identified during recessions in
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011).
         The second question firms were asked was if they heard good news about the economy on TV,
would they be more or less likely to look for more information? This question targets not just state-
dependence of information acquisition but also its symmetry. The results, presented in Table 13, are the
opposite of those found in response to bad economic news: over 60% of firms report that they are much
less or somewhat less likely to seek out more information in response to good economic news. This
evidence points toward strong asymmetry in firms’ information acquisition over the course of the
business cycle, with firms actively looking for more information during downturns when news are bad
but relying on their more outdated information during booms when news are good.


5.3      Strategic Complementarity
Another important channel emphasized in the literature on firms’ information acquisition is strategic
complementarity in price setting. When firms place more weight on the decisions of others, this should
affect their information acquisition decisions as well. For example, firms with higher levels of strategic
complementarity should prefer to receive signals which are received by others (“common signal”) over
signals that are available only to themselves (“private signal”), since the common signal also provides
information about the likely actions of other firms.
         Our survey data allows us to measure one important component of the strategic complementarity
faced by firms, namely how sensitive their revenues are to competitors’ price changes, by asking them the
following hypothetical question: “Suppose a typical firm in your industry cuts its price by 10%, by how
much would your sales be affected?” The average response to this question is a decline in sales of 7%.
We can also determine firms’ preferences for signals which only they observe versus signals received by
other firms by asking firms which signal they would prefer.8 75 percent of firms reported that they would

8
 The survey question is, “Suppose that there are two sources of information about the state of the economy. These
sources are equally informative/useful, but they can give different signals about the state of the economy (that is,

                                                                                                                   28
prefer to receive the common signal. To assess whether higher levels of strategic interaction lead firms to
prefer public signals, we regress one on the other and present results in Panel A of Table 14. Regardless
of whether we control for industry fixed effects or include firm-specific and manager-specific controls,
we find a robust positive correlation between the degree of strategic complementarity faced by firms and
their preference for a common signal. This provides unique and direct evidence for the effects of strategic
interaction on firms’ choice of signals, as emphasized in Hellwig and Veldkamp (2009).
         A related prediction from Gorodnichenko (2008) is that firms facing uncertainty about the state
will tend to wait for other firms to act instead of immediately changing their prices when there is strategic
complementarity in price setting, since they can extract information about the state from the actions of
others. Firms in the survey were asked “Suppose you want to adjust your prices but are uncertain about
the state of the economy, what would you do?” Firms selecting the answer “wait until other firms make a
price adjustment” would then be acting in the way predicted by the model. Using a dummy variable equal
to one when firms select this answer and zero otherwise, we find (Panel B of Table 14) that firms with
higher levels of strategic complementarity are more likely to report that they would prefer to wait for
other firms to adjust their prices, as predicted by the theory. This supports theories of inertia in prices that
rely on the notion that information from other firms’ prices does not rapidly diffuse through the economy
because each firm is waiting for others to adjust their prices first.
         A third implication of this class of models is that, when strategic complementarity is high,
another firm’s price change is more informative about aggregate conditions than when strategic
complementarity is low. This is because other firms also have an incentive to wait to change their prices
and therefore tend to do so only when they have strong information about the economy. As a result, firms
should draw stronger inferences from the price changes of others when everyone has an incentive to delay
their own actions. We can assess this prediction using another question from the survey: “Suppose your
main competitor raises its price by 10%, by how much would you revise your expectation of inflation
over the next twelve months?” We regress answers to this question on the dummy variable for whether
firms prefer to wait until other firms change their prices. The results, presented in Panel C of Table 14,
point toward a significantly positive correlation between firms’ desire to wait for other firms to change
prices first and the inference they draw from their competitors’ price changes, as suggested by the theory.
         These results therefore provide novel and direct evidence for models in which the gradual
diffusion of information and price stickiness interact to delay the response of the economy to shocks when
strategic complementarity is high. The latter induces firms to focus on public signals and rely on other
firms’ price changes as a source of information. As firms become more reticent to change prices, any firm


they can disagree). In addition, the first source can be seen by other firms in your industry while the second source is
available only to you. You can see only one source. Which source would you pick?” The possible answers are “The
source that can be seen by other firms” and “The source that can be seen only by you.”

                                                                                                                     29
that does change its price is therefore providing a stronger signal to other firms about fundamentals. Each
of these channels is supported by the survey data in a direct and transparent manner that illustrates the
usefulness of surveys of firms.


6       Conclusion
Using a novel survey of firms’ macroeconomic expectations, we document a number of new stylized facts
about firms’ beliefs. One such fact is that disagreement among firms is pervasive and much larger than that
among professional forecasters, both about past and future macroeconomic conditions. This disagreement
about macroeconomic conditions resembles that among households along a number of dimensions, such as
its size, its persistence, and its asymmetry. Nearly twenty five years after the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand became the first country to officially adopt an inflation target, we find little evidence that firms
fully grasp the stability that has characterized inflation dynamics in New Zealand.
        Inattention among firms varies along some dimensions predicted by the theory. Specifically, much
of this inattention to macroeconomic conditions appears related to firms’ incentives to collect and process
macroeconomic information, as predicted by models of rational inattention in which firms face costs or
frictions in collecting and processing information. For example, firms facing more competition or important
pricing decisions in the near future having better information overall. And firms facing steeper profit
functions, for whom information should thus be more valuable, also have better information on average.
        While we document pervasive inattention by firms to different macroeconomic variables,
aggregate inflation stands out as the variable about which firms seem least well-informed on average.
Many firms view inflation as unimportant to their business decisions and choose not to track its recent
values, leading to large misperceptions about recent inflation dynamics and forecasts that are far out of
line with historical values, even though they display significant knowledge about industry-specific price
changes. While firms respond in a Bayesian manner to new information about inflation, they seem to find
little incentive to seek out this information themselves, except when news reports are negative. Since
negative news reports about inflation tend to occur when inflation is unusually high, this may account for
why firms’ average beliefs about inflation, like those of households, are so much higher than those of
professional forecasters.
        One potential implication of these results is that firms’ expectations, especially about inflation,
may not be nearly as well “anchored” as has been recently emphasized (e.g. Bernanke 2010). This could
be problematic for policymakers for a number of reasons. First, there is little data currently available on
firms’ expectations for policymakers to track. Second, the wide dispersion in firms’ and households’
beliefs suggests that the average degree of inattention to economic conditions, and especially inflation
trends, is high among these agents. To the extent that monetary policymakers have recently been relying
upon policies whose key transmission mechanism is supposed to be inflation expectations, the outlook for


                                                                                                         30
such policies working effectively is likely limited. A third implication is that the willingness of monetary
policymakers to engage in non-traditional actions at the zero-bound is in part based on their view that
agents’ expectations are well-anchored, so that there is little concern about expectations becoming
unmoored in the long-run by these actions. But if expectations are not nearly as anchored as posited by
policymakers, then the potential risks of these policies may well have been underestimated.


References
Andrade, Philippe, and Herve Le Bihan, 2013. “Inattentive Professional Forecasters.” Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 60(8), pages 967-982
Alvarez, Fernando E., Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello, 2011. “Optimal Price Setting with
      Observation and Menu Costs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 1909-1960.
Armantier, Olivier, Scott Nelson, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar, 2012. “The
         Price is Right: Updating Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information Experiment,”
         manuscript.
Bachmann, Rudiger and Steffen Elstner, 2013. “Firms’ Optimism and Pessimism,” manuscript.
Bernanke, Ben, 2010. “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the Federal
         Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27, 2010.
Bruine de Bruin, W., W. van der Klaauw, G. Topa, J. S. Down, and O. Armantier, 2012. “The effect of
      question wording on consumers' reported inflation expectations,” Journal of Economic Psychology
      33, 749-757.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2003. “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(February): 269-298.
Carvalho, Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, 2014. “Do People Understand Monetary Policy?” Journal of
      Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us About
      Informational Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy 120, 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
      Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts,” forthcoming in American Economic Review
      (NBER WP 16537).
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
      Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal –
      Macroeconomics 7, 197-232
Drager, Lena and Ulrich Fritsche, 2013. “Don’t Worry, Be Right! Survey Wording Effects on Inflation
      Perceptions and Expectations,” DEP Discussion Papers, Macroeconomics and Finance Series, 8/2013.
Engelberg, Joseph, Charles F. Manski, and Jared Williams, 2009. “Comparing the Point Predictions and
      Subjective Probability Distributions of Professional Forecasters,” Journal of Business and Economic
      Statistics, 27(1), 30-41.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy. 2008. “Endogenous Information, Menu Costs, and Inflation Persistence,” NBER
      Working Paper no. w14184.
Jonung, Lars, 1981. “Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden,” American Economic Review,
      71(5), 961-968.
Hellwig, Christian, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009. "Knowing What Others Know: Coordination Motives in
      Information Acquisition," Review of Economic Studies 76(1), 223-251.
Lucas, Robert E. 1972. “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money.” Journal of Economic Theory 4(April):
      103-124.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention.”
      American Economic Review 99(June): 769-803.



                                                                                                         31
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
      Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(November): 1295-
      1328.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2003. “Disagreement about Inflation Expectations.”
      NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Cambridge, MIT Press, 18: 209-248, 2004.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006. "Inattentive Producers," Review of Economic Studies 73(3), 793-821.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
      50(April): 665-690.
Taylor, J.B., 1980 “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy 88(1),
      1-23.
Woodford, Michael. 2001. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.” published
      in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and
      Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund Phelps, Princeton Univ. Press, 2002.




                                                                                                     32
                                                              Table 1: Summary Statistics from Firm Survey

                                                                                     Firm Characteristics                                           Next Price Change
                                        Number                                                                               Duration              Months
                                                                               Labor’s    Trade     Current   Average                                           Expected
                                        of firms       Age     Employment                                                  between Price          until next
                                                                                Share     Share     Margin    Margin                                              Size
                                                                                                                              Reviews              change
All firms                                3,150         14.5        28.6          48.0       4.4      26.6        32.3           7.4                  5.9          5.6

Manufacturing                             997          16.8        32.7          39.3      10.7      21.3        28.1           6.4                  5.7            5.9
 Chemicals and metals                     213          16.0        32.1          38.4      13.2      22.6        29.0           6.6                  5.9            6.3
 Equipment and machinery                  164          15.9        28.3          38.3      11.3      23.3        28.8           5.7                  5.0            5.9
 Food and beverage                        261          18.3        35.5          40.2      9.0       20.4        27.2           6.0                  5.3            5.6
 Paper/wood, printing and furniture       139          15.3        31.4          39.6      8.0       20.3        28.2           6.6                  6.1            5.5
 Textile and clothing                     220          17.5        34.3          39.6      11.7      20.3        27.6           6.9                  6.1            6.3

Trade                                     837          8.5         23.9          44.5       2.8      20.5        26.8            7.6                 4.5            6.1
 Car, supermarket and food retailing      116          9.5         27.8          40.8       2.4      18.5        26.5           6.3                  2.9            4.8
 Hotel and food services                  305          8.2         25.6          41.3       4.2      16.3        26.8           5.5                  2.8            5.2
 Other store retailing                    181          8.3         22.5          49.5       0.0      25.2        27.9           11.2                 7.2            7.2
 Wholesale trade                          235          8.4         22.3          42.4       5.7      18.5        25.5           5.3                  3.2            6.2

Professional and financial services      1,146         17.0        28.9          57.7       0.6      37.0        41.1           7.6                  6.9            5.0
 Accounting services                      186          18.9        34.6          58.6       0.5      36.3        41.0           7.3                  8.0            4.7
 Finance                                  151          12.8        21.1          56.4       0.0      40.0        44.0           6.7                  6.2            4.1
 Insurance                                156          16.7        28.8          57.0       0.9      39.4        42.5           7.7                  6.7            5.0
 Aux. finance and insurance               125          11.5        20.9          56.9       0.2      40.3        43.5           6.6                  5.0            4.2
 Legal services                           139          21.3        36.5          58.5       1.4      37.5        41.3           8.0                  7.5            4.8
 Rental, hiring and real estate           163          18.4        26.6          59.1       0.3      33.5        37.7           7.9                  6.3            6.0
 All other professional services          226          18.0        30.9          57.5       0.9      34.1        39.1           8.4                  7.5            5.4

Construction and transportation           170          12.6        25.5          50.0       0.0      18.4        24.7           10.8                 8.4            6.2


        Notes: The first column of the table presents the number of firms in each industry and sub-industry category in the main survey (wave #1). Other columns are
        mean values across all firms in each industry or sub-industry of specific variables listed. Sectors in italics are defined as “industries” while sectors not in italics
        are defined as “sub-industries”, with the exception of “Construction and Transportation” which is counted as both. See section 2 for details.




                                                                                                                                                                            33
                    Table 2: Verification of Quality and Consistency of Survey Responses

Industry FE                                                      N               Y               N              N
Sub-Industry FE                                                  N               N               Y              N
Weights                                                          N               N               N              Y
                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)

                      Panel A: Number of price changes over the previous year
Time between price reviews                       -0.203***     -0.200***    -0.204***                      -0.185***
                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)                        (0.005)
Observations                                               3,150            3,150          3,150           3,137
R2                                                         0.670            0.689          0.695           0.639

                   Panel B: Average freq. of price reviews in the follow-up survey
Average frequency of price reviews                0.996***       0.995***      0.993***                    0.997***
                                                  (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.005)                     (0.005)
Observations                                               716              716            716             712
R2                                                         0.976            0.976          0.976           0.984

                              Panel C: Recall price (log) in the follow-up survey
Log price                                              1.002***        1.001***            1.001***        0.998***
                                                       (0.002)         (0.001)             (0.002)         (0.004)
Observations                                               716              716            716             712
R2                                                         0.997            0.997          0.997           0.998

                Panel D: Actual price change between the main and follow-up surveys
Expected price change                            0.952***      0.938***     0.931***                       1.056***
                                                 (0.056)       (0.056)      (0.059)                        (0.058)
Observations                                               375              375            375             374
R2                                                         0.677            0.685          0.690           0.759
Notes: Panel A: the dependent variable is the number of quarterly price changes over the previous year. The maximum
number of price changes is four. The time between price reviews takes values 0.25 (weekly), 1 (monthly), 3 (quarterly), 6
(every size month), 12 (annually), 18 (less frequently than annually). Panel B: the dependent variables is the average
frequency of price reviews reported in the follow-up survey. Panel C: the dependent variable is the price 3 month ago (for
firms surveyed in December 2013 or January 2014) or 6 month ago (for firms surveyed in September 2013, October 2013,
or November 2013) reported in the first follow-up survey. The regressor is the actual price reported in the main survey.
Panel D: the dependent variable is the percent change of current prices reported in waves 1 and 2. The regressor is the
expected percent change in the next price review reported in wave 1. The sample is constrained to firms that had an actual
price change and that expected to have a price review in the next five months. Constant is included but not reported.
Industry and sub-industry fixed effects are as defined in Table 1. Column (4) applies sampling weights. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. See
section 2 for details.




                                                                                                                       34
                                         Table 3: Correlation of Inattention across Macroeconomic Variables

   Survey:                                           Wave 1                            Wave 2                                          Wave 4
   Inattention to:                                                                                                       GDP
                                                      Output            Output        Unempl.         Interest                        Unempl.        Exchange
                                                                                                                        growth
                                                       gap               gap            rate            rate                            rate           rate
                                                                                                                          rate
                                                        (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)

   Abs. Value of Inflation Backcast Errors            0.97***           0.59***        0.02**         0.02*             0.02          -0.01          -0.00
                                                     (0.06)            (0.11)         (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.00)

   N                                                   3,153             716             716            716              1,257          1,257          1,257
   R2                                                   0.18             0.09            0.07           0.03              0.01           0.02          0.01


Notes: The table reports regressions of firms’ absolute errors for variables indicated in the second row on firms’ absolute errors for inflation over preceding
twelve months. The top row indicates which survey wave was used in the analysis. Sub-industry fixed effects (as defined in Table 1) are included but not
reported. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. See section 3.1 for
details.




                                                                                                                                                                 35
                                     Table 4. Determinants of Firm Inattention
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Firm characteristics
    Log(Age)                               0.03          -0.15*                                         0.06          -0.13
                                          (0.09)         (0.09)                                        (0.15)         (0.14)
    Log(Employment)                        0.46***        0.83***                                       0.38**         0.71***
                                          (0.12)         (0.11)                                        (0.17)         (0.15)
    Labor’s share of costs                 0.11***       -0.00                                          0.11***       -0.00
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
    Foreign trade share                   -0.00           0.01***                                       0.00           0.01**
                                          (0.00)         (0.00)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
    Number of Competitors                 -0.02***       -0.02***                                      -0.03***       -0.03***
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
    Avg. margin                            0.07***       -0.01                                          0.09***        0.00
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
    Price rel. to competitors              0.03***        0.01                                          0.02**        -0.00
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)
    Firm’s past price changes             -1.60**        -1.60**                                       -0.62          -0.66
                                          (0.72)         (0.63)                                        (0.94)         (0.87)
    Industry PPI inflation                -0.03***       -0.03***                                      -0.04**        -0.04***
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.02)         (0.01)
    Expected size of price change         -0.03**        -0.01                                         -0.01          -0.00
                                          (0.01)         (0.01)                                        (0.02)         (0.02)
    Duration until price change            0.15***        0.10***                                       0.16***        0.12***
                                          (0.02)         (0.01)                                        (0.02)         (0.02)
    Abs. slope of profit function         -0.44***       -0.46***                                      -0.53***       -0.60***
                                          (0.10)         (0.09)                                        (0.14)         (0.13)
Manager characteristics
   Age                                                                   0.02*           0.00           0.00           0.00
                                                                        (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
    Education:
        Some college                                                     0.65**          0.01           0.29           0.09
                                                                        (0.26)          (0.21)         (0.21)         (0.19)
         College                                                         0.55*           0.14           0.31           0.27
                                                                        (0.32)          (0.25)         (0.27)         (0.24)
         Graduate (MA+)                                                  0.14           -0.26           0.20          -0.02
                                                                        (0.32)          (0.24)         (0.25)         (0.22)
    Tenure                                                               0.11***         0.07***        0.00          -0.01
                                                                        (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)
    Income                                                               0.00            0.00           0.00           0.00
                                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)
Industry FE                                 N              Y              N               Y              N              Y
N                                         3,149          3,149          1,454           1,454          1,453          1,453
R2                                        0.29           0.44            0.05            0.39           0.37           0.49

Notes: Dependent variable is the absolute value of firm errors about past 12-month inflation from Wave #1 survey. Industry
fixed effects are defined as in Table 1. Omitted category for manager’s education is” high school diploma or less.” Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.
See section 3.2 for details.




                                                                                                                             36
                                        Table 5: Persistence of Inattention.

Industry FE                                                      N                Y              N               N
Sub-Industry FE                                                  N                N              Y               N
Weights                                                          N                N              N               Y
Dependent variable: abs. error in the follow-up
                                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
surveys

                          Panel A: Inflation over the previous 12 months, Wave #2
Abs. error for inflation in Wave #1                    0.596***     0.392***    0.387***                    0.715***
                                                       (0.038)      (0.050)     (0.051)                     (0.065)
Observations                                               716              716             716             712
R2                                                         0.328            0.467           0.484           0.364

                          Panel B: Inflation over the previous 12 months, Wave #4
Abs. error for inflation in Wave #1                    0.345***     0.303***    0.297***                    0.275***
                                                       (0.021)      (0.024)     (0.025)                     (0.034)
Observations                                               1,257            1,257           1,257           1,251
R2                                                         0.303            0.322           0.346           0.235

                                         Panel C: Output Gap, Wave #2
Abs. error for output gap in Wave #1                   0.510***     0.520***                0.513***        0.582***
                                                       (0.042)      (0.043)                 (0.043)         (0.057)
Observations                                               716              716             716             712
R2                                                         0.413            0.418           0.428           0.402

                                Panel D: Unemployment rate, Wave #4
Abs. error for unemployment rate in Wave #2      0.668***     0.678***                      0.688***        0.713***
                                                 (0.054)      (0.053)                       (0.051)         (0.070)

Observations                                               464              464             464             461
R2                                                         0.463            0.473           0.501           0.535


Notes: The table reports regressions of firms’ absolute errors for inflation over the last twelve months (Panels A and B),
the contemporaneous output gap (Panel C), and contemporaneous unemployment rate (Panel D) in waves #1, #2, and #4
on firms’ errors over the same variables in waves #1 and #2. Constant is included but not reported. Column (2) includes
industry fixed effects while column (3) includes sub-industry fixed effects, as defined in Table 1. Column (4) applies
sampling weights. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels respectively. See section 3.3 for details.




                                                                                                                        37
                                      Table 6: Macroeconomic Forecasts of Firms and Other Economic Agents

                                                                                                  Professional
                                                         Recent data         Central Bank                              Households              Firms
                                                                                                  Forecasters
       Forecasts from 2013Q4
       12-Month Ahead Annual Inflation Rate
           Mean Forecast (or actual value)                   1.5%                1.3%                 2.0%                 3.4%                5.3%
           Std. Dev. of Forecasts                                                                     0.2%                 2.0%                3.1%
       Forecasts from 2014Q1
       12-Month Ahead Annual Inflation Rate
           Mean Forecast (or actual value)                   1.5%                1.9%                 2.0%                 3.6%                5.9%
           Std. Dev. of Forecasts                                                                     0.3%                 1.8%                2.8%
       12-Month Ahead Unemployment Rate
           Mean Forecast (or actual value)                   6.0%                4.9%                 5.3%                  n.a.               5.2%
           Std. Dev. of Forecasts                                                                     0.3%                  n.a.               1.2%
       12-Month Ahead Annual GDP Growth Rate
           Mean Forecast (or actual value)                   2.3%                3.5%                 3.4%                  n.a.               3.1%
           Std. Dev. of Forecasts                                                                     0.5%                  n.a.               0.8%
       12-Month Change in Interest Rates
           Mean Forecast (or actual value)                   0.6%                1.9%                 1.2%                  n.a.               1.1%
           Std. Dev. of Forecasts                                                                     0.3%                  n.a.               1.2%

Notes: The table reports recent values, forecasts and dispersion in forecasts of different macroeconomic variables and for different agents. Actual inflation rates
are for the CPI and the 12-month change in interest rates is for the 1-year bill. Actual values are from Sept. or Dec. 2013 for main survey and follow-up survey
periods respectively, except for interest rates which are the average value from Oct.-Dec. 2013 minus the average value from Oct.-Dec. 2012. Forecasts from the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand are from the Dec. 2013 and March 2014 Monetary Policy reports. Professional forecasts are from Consensus Economics.
Household inflation forecasts are from the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s Survey of Households. The inflation forecasts of households are trimmed by the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand and exclude all forecasts of inflation above 15% and below -2%, so same trimming is applied to firms’ inflation forecasts for
comparison. Other firm forecasts are unadjusted. See section 4.1 for details.




                                                                                                                                                                38
                Table 7: Beliefs about Future and Past Values of Macroeconomic variables.

                                                       Wave #1          Wave #2           Wave #4          Firm FE
 Variables
                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
 Inflation rate, aggregate                              0.248***         0.065             0.345***         0.322***
                                                       (0.033)          (0.061)           (0.043)          (0.042)
 N                                                       3,149             716              1,255           5,126
 R2                                                      0.419            0.396             0.211           0.206
 Inflation rate, industry                                                                  0.616***
                                                                                          (0.122)
 N                                                                                          1,255
 R2                                                                                         0.644
 Unemployment rate                                                       0.337***          0.865***         0.651***
                                                                        (0.039)           (0.028)          (0.066)
 N                                                                         716              1,255           1,973
 R2                                                                       0.244             0.821           0.392
 GDP growth rate                                                                           0.654***
                                                                                          (0.047)
 N                                                                                          1,255
 R2                                                                                         0.690
 Exchange rate                                                                             0.991***
                                                                                          (0.012)
 N                                                                                          1,255
 R2                                                                                         0.898

Notes: The table reports estimates of firms’ 12-month-ahead forecasts of a given variable—indicated in the left column—
on the backcast (over previous 12 months) or nowcast of the variable. Nowcasts are used for the unemployment rate and
the exchange rate. Sub-industry fixed effects (defined as in Table 1) are included but not reported. Each column shows
which wave is used in estimation. Column (4) reports results for the specification when data are pooled across waves and
firm fixed effects are included. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.***,**, * denotes statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. See section 4.2 for details.




                                                                                                                     39
                                                                     Table 8. Information updates.

                                                                          Inflation                                                        UE                 GDP
                                                                                 CB target +
Information source:             pool              SPF              CB target                              EEEEEEEEEEE
                                                                                                          C D                          EEEEEEEEEEEEE
                                                                                                                                       C D FC            EEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
                                                                                                                                                         C  D GHI
                                                                                    SPF
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)                          (7)                 (8)
                                                                    Panel A. Dependent variable: posterior JK

Prior,                         0.307***        0.352***             0.221***         0.221***        0.275***         0.515***           0.762***            0.688***
                              (0.031)         (0.075)              (0.062)          (0.064)         (0.051)          (0.047)            (0.076)             (0.123)

Observations                    500              100                  100             100              100             100                 100                99
R-squared                      0.375            0.319                0.195           0.273            0.347           0.676               0.717              0.498

                                                                                                                              /% 0%
                                                      Panel B. Dependent variable: scaled revision of posterior:                 0%


Uncertainty,                   0.074***        0.088**              0.016            0.049**         0.083***         0.133***           0.298*             -0.488
                              (0.014)         (0.040)              (0.036)          (0.024)         (0.026)          (0.028)            (0.165)             (0.338)

Observations                    448              86                   80              91               93              98                  81                 80
R-squared                      0.035            0.024                0.002           0.035            0.051           0.083               0.021              0.028


Notes: Panel A reports results for specification (4.3) where the dependent variable is the posterior point prediction of the variable indicated in the first row of the
table and the regressor is the prior, i.e. the point prediction implied by the reported probability distribution for the corresponding variable. The prior is the belief
of a firm before the firm is presented with additional information. The posterior is the belief of a firm after the firm is presented with additional information.
Fixed effects for source of information are included in column (1) but not reported. Panel B reports result for specification (4.4) where the dependent variable is
the revision in beliefs (posterior minus prior) scaled by the difference between the signal and the prior for the variable indicated in the first row of the table. The
posterior and prior are defined as in Panel A. The regressor is the standard deviation implied by the probability distribution for the corresponding variable. Fixed
effects for source of information are included in column (1) but not reported. To minimize the effects of extreme observations, the sample in each column is
                                                  /% 0%
constrained to include only observations with L           L ≤ 2. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%,
                                                    0%
and 10% levels respectively. See section 4.3 for more details.


                                                                                                                                                                       40
          Table 9. Ranking of attention and associated backcast errors and forecast uncertainty.
                          Regressor: O&PQRS ? > PQRS B '                     Regressor: PQRS ? − PQRS B
X                       Inflation    Inflation     UE                    Inflation    Inflation     UE
Y                          UE          GDP        GDP                       UE          GDP         GDP
                           (1)          (2)        (3)                      (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                                                                      4:
               Panel A: dependent variable is the relative uncertainty in forecasts log 3 %; 6
                                                                                         4            %
Rank regressor         -0.161***      -0.155***      -0.019             -0.060***           -0.046***         -0.005
                       (0.034)        (0.035)        (0.032)            (0.012)             (0.011)           (0.014)

Observations           1,100          1,136          1,069              1,100               1,136             1,069
R-squared              0.019          0.016          0.000              0.023               0.015             0.000
                                                                                              |= ?>@A ?>@A |
          Panel B: dependent variable is the relative size of backcast errors log . |=>                       1
                                                                                                > B>@A B>@A |
Rank regressor         -2.067***      -1.890***      -1.020***          -0.733***           -0.606***         -0.493***
                       (0.063)        (0.059)        (0.062)            (0.022)             (0.018)           (0.025)

Observations           1,249          1,231          1,225              1,249               1,231             1,225
R-squared              0.475          0.498          0.175              0.507               0.504             0.228
Notes: Panel A: dependent variable is relative uncertainty in forecasts log&    ?
                                                                                    ⁄   B
                                                                                            ' where   ?
                                                                                                           measures uncertainty in
                                                                                                                      |= ?>@A ?>@A |
forecasts from the probability distribution for variable V. Panel B: relative size of backcast errors log . |=>                       1
                                                                                                                        > B>@A B>@A |
where V W is the backcast made at time 8 for variable V at time 8 − ℎ. The horizon ℎ is 12 month for inflation and
GDP growth rate and 0 for the unemployment rate. We use this question to rank variables in terms of relative attention
          Which macroeconomic variables are most important to you in making your business decisions? Please
          rank the variables below from 1 (most important) to 3 (least important)
          a.        Unemployment rate          …
          b.        GDP                        …
          c.        Inflation                  …
          d.        None of these is important to my decisions
PQRS ? − PQRS B is the difference in ranks of variables V and X as perceived by firm Y. Ranks can take values 1, 2, 3.
Thus the maximum difference is 2 and the minimum is -2. A higher value of the difference indicates that variable V is
more important than variable X. O&PQRS ? > PQRS B ' is the dummy variable equal to one if firm Y thinks that variable V
is more for firms business decisions than variable X. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.

                     Table 10. Which Macroeconomic Variables Do Firms Track?
                                                               Fraction of firms that try to look
Variables followed                     Fraction of firms              at all the indicators
                                                                simultaneously that they follow
                                              (1)                              (2)
Inflation, Unemployment, GDP                 0.216                            0.919
Inflation, Unemployment                      0.066                            0.916
Inflation, GDP                               0.101                            0.937
Unemployment, GDP                            0.329                            0.976
Inflation                                    0.027                               -
Unemployment                                 0.108                               -
GDP                                          0.151                               -
Notes: Column (1) reports the share of firms that track a combination of variables shown in the left column. Column (2)
reports the share of firms tracking variables simultaneously conditional on firms tracking multiple variables.

                                                                                                                                   41
          Table 11. Macroeconomic variables: importance for business decisions and tracking.
                            Inflation                Unemployment                       GDP
  Importance for
                                     Do not                     Do not                                             Do not
business decisions   Follow                       Follow                         Follow
                                     Follow                     Follow                                             Follow
 (1=high, 3=low)
                       (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)                               (6)
        1             0.371           0.003       0.205         0.009            0.395                             0.017
        2             0.028           0.104       0.394         0.101            0.290                             0.082
        3             0.011           0.482       0.120         0.171            0.112                             0.104
      Total           0.410           0.590       0.720         0.280            0.798                             0.202
Notes: The table shows shares of firms reporting importance of a given macroeconomic variable for their business
decisions and whether they track the variable.


       Table 12. Differences between firms that follow a given variable and firms that do not follow.
                                                                                  Forecast uncertainty
                         Backcast error                   Forecast
                                                                                        (st. dev.)
   Variables
                                   Do not                         Do not                         Do not
    followed         Follow                        Follow                        Follow
                                   Follow                        Follow                          Follow
                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
Inflation             1.151         5.131           3.453          5.916          1.797            2.131
Unemployment          0.459         1.987           5.614          6.675          0.770            0.685
GDP                   1.014         2.393           3.478          4.054          0.731            0.735
Notes: The difference between “follow” and “do not follow” means is statistically different from zero at 1 percent for all
cases but one: forecast uncertainty for GDP.




                           Table 13. State-Dependence in Acquisition of Information
                                                       Suppose you hear on TV that the economy is doing poorly. Would it
                                                              make you more likely to look for more information?
                                                      Much        Somewhat                                    Much
                                                                                    No        Somewhat
                                                      more          more                                       less          Total
                                                                                  change      less likely
                                                      likely        likely                                    likely
                      Much more likely                0.036         0.032          0.005         0.004        0.004          0.080
Suppose you hear

economy is doing




                      Somewhat more likely            0.096         0.069          0.018         0.014        0.017          0.214
likely to look for
make you more
on TV that the

well. Would it



information?




                      No change                       0.037         0.025          0.010         0.010        0.005          0.086
                      Somewhat less likely            0.240         0.149          0.060         0.035        0.022          0.507
                      Much less likely                0.044         0.039          0.013         0.011        0.006          0.113
more




                      Total                           0.453         0.313          0.106         0.073        0.054          1.000
Notes: The table reports shares of firms by their desire to seek for more/less information in response to good/bad news
about the economy.




                                                                                                                          42
                            Table 14. Complementarity in acquisition of information

                                                                                                            Sub-industry FE
                                                                                          Sub-industry
                                                                         No controls                         Firm controls
                                                                                              FE
                                                                                                            Manager controls
                                                                       (1)                      (2)               (3)
                                         Panel A: Information complementarity
Price complementarity                                                0.287***                0.287***             0.290***
                                                                    (0.022)                 (0.022)              (0.023)

Observations                                                                 1,257            1,257                1,140
R-squared                                                                    0.146            0.158                0.177

                                    Panel B: Importance of waiting for other firms
Price complementarity                                                0.436*         0.410*                        0.415*
                                                                    (0.231)        (0.226)                       (0.240)

Observations                                                                 1,257            1,257                1,140
R-squared                                                                    0.003            0.019                0.033

            Panel C: Revision of inflation expectations when the main competitor raises its price
Importance of waiting for other firms                            0.134***     0.132***            0.139***
                                                                (0.023)      (0.024)             (0.026)

Observations                                                                 1,257            1,257                1,140
R-squared                                                                    0.026            0.037                0.055


Notes: Panel A: The dependent variable is information complementarity which is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm
picks “The source that can be seen by other firms” and zero otherwise. The regressor is price complementary which
measures (in percent, absolute value) by how much sales of a given firm fall when a typical firm in your industry cuts its
price by 10%. The response is divided by 10.

Panel B: The dependent variable is the dummy variable equal to one when a firm chooses “Wait until other firms make a
price adjustment” in response to “Suppose you want to adjust your prices but you are uncertain about the state of the
economy. What would you do?” and zero otherwise. The response is divided by 10. Price complementarity is defined as in
Panel A.

Panel C: The dependent variable is the response to the following question: “Suppose your main competitor raises the
price of its product by 10 percent. By how much would you revise your expectation of inflation over the next 12 months”.
The response is divided by 10. The regressor is the dummy variable equal to one when a firm chooses “Wait until other
firms make a price adjustment” in response to “Suppose you want to adjust your prices but you are uncertain about the
state of the economy. What would you do?” and zero otherwise.

Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively.




                                                                                                                           43
                                                                        Figure 1: Firms’ Expected and Actual Price Changes
                                              Panel A: Expected Durations until Price Change             Panel B: Expected Size of Price Changes




                                                                                                                                      Share of firms changing prices in the follow-up survey
                                        150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual price change in the follow-up survey
                                                                                                                                                                                       1
Number of firms plannig to change price




                                                                                                                                                                              .8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                         100




                                                                                                                                                                    .6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                           .4
          50




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -10
                                                                                                                                                   .2



                                                                                                                                                                                                -20
                     0




                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                     -20    -15    -10      -5         0        5        10    15   20
                                               0         5             10          15            20                             25                                                                                                                              Expected size of next price change
                                                    Expected duration (months) before next price change
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              plan to change price in 3 months or less
                                                      number                     share (actual)                     share (recall)                                                                                                                            plan to change price in 4-5 months

                                               Notes: In Panel A, the bars (left axis) show the number of firms reporting a given expected duration before next price
                                               change in the main survey. The lines show the fraction of firms who actually adjusted their prices between the follow-up
                                               survey and the main survey, grouped by each duration. The red line measures changes in prices as the difference in
                                               current prices reported in the main and follow-up survey. The black line measures changes in prices as the change
                                               between the current price reported in the follow-up survey and the previous price reported in the follow-up survey. The
                                               previous price is the price 3 months ago for firms surveyed in December 2013 or January 2014 and 6 months ago for firms
                                               surveyed in September 2013, October 2013, or November 2013. See section 3 for details. Panel B plots firms’ expectation
                                               of the size of their next price change (in %) as reported in the main survey (x-axis) versus firms’ actual percentage change
                                               in price between the follow-up survey and the main survey (y-axis) for firms who reported that they expected to change
                                               prices within the next five months. Circles and crosses indicate the expected duration (reported in the main survey) before
                                               the next price change. See section 2 for details.

                                                                                                                  Figure 2: Inflation in New Zealand
                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Inflation                                         First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                targeting                                         wave of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is introduced                                     the survey
                                                                                               15
                                                                      annual inflation rate, %
                                                                                 10 5
                                                                                    0




                                                                                                    1965   1970   1975   1980        1985                                                      1990                                            1995   2000   2005     2010     2015

                                                                                                       Notes: The figure plots annual CPI inflation in New Zealand.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         44
                  Figure 3: Distributions of Errors about Recent Macroeconomic Conditions
Panel A: Errors about Different Macroeconomic Variables          Panel B: Inflation Errors by Industry




                                                                                                                  .25
            .3




                                     industry specific inflation rate                                                               Manufacturing
                                     aggregate inflation                                                                            Trade
                                     GDP growth rate                                                                                Prof. & Fin. Services




                                                                                                                  .2
                                     Unemployment rate                                                                              Construction & Transport
            .2




                                                                                                                    .15
  density




                                                                                                             density
                                                                                                                  .1
            .1




                                                                                                                  .05
            0




                                                                                                                  0
                            -12      -10      -8        -6        -4        -2     0        2       4                      -20         -15           -10            -5        0                 5
                                                             backcast error                                                                            backcast error



       Notes: Panel A plots kernel density estimates of distributions of errors about recent values of different macroeconomic
       variables made by firms. Panel B plots kernel density estimates of the distribution of errors about recent inflation made
       across different industries. See section 3.1 for details.


                                                    Figure 4: Distribution of Inflation Expectations across Firms
                                           Panel A: Wave #1 => Wave #1                          Panel B: Wave #1 => Wave #4
                                                                                                                          .2
                           .15




                                                                                            Informed                                                                              Informed
                                                                                            Uninformed                                                                            Uninformed
                                                                                                                          .15
                           .1
                 density




                                                                                                                  density
                                                                                                                    .1
                           .05




                                                                                                                          .05
                           0




                                                                                                                          0




                                 0           5                10              15       20               25                      0            5               10          15                20
                                                                   forecast                                                                               forecast


       Notes: The two panels plot distributions of firms’ inflation forecasts over the next twelve months. Panel A plots the
       distribution for “informed” firms (those whose errors about recent inflation were less than 2% points) versus
       “uninformed” firms in the first survey. Panel B plots equivalent distributions in the fourth wave of the survey, but
       continuing to identify “informed” and “uninformed” firms based on the size of their backcast errors in the first survey. See
       section 4.2 for details.




                                                                                                                                                                                           45
                                                                              Figure 5: Inflation Backcasts and Forecasts by Firm Characteristic




                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   >12 months




                                                                                   Mean Forecast of Future Inflation
                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                  1-5

                                                                                                                                                                               Flat
                                                                                                                                                                        6-10 7-12 months




                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                          Medium

                                                                                                                                                            10-20
                                                                                                                                                  4-6 months




                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                         0-3 monthsSteep
                                                                                                                                                                               time before next price adjustment
                                                                                                                                       >20 competitors                         number of competitors
                                                                                                                                                                               curvature of the profit function




                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                        3                 4                5           6             7                         8                9
                                                                                                                                                         Mean Belief about Past Inflation


                Notes: The figure plots mean backcasts and forecasts of inflation for firms grouped by firm characteristics in the main survey. One grouping is by number of months
                until next expected price change, a second grouping is by the number of competitors, and the third grouping is by the tercile of the distribution of the steepness of the
                profit function. See section 4.2 for details.
                                                                         Figure 6. Forecast Updating by Firms upon Receiving New Information
                                     Inflation                                                                                                                 Unemployment                                                                                     GDP
    20




                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
    15




                                                                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
Posterior




                                                                                                                       Posterior




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Posterior
  10




                                                                                                                          6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
    5




                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
    0




            0           5               10                    15                  20                                               3          4            5         6                7           8                9                   1    2               3              4               5               6
                                       Prior                                                                                                                        Prior                                                                                       Prior

                    45-degree line             Fitted line: slope = 0.31 (0.03)                                                               45-degree line                Fitted line: slope = 0.76 (0.08)                               45-degree line               Fitted line: slope = 0.69 (0.12)



                Notes: Each panel plots initial forecasts of firms in wave 4 (“prior”) against their revised forecasts (“posterior”) after being provided with new information. Panels
                include the 45 degree line and regression lines. Each panel is for forecasts of individual macroeconomic variable. See section 4.3 for details.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               46
APPENDIX




           47
                                                                  APPENDIX 1
                                                           Selected Survey Questions

                                                                          Wave #1

What is the main product of this firm?
“Main product”: The product (good or service) or product group from which this firm gets its largest share of revenue.



How many workers are employed in this firm? How many are used for the main product or product line?
                     Employment for firm:                    Employment for main product:
Full-time:      ……………………………………………….                          …………………………………………………
Contracted:    ……………………………………………….                           …………………………………………………
Part-time:      ……………………………………………….                          …………………………………………………
Casual:        ……………………………………………….                           …………………………………………………



How many years old is the firm?
Answer:       ……………… year(s) old

Report the dollar value of the total amount produced by this firm over the last 3 months and that for the main
product or product line. Please also report the dollar value of the amount the firm could have produced over the last
3 months if it had been operating at full capacity (i.e. given the equipment and machinery already in place and ready to
operate; with normal downtime; with the number of shifts, hours of operation and overtime pay that can be sustained under
normal conditions and a realistic work schedule in the long run; labor, materials, utilities, etc. are fully available; the same
product mix as the actual production).
                                    Total Production Value                      Production Value for Main Product
Actual Production:                  ………………………… $                                      …………………………                        $
Potential Production:               ………………………… $                                      …………………………                        $

What percentage of the firm’s revenues in the last 12 months came from sales in New Zealand (vs. other countries)?
Answer:        ……………… % of sales originating in New Zealand

How many direct competitors does this firm face in its main product line?
Answer:       ……………… firms.

Out of the total revenues of the firm, what fraction is used for compensation of all employees and what fraction is used
for the costs of materials and intermediate inputs (raw materials, energy inputs, etc…)?
                                     Labor Costs                             Costs of Materials and other Inputs
Share of total revenues:            …………………. %                                         …………………. %

What is the average selling price of this firm’s main product (or product group)?
Domestic market current price =                  (NZ$)             ....................................................................
Overseas market current price (if applicable) =   (currency………….). ....................................................................
N/A (please tick)

How would you compare the price of this firm’s main product relative to the prices of competing products (of similar
quality, characteristics, warranty)? Please provide an answer in percentage terms (e.g. “-10%” if your product is 10%
cheaper than that of most comparable competitors).
Answer:           ……………… %


                                                                                                                                          48
What was the average selling price (in domestic market) of this firm’s main product (or product group) in previous
periods?
3 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
6 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
9 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
12 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
N/A (please tick)

Considering your main product line or main line of services in the domestic market, by what margin does your sales
price exceed your operating costs (i.e., the cost material inputs plus wage costs but not overheads and depreciation)? Please
report your current margin as well as historical or average margin for the firm.
                                    Current Margin                               Average Margin
Answer:                             ……………… %                                       ……………… %

Approximately how often does this firm regularly review (formally) the price of its product?
Please circle the appropriate number:
1 = daily
2 = weekly
3 = monthly
4 = quarterly
5 = half-annually
6 = annually
7 = less frequently than annually
8 = N/A

When do you expect this firm to next change its price of the main product and by how much? Please provide a
numerical answer in months for the former (e.g. “0” for within the next month, 1 for one month from now, …) and a
percentage answer for the latter (e.g. “+10%” for a 10% increase in price or “-10%” for a 10% decrease)
Answer: I expect my firm to change the price of our main product by ……………… % in …………….. months

If this firm was free to change its price (i.e. suppose there was no cost to renegotiating contracts with clients, no costs of
reprinting catalogues, etc…) right now or in three months, by how much would it change its price in either case? Please
provide a percentage answer (e.g. “+10%” for a 10% increase in price). By how much do you think profits would change
as a share of revenues in either case? Please provide a numerical answer in percent (e.g. “+10%” if profits are expected to
rise by 10% of revenues).
                                   If price could change this month:           If price could change in three months:
Expected change in price:                  ………………             %                           ……………… %
Expected change in profits:                ………………             % of revenues               ……………… % of revenues

During the last twelve months, by how much do you think prices changed overall in the economy? Please provide an
answer in percentage terms.
Answer:          ……………… %

During the next twelve months, by how much do you think prices will change overall in the economy? Please provide
an answer in percentage terms.
Answer:          ……………… %

By how much higher or lower than normal do you think the current level of overall economic activity is? Please
provide an answer in percentage terms (e.g. “-5%” for five percent lower than normal, “+10%” for ten percent higher than
normal, etc…).
Answer:         ……………… %

                                                                                                                 49
                                                                      Wave #2

SECTION A. QUESTIONS ABOUT THE FIRM
      What is the selling price of this firm’s main product (or product group)?
      Domestic market current price =                  (NZ$)             ....................................................................
      Overseas market current price (if applicable) =   (currency………….). ....................................................................
      N/A (please tick)

           What was the average selling price (in domestic market) of this firm’s main product (or product
           group) in previous periods?
           3 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
           6 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
           9 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
           12 months ago = (NZ$) ....................................................................
           N/A (please tick)

SECTION B. MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS
    During the last twelve months, by how much do you think prices changed overall in the economy?
    Please provide an answer in percentage terms.
      Answer:          ……………… %

         During the next twelve months, by how much do you think prices will change overall in the economy?
         Please provide an answer in percentage terms.
           Answer:           ……………… %

        By how much higher or lower than normal do you think the current level of overall economic activity
        is? Please provide an answer in percentage terms (e.g. “-5%” for five percent lower than normal, “+10%” for
        ten percent higher than normal, etc…).
          Answer:            ……………… %

        What do you think the unemployment rate currently is in New Zealand and what do you think it will
        be in twelve months? Please provide a quantitative answer in percentage terms (e.g. “5.2%” for an
        unemployment rate of 5.2%) over each period.
                 Current unemployment rate                       Unemployment rate in 12 months
                        ………………             %                           ………………            %

        What do you think is the interest rate on a 1-year government bond currently and what do you think it
        will be in twelve months? Please provide a quantitative answer in percentage terms (e.g. “5.2%” for an
        unemployment rate of 5.2%) over each period.
                       Current interest rate                           Interest rate in 12 months
                         ………………             %                               ………………            %

           Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of growth rates of the overall economy
           (real GDP) over the next 12 months: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
           Possible growth rates for real GDP                   Probabilities
           More than 5% per year:                               ………………            %
           From 4 to 5% per year:                               ………………            %
           From 3 to 4% per year:                               ………………            %
           From 2 to 3% per year:                               ………………            %
           From 1 to 2% per year:                               ………………            %
           From 0 to 1% per year:                               ………………            %
           The economy will contract (<0% per year):            ………………            %

                                                                                                                                                50
Total (each column should sum to 100%):                100          %


Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of overall percentage price changes in
the economy over the next 12 months: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
Possible percentage changes in prices                Probabilities
More than 5% per year:                              ………………            %
From 4 to 5% per year:                              ………………            %
From 3 to 4% per year:                              ………………            %
From 2 to 3% per year:                              ………………            %
From 1 to 2% per year:                              ………………            %
From 0 to 1% per year:                              ………………            %
Prices will fall (<0% per year):                    ………………            %
Total (each column should sum to 100%):                 100           %




                                                                                                    51
                                                    Wave #3

What is your age?                  …………………………………….years




What is your gender?               Please tick a box:                      male       female




What is your highest educational qualification?

        1. Less than high school   2. High school diploma 3. Some college or Associate’s degree

        4. College diploma         5. Graduate studies (Masters or PhD)




How many years of work experience do you have in this firm?            …………………………………….years




How many years of work experience do you have in this industry?        …………………………………….years




How many years have you worked outside of NZ?                          …………………………………….years




How much is your gross income per annum?

1. Less than $30,000      2. 30,000-49,999              3. 50,000-74,999          4. 75,000-99,999

5. 100,000-149,999        6. 150,000 or more


During the next twelve months, by how much do you think your firm’s unit costs will change? Please provide an
answer in percentage terms.


During the next twelve months, by how much do you think overall prices in the economy will change? Please
provide an answer in percentage terms.


If you thought overall prices in the economy over the next 12 months were going to rise by more than what you are
currently forecasting, would you:
     a) Be more likely to increase your prices
     b) No change
     c) Be more likely to decrease your prices

Please explain your answer briefly: ………………………………………………………………………………..

                                                                                                              52
If you thought overall prices in the economy over the next 12 months were going to rise by more than what you are
currently forecasting, would you:
     a) Be more likely to increase the wages that you pay
     b) No change
     c) Be more likely to decrease the wages that pay

Please explain your answer briefly: ………………………………………………………………………………..


If you thought overall prices in the economy over the next 12 months were going to rise by more than what you are
currently forecasting, would you:
     a) Be more likely to increase your employment
     b) No change
     c) Be more likely to decrease your employment

Please explain your answer briefly: ………………………………………………………………………………..


If you thought overall prices in the economy over the next 12 months were going to rise by more than what you are
currently forecasting, would you:
     a) Be more likely to increase your investments (capital expenditures)
     b) No change
     c) Be more likely to decrease your investments (capital expenditures)

Please explain your answer briefly: ………………………………………………………………………………..




                                                                                                              53
                                          Wave #4

During the last twelve months, by how much do you think prices have changed in your industry?
Please provide a precise and quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %


During the next twelve months, by how much do you think prices will change in your industry?
Please provide a precise and quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %


During the last twelve months, by how much do you think prices have changed overall in the
economy? Please provide a precise and quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %


What do you think the real GDP growth rate has been in New Zealand during the last 12 months?
Please provide a precise quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %


What do you think the unemployment rate currently is in New Zealand? Please provide a precise
quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %


Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of overall price changes in the
economy over the next 12 months for New Zealand: (Note that the probabilities in the column should
sum to 100)
Percentage Price Changes in 12 Months Probabilities
More than 25%:                          ………………           %
From 15 to 25%:                         ………………           %
From 10 to 15%:                         ………………           %
From 8 to 10%:                          ………………           %
From 6 to 8%:                           ………………           %
From 4 to 6%:                           ………………           %
From 2 to 4%:                           ………………           %
From 0 to 2%:                           ………………           %
Less than 0%:                           ………………           %
Total (the column should sum to 100%):      100          %



Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of growth rates of the overall economy
(real GDP) over the next 12 months: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
Possible growth rates for real GDP                   Probabilities
More than 5% per year:                               ………………            %
From 4 to 5% per year:                               ………………            %
From 3 to 4% per year:                               ………………            %


                                                                                                    54
From 2 to 3% per year:                            ………………             %
From 1 to 2% per year:                            ………………             %
From 0 to 1% per year:                            ………………             %
The economy will contract (<0% per year):         ………………             %
Total (the column should sum to 100%):              100              %



Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of unemployment rates in 12 months
for New Zealand: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
Possible Unemployment Rates in 12 Months              Probabilities
More than 8%:                              ………………             %
From 7 to 8%:                              ………………             %
From 6 to 7%:                              ………………             %
From 5 to 6%:                              ………………             %
From 4 to 5%:                              ………………             %
Less than 4%:                              ………………             %
Total (the column should sum to 100%):          100           %



Randomly select firms into five sets [do not select firms based on their previous answers about
inflation, price/information stickiness, etc.]

Subset 1 of firms: [no additional information]. Go to question 13.

Subset 2 of firms: Professional forecasters are currently predicting that the overall prices in New
Zealand will rise by 2.0% over the next twelve months. By how much do you think overall prices in
the economy will change during the next twelve months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer
in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %

Go to question 15.

Subset 3 of firms: Professional forecasters are currently predicting that the overall prices in New
Zealand will rise by 2.0% over the next twelve months. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand targets an
overall rise in prices of approximately 2% each year. By how much do you think overall prices in the
economy will change during the next twelve months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer in
percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %

Go to question 15.



Subset 4 of firms: The Reserve Bank of New Zealand targets an overall rise in prices of
approximately 2% each year. By how much do you think overall prices in the economy will change
during the next twelve months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer in percentage terms.

ANSWER:          …………..           %

Go to question 15.




                                                                                                 55
    Subset 5 of firms: Overall prices in New Zealand have gone up by 1.0% over the last twelve months.
    By how much do you think overall prices in the economy will change during the next twelve months?
    Please provide a precise quantitative answer in percentage terms.

    ANSWER:           …………..             %

    Go to question 15.

    Subset 6 of firms: Firms in the economy expect overall prices to increase by X.X% over the next
    twelve months. By how much do you think overall prices in the economy will change during the next
    twelve months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer in percentage terms.

    ANSWER:           …………..             %

    Go to question 15.


    For firms in subsets 2-5, add no information. For firms in subset 1, randomly select firms into
        a. subset and provide additional information (subset 1.a). Ask the question below.
        b. others no information (subset 1.b). If selected in this subset, go to question 14.

    The most recent data for real GDP in New Zealand indicate that the economy grew 3.9% over twelve
    months. By how much do you think real GDP will grow overall in the economy over the next twelve
    months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer in percentage terms.

    ANSWER:           …………..             %

    Go to question 15.

    For firms in subsets 2-5 and subset 1a, provide no additional information. For other firms, randomly
    select firms into
         c. subset and provide additional information (subset 1.a.i). Ask the question below.
         d. others no information (subset 1.b.ii). If selected in this subset, go to question 15.
    The most recent unemployment rate in New Zealand is 5.4%. What do you think the unemployment
    rate will be in New Zealand in twelve months? Please provide a precise quantitative answer in
    percentage terms.

    ANSWER:           …………..             %



15. Which macroeconomic variables are most important to you in making your business decisions?
    Please rank the variables below from 1 (most important) to 3 (least important)
    e.       Unemployment rate          …
    f.       GDP                        …
    g.       Inflation                  …
    h.       None of these is important to my decisions


16. Which macroeconomic variables do you keep track of? Check each variable that you keep track of.
    a.     Unemployment rate          …
    b.     GDP                        …
    c.     Inflation                  …
    d.     None of these is important to my decisions …

    If they check three variables go to 14a.
    If they check two variables go to 14b.


                                                                                                      56
    If they check one variable, go straight to question 15.

    16a. How do you acquire information about macroeconomic variables (inflation, unemployment or
    GDP)?
    a. I try to look at all these indictors at the same time
    b. I try to look at unemployment and GDP together
    c. I try to look at unemployment and inflation together
    d. I try to look at inflation and GDP together
    e. I look at each of these variables separately


    16b. How do you acquire information about macroeconomic variables (inflation, unemployment or
    GDP)?
    a. I try to look at both indictors at the same time
    b. I look at them separately.


17. Suppose you hear on TV that the economy is doing well. Would it make you more likely to look for
    more information?
       a. Much more likely
       b. Somewhat more likely
       c. No change
       d. Somewhat less likely
       e. Much less likely

18. Suppose you hear on TV that the economy is doing poorly. Would it make you more likely to look for
    more information?
       a. Much more likely
       b. Somewhat more likely
       c. No change
       d. Somewhat less likely
       e. Much less likely


19. Suppose a typical firm in your industry cuts its price by 10%. By how much would YOUR sales be
    affected?
        a. Increase by … percent
        b. No change
        c. Decrease by … percent

20. Suppose that there are two sources of information about the state of the economy. These sources are
    equally informative/useful, but they can give different signals about the state of the economy (that is,
    they can disagree). In addition, the first source can be seen by other firms in your industry while the
    second sources is available only to you. You can see only one source. Which source would you pick?
        a. The source that can be seen by other firms
        b. The source that can be seen only by you

21. Suppose your main competitor raises the price of its product by 10 percent. By how much would you
    revise your expectation of inflation over the next 12 months?
        a. Increase by … percent
        b. No change
        c. Decrease by … percent

22. Suppose you want to adjust your prices but you are uncertain about the state of the economy. What
    would you do
    a. Collect more information now and then make a decision

                                                                                                          57
    b.   Wait another quarter until more information comes in (but do not look for it actively)
    c.   Wait until other firms make a price adjustment
    d.   Change your price right away

23. What share of your turnover (total vs. for main product) comes from long-term versus short-term
customers?
                                        Share of total turnover Share of turnover for main product
Long-term customers
 (relationship lasting more than one year)      …..       %             …..      %
Short-term customers
(relationship lasting 1 year or less)           …..       %             …..      %
                                               [check if sum =100]     [check if sum =100]


24. What do you think is the current exchange rate of the New Zealand Dollar relative to the U.S. Dollar?
Answer:                       …. (either US dollar / NZ dollar or vice-versa)


25. What do you think the exchange rate of the New Zealand Dollar will be in twelve months relative to
the U.S. Dollar?
 Answer:                    …. (either US dollar / NZ dollar or vice-versa)




                                                                                                            58
                                               APPENDIX 2
                        Classification of firms into industries and sub-industries

                                                                        SIC2 Codes

           Manufacturing
            Chemicals and metals                                        1700-2299
            Equipment and machinery                                     2300-2499
            Food and beverage                                           1110-1219
            Paper/wood, printing and furniture                     1400-1699, 2500-2599
            Textile and clothing                                        1300-1399

           Trade
            Car, supermarket and food retailing                          3900-4199
            Hotel and food services                                      4400-4599
            Other store retailing                                        4200-4399
            Wholesale trade                                              3300-3899

           Professional and financial services
            Accounting services                                           6932
            Finance                                                     6200-6299
            Insurance                                                   6300-6399
            Aux. finance and insurance                                  6400-6499
            Legal services                                                6931
            Rental, hiring and real estate                              6600-6799
            All other professional services               5400-6099, 6900-7399 (excl. 6931, 6932)

           Construction and transportation                         3000-3299, 4600-5399




Notes: The table reports allocation of SIC codes to industries (in italics) and sub-industries (not in italics
+ Construction and transportation).




                                                                                                             59
                                                  APPENDIX 3

                                       Construction of sampling weights

The statistical office of New Zealand provides detailed information on the number of firms by industry (up to
four-digit disaggregation of ANZSIC-06 industry classification) and firm size bins (1-5, 6-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-
99, 100+ employees). The data can be accesses at http://www.stats.govt.nz/, “Business demography tables”,
“employment size groups for geographic units (ANZSIC06) 2000-2013.” The information on the number of
firms is based on the Statistic New Zealand Longitudinal Business Frame. The Statistic NZ Business Frame
generally includes all employing units and those enterprises with GST turnover greater than $30,000 per year.

Denote the population number of firms in industry i and employment size s with Z . For each industry and bin
size, we compute the number of firms in our survey. Denote the number of firms in our survey in industry i and
                   [ .
in size bin s with Z

                                                                              [ .
We construct the weight for firms in industry i and firm size bin s as \ = Z /Z

In our baseline results, we use weights constructed for 5 firm size bins (6-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100+
employees) and 3-digit ANZSIC-06 industry classification. We use 3-digit industry classification to ensure that
we have firms in all industries. Note that in the survey we collected information only on firms with more than 5
employees. We exclude firms with 5 or fewer employees because these firms are likely to fall below the
economic significance criteria on Statistics New Zealand's Business Frame (BF).

The average value of \ is 11.7, the median is 5.5, the standard deviation is 15.5. In a small fraction of cases
\ < 1, which is likely to arise due to inconsistencies in industry/size classification of firms in our survey and
in the official statistics. For example, the official data uses employment in February while our data are for the
fourth quarter. Industrial and business classifications for smaller firms in the official statistics are primarily
maintained using administrative data while we use survey responses of firms about their main product. As we
increase the coarseness of firm size and/or industry classification, the fraction of cells with \ < 1 shrinks to
zero. In a handful of cases, \ > 100. To avoid the adverse effects of assigning large weights to a small number
of firms (this can have a disproportionate effect on regression estimates), we censor \ at 100.




                                                                                                               60
                                                        APPENDIX 4

                            Sensitivity of inflation expectations to wording of questions

Consistent with the Michigan Survey of Consumers, we asked firms about the expected change in prices. The
economists, however, often operate with inflation rates. While there is a one-to-one mapping between changes in
prices and inflation rates, one may be concerned that the wording of the question may be important here since
people may have cognitive biases or difficulties with respect to this mapping. In addition, when we ask firms
about expected inflation over the next three months, we implicitly assume that firms report annualized inflation
rates. To assess the importance of these issues, we presented alternative formulations of the expected inflation
(e.g. Q16) to 100 randomly selected firms.

Baseline: During the next three months, by how much do you think prices will change overall in the
economy? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

Alternative #1: During the next three months, what will be the inflation rate in the economy? Please
provide an answer in percentage terms.

Alternative #2: During the next three months, what will be the annualized inflation rate in the economy?
Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

We asked similar questions about inflation over the next twelve months as well as about past inflation over the
last three and twelve months. Appendix Table 4.1 shows that the differences in responses across questions are
not statistically significantly different from zero. Thus, firms do not appear to systematic biases or exhibit
difficulties with interpreting the questions.

Appendix Table 4.1. Mean differences in responses to baseline and alternative formulations of inflation
expectation questions

                                                      Backcast                                    Forecast
                                           3 months           12 months                3 months              12 months
                                              (1)                (2)                      (3)                   (4)

                                    Panel A: Alternative #1, inflation expectations
Difference from the baseline              -0.175               -0.735                   0.280                -0.804
                                          (0.440)              (0.601)                 (0.696)               (0.633)

                                    Panel B: Alternative #2, inflation expectations
Difference from the baseline               0.161                0.824                   0.469                -0.096
                                          (0.387)              (0.539)                 (0.539)               (0.651)

                               Panel C: Alternative #1, change in inflation expectations
Difference from the baseline              -0.030              -0.070                   1.353**               -0.545
                                          (0.370)             (0.456)                 (0.607)                (0.740)

                                 Panel D: Alternative #1, change in inflation expectations
Difference from the baseline                 -0.452             -0.602                   0.701              -0.312
                                             (0.468)            (0.606)                 (0.538)             (0.685)
Notes: the table reports the difference between the mean response to a question in alternative formulation and the mean
response in the baseline formulation of the question. The sample of firms used for the baseline formulation is constrained to
cover only industries (3-digit level) that are populated by firms that answered an alternative formulation of the question. **
denotes statistical significance at 5% level.

                                                                                                                            61
                                                   APPENDIX 5

                           Point forecasts vs. means from probability distributions

In addition to asking firms about their point forecasts of inflation, we asked firms to provide probability
distribution for their forecasts in wave #2. The question is formulated as follows:

Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of overall percentage price changes in the economy
        over the next 12 months: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
        Possible percentage changes in prices                Probabilities
        More than 5% per year:                              ………………             %
        From 4 to 5% per year:                              ………………             %
        From 3 to 4% per year:                              ………………             %
        From 2 to 3% per year:                              ………………             %
        From 1 to 2% per year:                              ………………             %
        From 0 to 1% per year:                              ………………             %
        Prices will fall (<0% per year):                    ………………             %
        Total (each column should sum to 100%):                   100          %

One may be concerned that the implied mean from the probability distribution may be different from the point
forecast reported by firms because firms may have cognitive biases and difficulties in connecting point forecasts
and distributions for their forecasts. We calculate the mean forecast implied by the probability distribution as
follows:

        ^    ,    = −0.5 × `abcdef hcii jkii &< l% neb oekb'p + 0.5 × &qbrs l tr O% neb oekb' + 1.5
                       × &qbrs O tr u% neb oekb' + 2.5 × &qbrs u tr v% neb oekb' + 3.5
                       × &qbrs v tr x% neb oekb' + 4.5 × &qbrs x tr z% neb oekb' + 10
                       × &{rbe t|k} z% neb oekb'

Note that the value for the (More than 5% per year) bracket is set at 10 to reflect that many firms report high
mean inflation forecasts and that firms reporting a high weight on this bracket have inflation forecasts on average
in excess of 10 percent per year. Appendix Figure 4.1 plots point forecast for inflation           ,     against the
mean value implied from the probability distribution     ^   ,    . Note that many observations are above the red
line, which shows results from a fitted OLS regression. To explain this pattern, one should observe that many
firms predict more than 5 percent inflation (point forecasts) and thus put a very high weight on the (More than
5% per year) bracket. Since the bracket cannot provide details on inflation above 5%, the mean implied by the
distribution is not able to capture variation on inflation expectations above 5% and hence errors are likely to be
one-sided.

To evaluate this conjecture, we present results of regressing          ,      on ^ ,       using OLS and quantile
(median) regressions (Appendix Table 4.2). Quantile regressions minimize the effect of influential observations
and outliers. We also present results for subsamples where firms predict ^ ,            ≤ 5% and ^ ,          > 5%.
Note that with quantile regressions, which are least sensitive to one-sided errors, the slope is close to one and the
constant term is close to zero in all cases. The constant term for the OLS regressions is largest for firms with
 ^ ,        > 5% while the slope for these firms is smaller than for firms with ^ ,                ≤ 5% . Thus, we
conclude that, although construction of brackets limits information for inflation rates above 5%, point forecasts
for inflation are close to the mean forecasts implied by the probability distributions.




                                                                                                                  62
   Appendix Table 4.2. Consistency of inflation forecasts: point estimate vs. mean implied by the probability
                                                 distribution.

                                                                                        Regression
             Dependent variable:
                                                                                    OLS         Quantile
             Point forecast    ,
                                                                                    (1)            (2)
             Panel A: all observations
             Mean forecast implied by the distribution, ^       ,                 1.167***        1.111***
                                                                                 (0.063)         (0.053)
             Constant                                                             0.566*         -0.333
                                                                                 (0.339)         (0.333)

             Observations                                                            716            716
             R-squared                                                              0.261

             Panel B: firms with ^ ,      ≤ 5%
             Mean forecast implied by the distribution, ^       ,                 0.951***        1.026***
                                                                                 (0.246)         (0.043)
             Constant                                                             0.933          -0.103
                                                                                 (0.774)         (0.141)

             Observations                                                            229            229
             R-squared                                                              0.108

             Panel C: Firms with ^ ,       > 5%
             Mean forecast implied by the distribution, ^       ,                 0.798***        0.916***
                                                                                 (0.191)         (0.191)
             Constant                                                             3.375**         1.099
                                                                                 (1.409)         (1.398)

             Observations                                                            487            487
             R-squared                                                              0.035


Notes: Responses are from the follow-up survey. Robust standard errors are reported in column (1). ***, **, * shows
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                      63
  Appendix Figure 4.1. Point forecast for inflation vs. mean forecast implied by the probability distribution.
               40
               30
               20
               10
               0




                      0              2                4               6                8                   10
                              Average predicted inflation from the prob. distribution, fu survey

                          Belief about inflation over next 12 months, fu survey              Fitted values



Notes: ^   ,        is on the horizontal axis.   ,   is on the vertical axis. Responses are from the first follow-up survey.




                                                                                                                           64
                                                                                      APPENDIX 6

               Firms’ expectations of aggregate inflation vs. expected changes in own unit costs

Some surveys of firms, such as the Business Inflation Expectations survey of the Atlanta Federal Reserve, ask
firms about their expectations of future changes in their unit costs rather than their expectations of aggregate
inflation. In the third wave of the survey, we asked firms the following two questions to assess the potential
relationship between these two distinct concepts:
Expected changes in unit costs:
“During the next twelve months, by how much do you think your firm’s unit costs will change? Please provide
an answer in percentage terms.”

Benchmark inflation question:
During the next twelve months, by how much do you think overall prices in the economy will change? Please
provide an answer in percentage terms.


We then compare firms’ answers to the two questions in Appendix Figure 6.1 below. The correlation between
firms’ expectations over future aggregate inflation and their expectations over their future changes in unit costs is
essentially zero.
            Appendix Figure 6.1. Expectations of future inflation vs. future changes in own unit costs
                                                            20
               Expected inflation over the next 12 month, %




                                                                                                                ρ = 0.012
                       5            10  0        15




                                                                 0       5             10             15             20       25
                                                                     Expected change in unit cost over the next 12 month, %


Notes: The vertical axis is firm’s expectations about aggregate inflation and horizontal axis is firm’s expectations about
future changes in their own unit costs.




                                                                                                                                   65
                                                      APPENDIX 7

                                            Additional tables and figures

                   Appendix Table 1. How Firms Respond to Higher Inflation Expectations

     Panel A.
                                                                      Response
     Variable                             increase                    no change                    decrease
        price                              0.354                        0.604                       0.042
        wage                               0.253                        0.727                       0.019
        employment                         0.274                        0.715                       0.011
        investment                         0.293                        0.694                       0.013
     Panel B.
                                                                   Wage response
     Price response                       increase                  no change                      decrease
         increase                          0.130                      0.217                         0.007
         no change                         0.114                      0.480                         0.011
         decrease                          0.009                      0.030                         0.002
     Panel C.
                                                               Employment response
     Wage response                        increase                 no change                       decrease
        increase                           0.082                     0.167                          0.004
        no change                          0.184                     0.536                          0.007
        decrease                           0.007                     0.012                          0.000
     Panel D.
                                                               Employment response
     Investment response                  increase                 no change                       decrease
         increase                          0.089                     0.200                          0.004
         no change                         0.182                     0.504                          0.007
         decrease                          0.002                     0.011                          0.000


Notes: Panel A presents shares of firms responding “increase”, “decrease”, or “no change” to the survey question is “If you
thought overall prices in the economy over the next 12 months were going to rise by more than what you are currently
forecasting, would you be more likely to [increase/decrease/no change] your [prices/employment/investment/wages]?”
Panels B-D show breakdowns of how firms responded to pairs of questions. See section 4.1 for details.




                                                                                                                        66
     Appendix Table 2. Ranking of attention and associated backcast errors and forecast uncertainty.
                       Regressor: 1&PQRS ? > PQRS B '                   Regressor: PQRS ? − PQRS B
X                       Inflation    Inflation     UE                    Inflation   Inflation      UE
Y                          UE           GDP        GDP                      UE          GDP         GDP
                       (1)          (2)        (3)                      (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                                               4:
               Panel A: dependent variable is the relative uncertainty in forecasts log 3 %; 6
                                                                                         4        %
Rank regressor         -0.109***      -0.107***      -0.027             -0.042***     -0.032**         -0.008
                       (0.040)        (0.041)        (0.035)            (0.014)       (0.013)          (0.015)

Observations               993           1,030           967                993           1,030               967
R-squared                 0.032          0.036          0.020              0.035          0.035              0.019

                                                                                         |= ?>@A ?>@A |
          Panel B: dependent variable is the relative size of backcast errors log . |=>                  1
                                                                                           > B>@A B>@A |
Rank regressor         -1.917***      -1.661***      -1.009***          -0.687***     -0.538***        -0.487***
                       (0.069)        (0.071)        (0.065)            (0.025)       (0.022)          (0.027)

Observations           1,133          1,117          1,112              1,133         1,117            1,112
R-squared              0.492          0.510          0.193              0.520         0.521            0.243


Notes: This table replicates Table 13 with firm and manager controls used in Table 4. See notes to Table 13 for more details.




                                                                                                                          67
      Appendix Table 3. Determinants of tracking and importance of inflation for business decisions.
                                                                             Relative importance of
                                                  Track inflation             inflation for business
                                                                                     decisions
                                                (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
    Firm characteristics
       Log(Age)                              -0.032          -0.021          0.056            0.037
                                             (0.022)         (0.022)        (0.043)          (0.044)
       Log(Employment)                       -0.037          -0.054**        0.052            0.082*
                                             (0.023)         (0.022)        (0.045)          (0.044)
       Labor’s share of costs                -0.010***       -0.000          0.016***        -0.000
                                             (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.004)
       Foreign trade share                   -0.002**        -0.003***       0.002            0.004*
                                             (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.002)          (0.002)
       Number of Competitors                  0.003***        0.003**       -0.007***        -0.006**
                                             (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.003)          (0.003)
       Avg. margin                           -0.012***       -0.004**        0.021***         0.009**
                                             (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)
       Share of revenue from LT customers    -0.005***       -0.005***       0.010***         0.009***
                                             (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)
    Manager characteristics
       Age                                    0.001           0.001         -0.002           -0.001
                                             (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)          (0.003)
       Education:
           Some college                      -0.035          -0.020          0.033            0.006
                                             (0.032)         (0.031)        (0.062)          (0.060)
           College                            0.022           0.018         -0.059           -0.053
                                             (0.038)         (0.037)        (0.071)          (0.070)
           Graduate (MA+)                     0.039           0.055         -0.061           -0.089
                                             (0.040)         (0.040)        (0.078)          (0.076)
       Tenure                                 0.001           0.002         -0.001           -0.003
                                             (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.005)          (0.005)
       Income                                -0.000          -0.000          0.001            0.001
                                             (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.001)          (0.001)

    Industry FE                                          No               Yes                 No               Yes
    Observations                                        1,139            1,139               1,139            1,139
    R-squared                                           0.277            0.313               0.242            0.276


Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the dummy variable equal to one if a firm tracks inflation and zero
otherwise. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the importance rank of inflation (relative to GDP and
unemployment rate) for a firm’s business decisions. The score runs from 1 (most importance) to 3 (least importance).
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,**, * denotes statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively.




                                                                                                                          68
            Appendix Figure 1: Distribution of 12-Month Ahead Inflation Forecasts by Industry




                           .2
                                                                            Manufacturing
                                                                            Trade
                                                                            Prof. & Fin. Services
                           .15                                              Construction & Transport
                        density
                          .1
                           .05
                           0




                                  0        5           10              15            20            25
                                                            forecast


Notes: Each panel plots the distribution of the firms’ forecasts of inflation over the next twelve months by industry, as
defined in Table 1. Data is from the main survey. See section 5.2 for details.




                                                                                                                      69
