                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DELAY FUNCTIONS AS THE FOUNDATION OF TIME PREFERENCE:
                TESTING FOR SEPARABLE DISCOUNTED UTILITY

                                        Keith Marzilli Ericson
                                            Jawwad Noor

                                        Working Paper 21095
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21095


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




We are grateful to Larry Epstein, Bart Lipman and Faruk Gul for very useful discussions, to Glenn
Harrison and Daniel Schunk for detailed comments and discussions of the experimental literature.
Helpful comments from seminar participants at Boston University, Caltech, Cornell, UC San Diego,
UC Santa Barbara, UC Irvine, Johns Hopkins, NYU, LSE and U of Glasgow and participants at the
Canadian Economic Theory Conference (2010) and European Summer Symposium in Economic Theory
(2010) are also gratefully acknowledged. The usual disclaimer applies. We acknowledge funding from
Boston University. This paper subsumes an earlier paper circulated as "Time Preference: Experiments
and Foundations". The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Keith Marzilli Ericson and Jawwad Noor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Delay Functions as the Foundation of Time Preference: Testing for Separable Discounted
Utility
Keith Marzilli Ericson and Jawwad Noor
NBER Working Paper No. 21095
April 2015
JEL No. D01,D03,D9,D91

                                              ABSTRACT

Delay functions, which vary timing of rewards but fix the money dimension, can elicit the form of
discount functions with minimal assumptions. We present a general theorem that characterizes the
set of discount functions and utility indices compatible with any 'regular' preference. We provide conditions
to test for separable discounted utility (SDU). We elicit individual delay functions for a range of amounts
and time horizons. When we impose SDU assumptions, we classify more than half our analysis sample
as exponential discounters. However, we reject SDU assumptions for 68% of the sample in favor of
magnitude-dependent discounting with time distortion.


Keith Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu

Jawwad Noor
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston MA 02215
jnoor@bu.edu
1. Introduction
This paper proposes a behavioral object we refer to as "delay functions" as an al-
ternative method for studying time preference. While there is a major empirical
debate over whether individuals are exponential or hyperbolic discounters,1 both
exponential and hyperbolic models share the common assumption that the agent’s
preferences are represented by a Separable Discounted Utility (SDU),

                                    U (m; t) = D(t) u(m);

where time and money are evaluated separately. Delay functions allow researchers to
directly test the SDU assumption and can provide information about the structure
of discounting even if SDU assumptions are violated. We conduct an experiment
measuring delay functions on a sample of the American population and …nd that
the SDU assumption is rejected for 68% of our analysis sample.2 We also discuss the
signi…cance of this …nding.
    Most empirical discounting studies work with "present value" data in which the
dates of the rewards are …xed and an amount $l is elicited that makes the subject
indi¤erent between $s at time t1 and $l at time t2 : Researchers then typically assume
an SDU model and attempt to estimate D and u:
    Delay functions instead ask, what delay l (s; t) makes the subject indi¤erent
between $s at time t and $l at time l (s; t)? Delay functions thus …x the money
dimension for both earlier and later rewards, and vary only the time dimension for
the later reward. Speci…cally, for a …xed small reward s and large reward l; a delay
function elicits for each t the delay from time zero l (s; t) such that

                                      (s; t)    (l;   l (s; t)):                              (1.1)

That is, the subject reveals that s at time t is as good as l at time l (s; t). This
delay function reveals that the ‘loss of attractiveness’(discounting) of s due to a
delay over any interval [t; t0 ] is equal to that of l over [ l (s; t); l (s; t0 )], and thus it is
an embodiment of the agent’s discount function. Delay functions can be obtained in
an experimental setting by using a ‘multiple delay list’rather than a ‘multiple price
list’procedure, or alternatively by the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak mechanism.
   1
    See e.g.Andreoni and Sprenger [2012], Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger [2013].
   2
    This result is consistent with recent research of Ericson et al. [forthcoming], showing that
a non-SDU heuristic model outperforms all common SDU models in a cross-validated prediction
exercise. Their heuristic model, however, is only de…ned for binary choices, not multiple price list
or multiple delay list elicitation methods.


                                                 2
    Delay functions allow researchers to estimate general discounting models that
allow subjects to discount di¤erent size rewards di¤erently ("magnitude-dependent
discounting"). Existing evidence suggests that this may be the case: experiments
often …nd a magnitude e¤ect in choice, with subjects seeming to exhibit more patience
towards larger rewards (Frederick et al [2002], Noor [2011], Andersen et al. [2013]).3
    The main theoretical result in this paper delivers an explicit formula for com-
puting the subject’s discount function on the basis of the data . This is done for
preferences with very little structure: complete, transitive, continuous preferences
that satisfy monotonicity and impatience, admitting General Discounted Utility rep-
resentations of the form
                              U (m; t) = D(m; t) u(m);
where D( ; 0) = 1. We provide the expression for D in terms of . The general
theorem is then specialized for the purpose of applications. In particular, we are in-
terested in tests for the existence of SDU representation. While SDU is an attractive
theoretical assumption (parsimony, appealing axioms), its descriptive validity is of
interest here. Thus, it is valuable to have a simple test and let the data speak on
whether separability adequately describes decision-makers’behavior.
    Our main specialization restricts attention to a ‡exible class of delay functions:
                                (m; t) = (a(m)t + b(m))1= :
This subsumes the behavior of common SDU models (exponential, generalized hyper-
bolic), where delay functions are linear and of the speci…c form (m; t) = [1 + kb(m)] t+
b(m);with k      0 and b decreasing in m: The ‡exible functional form permits non-
linearity in the delay function. For this class of delay functions, the test for SDU
discounting is simply that there is some k 0 such that a(m) = 1 + kb(m) for all
m.
    We prove that subjects who fail the SDU test can nevertheless be attributed
the magnitude-dependent exponential discounting with time-distortion: D(m; t) =
e a(m) t where a is decreasing. In this model, the subject is more patient towards
larger rewards, as suggested by the magnitude e¤ect. Magnitude-dependent discount-
ing could arise from a decision process where the agent has limited cognitive resources
and …nds it optimal to pay more attention only to higher rewards. It may also re-
late to models of mental accounting in which larger rewards are assigned to di¤erent
accounts, or models of self-control and temptation preferences (e.g. Gul and Pe-
sendorfer [2001], Fudenberg and Levine [2006]) in which the degree of self-control
  3
    Whether this observed fact rejects SDU is controversial, because experiments must typically
estimate both D (t) and the curvature of u (m). The delay function approach does not require us
to estimate u:

                                              3
implemented may vary with the magnitude of reward at stake. Time distortions are
motivated by a literature suggesting non-linear perception of time (e.g. Zauberman
et al. [2009]).
    We elicit delay functions in an experiment on a representative sample of the
American population recruited from a professional sampling service. We conduct all
our estimation at the individual level, allowing for heterogeneity across individuals
in preferences and models. We …rst assume that delay functions are linear ( = 1 in
the above class) and that the agents are SDU (a(m) = 1 + kb(m) for all m). Within
this subclass, the individual is exponential if k = 0 and hyperbolic if k > 0. We
…nd that the median k in our analysis sample is virtually zero, suggesting that more
than half of our sample were exponential discounters if we limited consideration to
SDU models with linear delay functions only.4 However, we then directly test the
SDU assumption. For 68% of our analysis sample, we reject SDU (with or without
time distortion) at p < 0:05; …nding strong evidence of non-SDU discounting. Using
model selection criteria, only 18% of our sample has a best-…t model that is consistent
with SDU. These results suggest that if researchers only examine SDU models, they
may mistakenly conclude that individuals are exponential discounters.
    The rejection of separability has a signi…cant implication for the extrapolation of
experimental results. The only way experimental results involving small stakes can be
used to make assertions about choices involving large stakes is precisely by assuming
separability. Without separability, a theory is needed to understand the validity of
such assertions. The results also reveal that there is a possibly signi…cant descriptive
price paid by research that looks for economic explanations within the class of SDU
models. A worthwhile avenue for future research is to model magnitude-dependent
discounting of the type revealed in our experiment and to study its implications in
economic settings.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We close the introduction with
related literature. Section 2 presents the main theoretical results and Section 3
presents specializations. Section 4 presents our experiment and results and Section
5 concludes. All proofs are contained in appendices.
    Related literature
    We term the common method of eliciting discount functions as the "present
value" approach: subjects choice between dated rewards (m; t) and give indi¤erence
points of the form (s; t) (l; t0 ); where, for any dates t,t0 either the future reward l
is …xed and the subjects’ "present value" s is obtained, or the present reward s is
   4
    Using a related elicitation method, Attema et al [2010] restrict consideration to SDU models
and …nd that 58% of classi…able subjects were exponential discounters. They do not, however, test
the SDU assumption.


                                               4
…xed and the "future value" l is obtained.5 In recording how present/future value of
a reward changes with t, the data re‡ects behavior when both the money and time
dimensions are changed. This is re‡ected in how conclusions are drawn about the
discount function. Presuming the SDU model, the discount function D(t) is elicited
by computing
                                            u(s)
                                    D(t) =       ;
                                            u(l)
and so eliciting the discount function requires an assumption on u. The early liter-
ature assumed that u is linear. Since this assumption typically yields implausibly
high discount rates, the literature has sought methods of eliciting discount functions
and the curvature of u simultaneously. Andersen et al [2008] replace the linearity
assumption with the expected utility assumption, and they use both risk preferences
and time preferences to jointly estimate several speci…cations of u and D. Andreoni
and Sprenger [2012] replace the linearity assumption with the assumption that pref-
erences
P        over consumption streams are represented by a time-additive SDU model
   D(t)u(mt ) with CRRA u. Subjects are asked to choose their allocation of an
endowment over two periods for di¤erent interest rates and endowments, and thus
their intertemporal demand curves are obtained, to which u and D are jointly …t.
    The theoretical literatures on multi-attribute utility and conjoint measurement
(Fishburn [1967], Krantz et al [1971]) introduce the “sawtooth method” to behav-
iorally isolate the components of any separable representation, and this is built on
the idea of varying only one dimension while …xing others.6 Attema et al’s [2010]
study of discount functions and Wakker and Dene¤e’s [1996] study of probability
weighting are experimental implementations of the sawtooth method. The delay
function approach presented in this paper di¤ers from the sawtooth method: It is
established for preferences that do not necessarily lie in the SDU class. Moreover, the
theoretical derivation of the discount function is very di¤erent – we …nd a solution
to a functional equation rather than doing a direct construction with the sawtooth
   5
      See Fredrick et al [2002] for a review of the experimental literature, and later experimental
work by Coller and Williams [1999] and Harrison et al [2002].
    6
      These papers consider a preference over binary attributes (x; y): Fix any y, y 0 and x0 and
suppose that x1 is a quantity such that the agent exhibits (x1 ; y) (x0 ; y 0 ). Furthermore, suppose
it is determined that, iteratively for i = 2; ::; n; that (xi ; y) (xi 1 ; y 0 ): If the preference has a
                                                                                                v(xi )
multiplicative representation, U (x; y) = v(x) u(y), then each indi¤erence point satis…es v(x     i 1)
                                                                                                       =k
                                                0
for all i = 1; ::; n; for some constant k := u(y )
                                             u(y) . Since v is unique up to an a¢ ne transformation,
v(x0 ) and v(x1 ) can be normalized, and consequently v is pinned down on fx0 ; ::; xn g. The grid
can be made arbitrarily …ner. This procedure is referred to as the ‘saw-tooth method’ (Fishburn
[1967]) and the noted sequence is an example of a ‘standard sequence’(Krantz et al [1971]).



                                                    5
method. Finally, we avoid incentive compatibility issues that exist in the experi-
mental application of the sawtooth method, as discussed in Harrison and Ruström
[2009].7
    Relatedly, Laury, McInnes, and Swarthout [2012] also show a procedure for elic-
iting discount rates using variation in the probability a payment will be made, rather
than the amount (as in the present value approach) or the delay (as in our proposed
approach). Their approach also assumes SDU, as well as either expected utility
theory or a particular probability weighting function. Similarly, Olea and Strzalecki
(2014) provide a method using "annuity compensations" to estimate quasi-hyperbolic
discounting without estimating the utility function u: Their approach assumes a
quasi- or semi-hyperbolic discounting model–members of the SDU class–while our
approach can test the underlying SDU assumption.
    Our theoretical analysis applies to any type of dated reward (money, food, work,
etc.). Our experiment uses money, following most of the literature. However, there is
a dispute over whether money from experiments is consumed when received. While
many models assume that individuals will smooth their consumption across time,
models of mental accounting or dual-self models (e.g. Fudenberg and Levine [2006])
predict that income from experiments may be consumed when received. Andersen
et al. [2008] have data on risk questions and time-money tradeo¤ questions, and
jointly estimate the curvature of utility, discount function, and degree of consumption
smoothing. They estimate that payments are consumed when received; see also
Booij and van Praag [2009]. However, in recent work, Augenblick, Niederle, and
Sprenger [2013] …nd substantial di¤erences in the degree of preference reversals for
money versus real e¤ort tasks, suggesting choices over money may not reveal the
discount function. However, if individuals do smooth consumption over time, taking
advantage of outside-the-lab borrowing and lending, then subjects’ choices should
reveal the interest rate they face (Cubitt and Read [2007]). If the interest rate faced
is constant in the range of dollar amounts considered (in our experiment, $50 to
$100), then their choices should appear as though they were SDU discounters. We
in fact reject SDU for most subjects. This rejects, at the very least, exponential
discounting of income (as opposed to consumption).
   7
    In the sawtooth method, a subject’s answer to one question becomes an input into the next
question. Therefore by misstating preferences it is possible for subjects to a¤ect the sequence of
questions they face in a way that improves their expect outcome.




                                                6
2. Theoretical Foundations
We present here the main theoretical result that provides the foundations for our
experimental procedure.
    The primitive of our analysis is a revealed preference relation % over the set
of dated rewards X = M T , where time is continuous and given by T = R+ ,
with generic elements t; t0 , and the set of rewards (e.g. money) is a bounded interval
M = [0; m] with generic elements m; m0 ; s; l: Data on such a preference is the minimal
and simplest data that may be used to study the basic structure of time preference
in a general way.
    The choice data needed for our analysis is the delay function : M T ! T ,
which is obtained via the indi¤erence:

                                     (m; t)     (m; (m; t));

for all 0 < m m and each t. That is, (m; t) is de…ned as the date such that m at
t is just as good as m at (m; t).8 Varying t leads to a variation in the desirability of
(m; t), and this is measured by variation in the delay (m; ). The simplest example is
a linear delay function, (m; t) = a(m)t + b(m). The delay function can be obtained
in practice by using the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak mechanism or by adapting the
Multiple Price List (MPL) popularized by Coller and Williams [1999] and Harrison
et al [2002].9
     Our general result presumes only that the preference % admits a General Dis-
counted Utility (GDU) representation:

                                   U (m; t) = D(m; t) u(m);

where u : M ! R+ is a utility index (a strictly increasing, continuous function
satisfying u(0) = 0) and D : M T ! (0; 1) is a discount function (a continuous,
strictly decreasing function satisfying D(m; 0) = 1 and limt!1 D(m; t) = 0 for all
m > 0) such that D(m; t)u(m) is strictly increasing in m. We will often refer to the
   8
      Compared to the notation l (s; ) in the Introduction for any pair of rewards s l, here we …x
the largest reward l at m, and suppress it in the notation.
    9
      An MPL asks questions of the form “Do you prefer $100 now or $x in 6 months?”where x varies
over a grid x1 ; :::; xN +1 of dollar amounts. The implied interest rate associated with x increases
monotonically moving down the list, and the point at which the subject switches from preferring
the earlier reward to the later reward determines an interval [xi ; xi+1 ] within which an indi¤erence
point ‘($100;now)         ($z;6 months)’ lies. A ‘Multiple Delay List’ asks a sequence of questions of
the form “Do you prefer $50 in 1 month or $100 in t months?” where t varies over a range of time
periods t1 ; ::; tN +1 in a way that the implied interest rate decreases monotonically moving down the
list.

                                                  7
tuple (D; u) as the GDU representation. If a preference admits a GDU representation
then we say it is regular. Lemma A.1 con…rms that regularity corresponds only to
very basic properties such completeness, transitivity, monotonicity and impatience.10
    Any increasing transformation of a GDU representation yields another GDU rep-
resentation, so there are an in…nity of such representations for a given preference.11
In order to demonstrate the generality of our approach to studying discount func-
tions, we proceed without requiring more structure on the preference or restricting
attention to any particular subclass of representations. Later we specialize to prepare
for applications.
    The exhaustive set of restrictions on the delay function implied by the regularity
assumption is given in the following proposition.

Proposition 2.1.     is generated by a regular preference % if and only if:
  (i) (m; t) is continuous.
  (ii) For any t; ( ; t) is strictly decreasing and limm!0 (m; t) = 1.
  (iii) For m > 0, (m; ) is strictly increasing and (m; t) = t for all t.

    Part (ii) re‡ects monotonicity with respect to money: the delay function increases
monotonically to in…nity as m decreases to 0. Intuitively, as the sooner-smaller
reward m decreases and becomes less desirable, the large reward has to be pushed
into the future in order to maintain indi¤erence. In a similar fashion, part (iii) re‡ects
monotonicity with respect to time.

2.1. General Framework
The main result in this paper identi…es the set of discount functions attributable to
the preference %, and the utility index u that corresponds to each discount function.
Say that a function g : R+ ! R+ is a restricted transformation if it is continuous,
strictly increasing, unbounded and satis…es g(0) = 0.
  10
     The intuitive appeal underlying the connection between delay functions and discount functions
does not rely on transitivity, so we expect that our results can be extended to models of intransitive
preference, such as Ok and Masatlioglu [2007]. We maintain regularity since it enables a clear
exposition.
  11
     To see this, …rst note that for any utility index u there exists a unique representation U for
a regular preference % (for this standard result see for instance Fishburn and Rubinstein [1982]).
Our assertion then follows from the fact that any representation U can be uniquely written in the
form of a GDU representation (D; u) as follows: for any representation U , the utility index u in
any GDU functional form is uniquely de…ned by u(m) = U (m; 0), and D is uniquely de…ned by
D(m; t) = Uu(m)
             (m;t)
                   for all m > 0.



                                                  8
Theorem 2.2. Consider a regular preference % and its delay function . Then %
admits the GDU representation (D; u) if and only if there is a restricted transforma-
tion g and some scalar u(m) > 0 such that for all m > 0 and t;
                                         [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))]
                           D(m; t) = e                           ;

and for all m    0;
                                         g( (m;0))
                              u(m) = e               u(m):


    The result characterizes all the discount functions and corresponding utility in-
dices that can be attributed to the preference %. The functional forms involve
an increasing transformation g of . Discount functions are de…ned in terms of
the di¤erence g( (m; t)) g( (m; 0)), whereas utility indices are de…ned in terms
of g( (m; 0)). Observe that the discount function is completely characterized in
terms of the delay function . While u is also characterized in terms of , it es-
sentially only re‡ects the information contained in present values: by de…nition,
(m; 0)    (m; (m; 0)). In contrast D requires information on how changes as a
function of t. The result reveals that obtaining a functional form for is all that is
necessary to obtain all the discount functions attributable to the subject.
    The simple idea behind the proof is as follows. Note that the two indi¤erence
points
                    (s; 0) (m; (s; 0)) and (s; t) (m; (s; t))
reveal that the loss of attractiveness (due to discounting) in (s; t) relative to (s; 0)
must equal the loss in (m; (s; t)) relative to (m; (s; 0)). This translates into the
statement that any discount function D attributable to the preference % must satisfy
             D(s;t)    D(m; (s;t))
the equality D(s;0) = D(m;  (s;0))
                                   . By de…nition, D(s; 0) = 1, and so this inequality
can be rewritten as:

                       D(s; t) D(m; (s; 0)) = D(m; (s; t)):

But this is a functional equation where D is the unknown function and         is the
known function. The proof veri…es that a discount function D is a solution to this
functional equation if and only if there exists a utility index u for which (D; u) is
a GDU representation for the preference %. The general solution of the functional
equation is leads to the statement of the theorem. (In the appendix we prove a more
general result by allowing M to be unbounded).



                                           9
2.2. The E¢ ciency of Delay Functions
Theorem 2.2 not withstanding, the set of compatible discount functions can be com-
puted through present value data as well: it is readily seen that (D; u) is a GDU
representation for a regular preference % if and only if u is a utility index and the
discount function satis…es
                                          u(p(m; t))
                               D(m; t) =             ;
                                             u(m)
where p(m; t) is the present value of (m; t). The proof of this is trivial, and it provides
a characterization of the set of discount functions and corresponding utility indices
just as Theorem 2.2 does.
    However, in practical settings, where data is necessarily limited, -data better
reveals the information in % than present value data tradeo¤ data. We substantiate
this claim here in the context of the SDU model. Fix the set of periods and prizes
and order them so that 0 = t1 < t2 < ::: < tJ and 0 < m1 < ::: < mI . Write the
corresponding …nite space of dated rewards as XIJ := fm1 ; ::; mI g f0; t2 ; ::; tJ g.
Suppose that the present value data is given by pij such that

                         (pij ; 0)   (mi ; tj ) for all mi and all tj > 0.

Assume that the analyst is interested in SDU representations. Say that the (magnitude-
independent) discount function D is attributable to the present value data if there
exists a utility index u such that u(pij ) = D(tj )u(mi ) for all (mi ; tj ) 2 XIJ . Let the
set of attributable D be denoted by DIp . This is indexed by I since we will be varying
I below.
    Given XIJ , let p (= pI1 ) denote the present value of (mI ; t1 ), the largest reward
at the earliest future period. Suppose that -data is obtained by determining j
such that
                            (p ; j ) (mI ; tj ) for all tj > 0:
That is, we determine j such that (p ; j ) = tj . Say that the discount function D
is attributable to the -data if D(t)D( (p ; t1 )) = D( (p ; t)) for all these periods
             12
  1 ; ::; J .   Denote the set of attributable D by D .
      The present value and -data are related by a common time horizon tJ and also
the indi¤erence point (pI1 ; 0)       (mI ; t1 ) which de…nes both pI1 and (pI1 ; 0). The
following theorem reveals that the J 1 data points for are more discerning than
the I (J 1) data points for present values, regardless of the number I of rewards.
  12
     This is equivalent to requiring that there are utilities 0 < u(p ) < u(mI ) such that D(t)u(p ) =
D( (p ; t))u(mI ) for these t’s. Observe that u(p ) = D( (p ; t1 ))u(mI ) must hold and so the
utilities can be substituted out, yielding the original de…nition.

                                                 10
Theorem 2.3. Suppose that % admits some SDU representation. Then for all I,

                                             D        DIp :

    The proof of the theorem is based on the following insight: limited present value
data will at best put bounds on the participant’s true delay function and this is
the only extent to which it restricts the range of possible D’s. The remainder of
the data, no matter how rich, will only help determine what u goes with any such
D (observe that in Theorem 2.2 the utility index is determined by ( ; 0), which
essentially comes from money-time trade-o¤ data). Limited direct data on          will
speak more than data that just puts bounds on .
    The ‘true’D is in both D and DIp . The theorem therefore tells us that there is
greater e¢ ciency achieved by using , in that we can get closer to the true D with
fewer data points. Stated di¤erently, the theorem reveals that the degree of potential
misidenti…cation is greater with present value data than it is with -data. In this
sense, limited data provides a better picture of the agent’s entire preference than
does present value, which is the claim we set out to establish. This theorem thus
provides further validation for our claim that serves as a behavioral de…nition of
discount functions.

3. Specializations13
We proved the result for a class as general as the GDU class so as to enable a wide
variety of applications. Practical interest will typically lie in subclasses with much
more structure, such as the SDU class or its generalizations. We consider a class
smaller than GDU that subsumes SDU. In the sequel we further specialize within
this class.
    The literature discusses two dimensions along which discounting can deviate from
exponential discounting. The …rst is time distortion (non-linear perception of time, as
in Zauberman et al. [2009]). The second is magnitude-dependence (greater patience
towards larger rewards, as in the magnitude e¤ect discussed in Frederick et al [2002]);
this has not received much attention in theoretical literature. A functional form that
allows for both is:

                                                       a(m) g(t)
                                       D(m; t) = e                 :              (3.1)
for some a : M ! R+ and g : R+ ! R+ . Note that the SDU model obtains if
a( ) = 1:
 13
      This subsection can be skipped without loss of continuity.

                                                 11
       The proposition highlights some of the ordinal content of the representation.

Proposition 3.1. Consider a regular preference that admits a discount function
D(m; t) = e a(m) g(t) . Then:
   (a) a( ) is a continuous decreasing function satisfying a ( ) > 0 and a(m) = 1.
   (b) g( ) is continuous, strictly increasing, unbounded and satis…es g(0) = 0. A
twice di¤erentiable g is linear if and only if the delay function is linear in t.

    The proposition reveals the following. First, given regularity, a must be decreasing
function of m. Intuitively, if a larger reward is discounted more heavily, then the agent
may prefer $50 over $100 at some large enough t, violating monotonicity. Therefore
the ordinal restriction of regularity is consistent with only one kind of magnitude-
dependence, namely that of greater patience towards larger rewards. Second, the
existence of time distortion is an ordinal property: it represents nonlinearity in the
delay function in t.
    To restrict attention to this class is to implicitly make an assumption on the
agent’s delay function. For completeness we clarify the technical restriction:14

Proposition 3.2. Consider a regular preference % and its delay function , and take
any a; g that satisfy the properties in Proposition 3.1. Then preference % admits a
GDU representation with a discount function of the form D(m; t) = e a(m) g(t) if and
only if satis…es,
                        g( (m; t)) g( (m; 0)) = a(m) g(t);                      (3.2)
for all m; t:

    The restriction on the delay function is not a transparent one, but what matters
for our purposes is that it is lax enough to allow for a variety of functional forms some
of which, as we will see below are adequate for a general analysis. Some examples
are presented in the table.
  14
     The proof of Proposition 3.2 notes that a discount function D(m; t) = e [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))]
in our main theorem takes the desired form if and only if the power term g( (m; t)) g( (m; 0))
equals a(m)f (t) for some function f . Observing that for m = m the power term becomes g(t) 0
it follows that f = g. Hence the condition (3.2).
   For the proof for Proposition 3.1, write (m) = e a(m) , suppose s < l and observe that Monotonic-
ity (ie, for any t, larger rewards are preferred) requires that (l)f (t) u(l) > (s)f (t) u(s) and thus
                f (t)
u(l)
u(s)> (s) (l)      for all t. If (s)
                                 (l) > 1, the unboundedness of f implies that this inequality cannot
hold for all t, a contradiction. Thus (s)         (l), and a( ) must be decreasing. The remaining
properties follow readily from regularity.



                                                 12
   -Function                                  Discount Function D           Generated by transformation:
   (m; t) = g 1 (g(t) + g( (m; 0)))           D(t) = e rg(t)                a (m) = 1; any g
   (m; t) = (1 +      (m; 0))t + (m; 0)       D(t) = (1 + t) 1              a (m) = 1; g(t) = ln(1 + t)
   (m; t) = a(m)t + (m; 0)                    D(m; t) = e ra(m) t           g(t) = t
                                  1
   (m; t) = [a(m) t + (m; 0) ]                D(m; t) = e ra(m) t           g(t) = t
                   a(s)
   (m; t) = [(1+ t) (1+ (m;0)) 1]             D(m; t) = (1 + t) '(m)        g(t) = ln(1 + t)
                                   Table 1:    -functions   and associated D.

    Unless the analyst uses richer data in order to pin down the representation, or
further restricts the representation (for instance we take g(t) = t in our application),
there may be more than one pair of a and g satisfying (3.2) for a given , and for
each such pair a di¤erent representation for the preference may be obtained. While
such non-uniqueness of a representation is a nuisance of sorts in theoretical work, in
the current context it is a strength: di¤erent representations may provide di¤erent
intuitive explanations for a given behavior, which may be relevant for interpretation
and applications. The usefulness of such nonuniqueness will be demonstrated in the
sequel, where we showed that behavior arising from hyperbolic discounting can be
replicated by magnitude-dependent discounting.

3.1. A Tractable Class of Delay Functions
To prepare for our experimental application of Theorem 2.2, we introduce a class of
delay functions that lies within the restricted framework of the previous subsection.
This is a functional form that accommodate familiar behaviors like Stationarity and
Preference Reversals but is ‡exible enough to accommodate nonlinearities in the
data, and more besides:
                                                                1
                                (m; t) = (a(m)t + b(m) ) ;                               (3.3)

for > 0. Given Proposition 3.1, regularity requires that a( ) is weakly decreasing
and satis…es a(m) = 1, and b( ) is strictly decreasing and satis…es b(m) = 0.15 Thus,
the curves (m; ) are upward sloping, non-intersecting, and the curves for lower m
lie strictly above those for higher m. Time distortion (curvature of the delay function
  15
    To see that a( ) must be weakly decreasing, suppose m > m0 and a(m) > a(m0 ) then for large
t we would obtain (m; t) > (m0 ; t), a contradiction.




                                              13
in t) is captured by . The delay function is linear (resp concave, convex) if = 1
(resp > 1, < 1).16
    We …rst identify conditions under which there exists an SDU representation. Refer
to magnitude-independent discount functions D(t) as separable discount functions.

Proposition 3.3. Consider a regular preference % and with a delay function that
has the nonlinear form (3.3). A separable discount function D(t) can be attributed
if and only if there exists k 0 such that, for all m,

                                     a(m) = 1 + kb(m) :                                      (3.4)

If k = 0, then the only attributable separable discount function is exponential dis-
counting with time distortion,
                                               rt
                                   D(t) = e         ;           r > 0:

If k > 0, then the only attributable separable discount function is hyperbolic dis-
counting with time distortion,
                                                        r
                                D(t) = (1 + kt )            ,     r > 0:


    Thus, the test for the existence of an SDU representation is simply that the
slopes a(m) must be a linear function of b(m) in (3.3). The slope k            0 of this
function determines the shape of the separable discount function, which can either
be exponential or hyperbolic, but with time distortion. If the delay function is linear
( = 1) then there is no time distortion and we obtain the corresponding standard
models.
    If the SDU test fails we can nevertheless still identify the non-SDU representation
that exists:17

Proposition 3.4. The delay function has the form (3.3) if and only if the following
general exponential discount function can be attributed to it:
                                               ra(m) t
                                D(m; t) = e                 ;      r>0

where a( ) is weakly decreasing in the size of the reward.
  16
      The expression for the second derivative of         (m; t) wrt to t is (1        )(a(m)t +
         1 2
b(m) )       t2( 1) [1 ( (m;t)
                            t  )  ], and the term in  the square brackets is always  negative since
  (m;t)
    t   > 1.
   17
      To prove this, simply apply Prop 3.2 with the transformation function g(r) = r .

                                                14
    As before, the direction of the magnitude dependence in a( ) is an ordinal re-
striction, and strongly reminiscent of the magnitude e¤ect discussed in the literature
(Frederick et al [2002]). The free parameter r needs additional data to pin down, but
for our purposes below it will su¢ ce to restrict attention to the canonical representa-
tion obtained by setting r = 1. An attractive feature of this canonical representation
is that all its parameters are …xed by :
    A noteworthy observation is that hyperbolic discounting is behaviorally a special
case of the general exponential discount function on the domain of dated rewards: all
subjects with linear are representable by general exponential discounting but only
a subset are representable by hyperbolic discounting. Therefore the analysis reveals
that magnitude-dependent discounting is an alternative explanation for preference
reversals attributed to hyperbolic discounting. The two forms of discounting are
substantially di¤erent in spirit. Hyperbolic discounting is suggestive of a self-control
problem, whereas the magnitude e¤ect is suggestive of bounded rationality: the
former suggests a passion for the present [1997] whereas the latter suggests that
subjects pay greater attention to larger rewards [2011].


4. Empirical Application
4.1. Experiment Design
For an empirical application of the method, we recruited 100 participants aged 18-65
from an online sampling service (Qualtrics) designed to produce an approximately
representative sample based on age, gender, and income.18 Prior to collecting this
data, we ran a pilot using participants recruited from an online labor market (Amazon
MTurk); results are quite similar.19
   Participants were paid a ‡at participation fee and received incentives to respond
truthfully, as 10% of participants were randomly selected to be paid for one of their
choices. This level of incentives is in line with previous work, e.g. Andersen et al.
  18
     The sampling service screens out inattentive participants who fail basic attention checks, such
as answering questions too quickly or answering illogically or inconsistently. 11 such participants
were screened out. Additionally, 20 subjects began the experiment but did not complete it. These
participants do not count toward our 100 completed participants.
  19
     The Mturk pilot was unincentivized. The procedure was similar, but di¤ered in the set of
smaller, sooner magnitudes considered: m 2 f$25; $50; $75; $90g :The pilot analysis sample (drop-
ping non-monotonic choices and subjects who ever have a list on which they always take the
larger-later option) was 44 of 118 participants; (many subjects always chose $100 over $25). In pi-
lot analysis sample, we …nd more evidence of decreasing impatience. We get similar results testing
model restrictions.



                                                15
2008 pay 10% of their sample.
    Participants faced a series of multiple delay list decisions. On each list, they were
asked to choose between (m; t)–smaller amount m at time t–and a series of options
(100; t + ), with 2 f1; 2; 3; 5; 7; 9; 13; 17; 22; 28; 35; 43; 68g : Participants saw lists
for 5 smaller-sooner amounts m 2 f$50; $60; $70; $80; $90g available at 6 di¤erent
time horizons for the smaller-sooner amount t 2 f0; 1; 3; 5; 12; 24g weeks, for a total
of 30 lists. As required by the theory, the larger-later amount was constant on all
lists (here, $100). Thus, on one particular list, participants choose between $50 at
time 0 versus $100 at time 1, then $50 at time 0 versus $100 at time 2, etc.
    Our objective is to …nd each participant’s delay function i (m; t) s.t. (m; t)
(m; i (m; t)): For each participant i on each multiple delay list, we determine the
indi¤erence point from the point at which the participant switches from choosing
the larger-later reward to the smaller-sooner reward. We place the indi¤erence point
at the midpoint of the interval: if the participant chooses larger-later at t + j and
smaller-sooner at t + j+1 then i (m; t) = 12 ( j + j+1 ) : If a participant always
chooses the earlier option on a list, i (m; t) = 12 (1 + 0) = 12 :
    So, for example, a participant who chose the larger-later option in "$50 in 1 week
v. $100 in 2 weeks", but the smaller-sooner option in "$50 in 1 week v. $100 in
3 weeks", has revealed they are willing to wait 2 weeks but not 3 weeks for $100.
Hence, i (25; 1) = 2:5: If a participant always chooses the larger-later option on a
particular list,20 they were too patient for us to estimate their delay function: High
levels of patience do not allow us to observe the characteristics of their discount
function: e.g. very patient exponential discounting looks very similar to very patient
hyperbolic discounting. This issue is not unique to our method; similar issues apply
to multiple price lists.
    To construct our Analysis Sample, we drop the 26/100 subjects who ever make
a non-monotonic choice (they do not have a unique switching point on some list).
We then limit to the 40/74 who never have a multiple delay list on which they
always choose the larger-later option. Of these excluded subjects, 26% make the
more patient choice on every question asked, and 59% always make the more patient
choice on the majority of multiple delay lists. Participants who are very patient do
not allow us to observe the characteristics of their discount function. In robustness
  20
    The maximum available delay o¤ered was constrained for the purposes of payment reliability
and feasibility. The latest available payment in this experiment was 92 weeks later, or almost 2
years. The preferences of patient participants could be better captured with lists that use higher
smaller-sooner amounts (e.g. m = 99). However, we wanted to limit the total number of decisions
made to avoid taxing participants’ attention and cognitive ability. Incentive-compatible dynamic
designs would be complicated to explain and implement. Pre-testing indicated that our chosen
range of magnitudes and delays captured the preferences of the largest fraction of participants.


                                               16
checks, we broaden our sample to include those participants who always choose the
larger-later option on less than 10 m; t pairs and impute a value of the delay function
for those choices; the fraction of subjects consistent with an SDU representation is
quite similar.

4.2. The Data
Our Analysis Sample has broad demographic coverage and is similar to the U.S.
population. It is 57% male, with a median age of 48, and 50% are married. By
comparison, the 18-65 U.S. population has a median age of 43 and a marriage rate
of about 50% (2011-2013 American Community Survey). Our sample has a range of
income levels: 33% have household incomes below $35,000 and 30% have household
incomes above $75,000. By comparison, about 35% of U.S. households have incomes
below $35,000 and about 33% have incomes about 75,000. The full sample also has
very similar characteristics.
    For each participant i, magnitude m of the smaller-sooner payment, and time
horizon t to the earlier payment, we calculate ti;m;t = i (m; t) t, which is the
maximum additional delay the participant is willing to accept while still choosing
the larger-later payment. The larger ti;m;t is, the more patient the choice. Figure
1 plots the average ti;m;t across participants, broken out separately by magnitude
of and time to the smaller-sooner payment. In the upper left panel, the average
maximum additional delay participants are willing to take to choose $100 over $50 is
10.7 weeks when the smaller-sooner reward was available today, and 13.1 weeks when
the smaller-sooner payment was available at 24 weeks. In the lower right panel, we
…nd that on average, participants are only willing to wait 3-4 additional weeks for
$100 over $90, regardless of when the $90 became available.
    Constant impatience (i.e. exponential discounting) implies that the maximum
additional delay ti;m;t should not vary by the horizon t to the smaller-sooner re-
ward, while decreasing impatience (e.g. hyperbolic discounting) implies that ti;m;t
should increase with t: Visually, Figure 1 shows only very limited evidence of de-
creasing impatience at the aggregate level– only the $50 v. $100 choice displays
a noticeable increasing pattern.21 But individual heterogeneity is important. We
regress the maximum additional delay for each participant i, amount m, horizon t
against participant-speci…c …xed e¤ects for smaller-sooner amount and for horizon
  21
    This is consistent with a stream of literature that has not found aggregate decreasing impatience
for monetary rewards, including McClure et al. [2004], who use the same payment method as we do,
and Andreoni and Sprenger [2012], who take care to remove many confounds in their estimation of
preferences. Other work, such as Olea and Strzalecki (2014), has found evidence of both decreasing
impatience and increasing impatience for monetary rewards.


                                                 17
             15                ∆tm,t giving indifference between $50 v. $100                                              ∆tm,t giving indifference between $60 v. $100




                                                                                                        15
                                                                                 13.1

                                                                                                                                                                            11.9
                                                                                                                   11.3       11.5
                                                           11.0           11.1                                                           11.3         11.1           11.2
                        10.7                  10.8
                                   10.3
  Mean ∆tm,t in Weeks




                                                                                             Mean ∆tm,t in Weeks
                  10




                                                                                                             10
  5




                                                                                             5
             0




                                                                                                        0
                                          t: time of earlier option                                                                  t: time of earlier option
                                           Today                      1 week                                                          Today                      1 week
                                           3 weeks                    5 weeks                                                         3 weeks                    5 weeks

                                           12 weeks                   24 weeks                                                        12 weeks                   24 weeks



                               ∆tm,t giving indifference between $70 v. $100                                              ∆tm,t giving indifference between $90 v. $100
             15




                                                                                                        15
                        10.5       10.5       10.4         10.2
  Mean ∆tm,t in Weeks




                                                                                             Mean ∆tm,t in Weeks
                  10




                                                                                                             10
                                                                                 9.5
                                                                          9.2
  5




                                                                                             5



                                                                                                                   3.8        3.8                                    3.7    3.9
                                                                                                                                          3.3          3.4
             0




                                                                                                        0




                                          t: time of earlier option                                                                  t: time of earlier option
                                           Today                      1 week                                                          Today                      1 week

                                           3 weeks                    5 weeks                                                         3 weeks                    5 weeks

                                           12 weeks                   24 weeks                                                        12 weeks                   24 weeks




Figure 1: Average maximum additional delay accepted for larger-later reward. Sam-
ple: Analysis Sample.

to the smaller-sooner payment: ti;m;t = im + it ;where im is a vector of indicator
variables for the smaller-sooner reward magnitudes interacted with participant, and
 it is a vector of indicator variables for the di¤erent t; also interacted with partici-
pant. While ti;m;t can vary across participants and amounts in an arbitrary way
(captured in im ), constant impatience requires that ti;m;t not depend on the hori-
zon t to the smaller-sooner reward. Thus, we test the restriction that all it = 0:We
reject this restriction (and thus constant impatience) via a likelihood ratio test at
p < 0:001:22
   22
      We can also test separately, for each participant, whether it = 0 for that particular i; but
doing so has much less power. For 25% of the participants in the Analysis Sample, we reject that
 it = 0 at p < 0:05:




                                                                                        18
4.3. Results
Having calculated the values of the delay function i (m; t) from participants’switch-
ing points; we then seek to characterize its structure. Given the values of i (m; t) for
each m; t pair, we estimate four delay functions via non-linear least squares. These
delay functions vary in whether they enforce SDU and/or no time distortion (i.e.
linear delay function) structure, and are as follows:

      SDU-Linear: i (m; t) = im + (1 + ki im ) t , where im varies across partici-
      pants and magnitudes, and ki varies across participants only and is common
      across magnitudes. Following Proposition 3.4, we constrain k 0:
                                                                     1
      SDU-NonLinear: i (m; t) = [ imi + (1 + ki imi ) t i ] i ; which adds the time
      distortion parameter i that can vary across participants; we still require ki 0:

      NonSDU-Linear:      i (m; t)   =   im +   im t;where   im ;   im   vary across participants
      and magnitudes.
                                                             1=
      NonSDU-NonLinear: i (m; t) = [ imi + im t i ] i ; which adds the time dis-
      tortion parameter i that can vary across participants.

    The SDU-Linear model is of particular interest, since most economic applications
of discounting assume SDU and do not allow for time distortion. When we estimate
the SDU-Linear model, we …nd the distribution of ki seen in Figure 2: the mean ki is
0.028, and the median ki is virtually zero (2.13 10 16 ), suggesting the the majority
of our sample are exponential discounters. In fact, for 75% of our sample, we cannot
reject the restriction that ki = 0 at the p < 0:05 level. (We …nd similarly small
median ki in the SDU-NonLinear model as well, as shown in Table 2 )
    However, what appears to be evidence of exponential discounting is instead an
artifact of imposing the SDU model. We reject the SDU restrictions, indicating
participants cannot be exponential (SDU) discounters. Because each model is more
general than the previous ones, we can use a likelihood ratio test to assess the restric-
tions implied SDU and linearity (no time distortion). The SDU model is simply the
NonSDU-NonLinear model with the constraints that im = 1 and im = 1 + ki im:
The parameter estimates in the Non-Linear Non-SDU then tell us how choices deviate
from the SDU model.
    Table 2 shows that we strongly reject the restrictions implied by the SDU model
using our likelihood ratio tests. For 68% of the sample we can reject at p < 0:05 the
restrictions implied by the SDU-Linear model in favor of the NonSDU-NonLinear


                                                19
                                      Distribution of estimated k i




                   1
                   .8 .6
               Fraction
                   .4
                   .2
                   0




                           0           .1             .2         .3            .4
                                                       ki



Figure 2: Distribution of Estimated ki Under the Assumption of the SDU-Linear
Model. Sample: Analysis Sample.

model; we reject the SDU-NonLinear in favor of the NonSDU-NonLinear model for
70% of the sample.23
    The non-linearity of the delay function (i.e. time distortion) is not crucial to
the results. We can only reject the NonSDU-Linear model in favor of NonSDU-
NonLinear for 38% of the sample. In additional to the results in the table, we have
also compared the SDU-Linear model directly to the NonSDU-Linear model. Doing
so simply …xes i = 1 and tests the restriction that im = 1 + ki im: For 58% of
the sample, we can reject at p < 0:05 the restriction implied by the SDU model in
favor of the Linear Non-SDU model.
    We then use a commonly used model selection criterion, the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC), to determine the "best-…t" model, without privileging any model
  23
    While it is slightly surprising that we reject the more general SDU model for a larger fraction of
the population, this can occur because the null model being tested against the unrestricted model
di¤ers. For the participant for which we reject the SDU-NonLinear model but not the SDU-Linear
model at p<0.05, we have veri…ed that while the SDU-NonLinear …ts slightly better than the SDU-
Linear model, the test rejects SDU-NonLinear at p=0.032 and SDU-Linear at p=0.054 because the
degrees of freedom for the SDU-NonLinear likelihood ratio test are 4 instead of 5.




                                                 20
as the null hypothesis. Of course, a model with more parameters will of course be
able to capture more variation in the data. However, the AIC trades o¤ a penalty
for additional parameters against the improved …t to select among models. Table
2 shows that one of the non-SDU models are preferred for 82% of participants.
The most frequently selected model is the NonSDU-NonLinear model, chosen for
53% of participants. In addition to the results in the table, we have also removed
consideration of non-linearity and compared the SDU-Linear model to the NonSDU-
Linear model. In this case, the AIC prefers the NonSDU-Linear model 73% of the
time over the SDU-Linear model.




                                       21
                                       Table 2: Model Selection and Delay Function Parameters
                                 % of Sample For Which Model is
      Model                    Chosen by AIC: Rejected by LR Test:                 Parameters: Mean, [Median], (Std. Dev.)
                                                                               m=50    m=90    m=50    m=90  ki                    i

      SDU-Linear               13%                 68%                        10.41     3.43                        2.84E-02
                                                                              [7.55]    [2.46]                      [2.13E-16]
                                                                              (9.84)    (3.53)                      (0.08229)
      SDU-NonLinear            5%                  70%                        10.72     3.90                        4.95E-02   1.03
                                                                              [7.42]    [3.19]                      [5.41E-12] [1.01]
                                                                              (10.22)   (3.65)                      (0.11284) (0.06)
      NonSDU-Linear            30%                 38%                        10.40     3.58     1.10      1.01
                                                                              [6.76]    [3.13]   [1.04]    [1.00]
                                                                              (9.59)    (3.22)   (0.38)    (0.19)
22




      NonSDU-NonLinear 53%                         NA                         9.80      3.54     1.36      1.05                   1.35
                                                                              [7.39]    [3.19]   [1.05]    [1.01]                 [1.14]
                                                                              (8.66)    (3.39)   (1.42)    (0.25)                 (1.19)
      Sample: Analysis Sample. Median parameters displayed. Mean parameters displayed, with medians in brackets and standard deviations in
     parentheses below. For the NonSDU-NonLinear model, the means and standard deviations exclude one extreme outlier subject. Likelihood
     ratio tests conducted relative to NonSDU-NonLinear model.
    For each model, the row in Table 2 displays the mean and median estimated
parameters for the all participants. Because each participant is described by a vector
of parameters (e.g. im for m = 50; 60; :::; 90) we display a subset of the parameters–
those for the lowest and highest m: The various m=50 parameters imply that for a
decision between $50 today and $100 sometime in the future, the median participant
would be willing to wait 6.76 weeks (as predicted by the NonSDU-Linear model) to
7.55 weeks (as predicted by the SDU-Linear model).24 The lower m=90 parameter
indicates that the median participant is willing to wait is only 2.5-3.2 weeks for $100
over $90 today. An mean m=50 value of 1.36 means that for each additional week
the smaller-sooner payment is delayed (t = 1; 2; :::) , on average participants would
be willing to wait an additional 0.36 weeks (=1.36-1) after the time of the smaller-
sooner payment. (Recall, the delay function is measured in absolute time, not time
relative to the smaller-sooner payment.) While the median subject has an near 1,
close to constant impatience, there can is substantial variation around the median.
Finally, captures the non-linearity in the delay function; it is more clearly described
in the …gure.
    To illustrate the di¤erent delay functions, we examine one particular partici-
pant in Figure 3; the population average parameters mask substantial individual
heterogeneity. The …gure displays the participant’s estimated delay functions for
two di¤erent smaller-sooner amounts m; for the SDU-Linear, NonSDU-Linear and
NonSDU-NonLinear models (we omit the SDU-NonLinear model for readability).
Each panel also includes a 45 line, which is the delay function that would be pro-
duced by SDU exponential discounting. First, note that on the right panel (m = 90);
the lines virtually overlap and are close to the 45 line, showing the models don’t make
very di¤erent predictions for the choice between $90 and $100. However, the models
substantially di¤er in the left panel, which describes the choice between $50 and
$100. Note that the NonSDU-Linear model and SDU-Linear model lines cross–we
…nd the SDU-Linear model predicts more patience when time to the smaller-sooner
payment t 0; but less patience when t is above 10. The NonSDU-NonLinear model
predicts a similar willingness-to-wait to the other models when the smaller-sooner
payment is available at short time horizons (t near zero). Yet it quickly diverges when
the smaller-sooner payment is available at a longer delay. At about 1 month to the
smaller-sooner payment (t = 4), the NonSDU-NonLinear delay function shows much
more patience than the SDU-Linear model: a willingness-to-wait of about 36 weeks,
12 weeks more than the approximately 25 weeks predicted by the other models.
  24
    Note that while Figure 1 shows the mean additional delay accepted for $50 v. $100 when t = 0
is about 10 weeks, the median additional delay is approximately 8 weeks, near to what is implied
by the m=50 estimates.


                                              23
           60                   Smaller-sooner m = 50                                                      Smaller-sooner m = 90




                                                                                      60
                40




                                                                                           40
  Φ(m,t), in weeks




                                                                             Φ(m,t), in weeks
           20




                                                                                      20
           0




                                                                                      0
                     0     5              10              15            20                      0     5              10              15            20
                           t: weeks to smaller sooner payment                                         t: weeks to smaller sooner payment

                                         Model                                                                      Model
                         SDU-Linear                  NonSDU-NonLinear                               SDU-Linear                  NonSDU-NonLinear
                         NonSDU-Linear               45° line                                       NonSDU-Linear               45° line




Figure 3: Delay Function Models Plotted Using an Example Participant’s Estimates.
Note: Parameters are as follow. SDU-Linear model: ki = 0:0055, 50 = 22:0;
 90 = 5:1: NonSDU-Linear:   50 = 18:2; 50 = 1:60; 90 = 5:9; 90 = 0:92: NonSDU-
NonLinear: = 0:50; 50 = 20:7; 50 = 0:77; 90 = 3:7; 90 = 0:67:

    Finally, a quick glance at Table 2 suggests that the results satisfy the conditions
that im and im decrease in m, as required by regularity. We more rigorously
verify this for the most general NonSDU-NonLinear model by estimating a linear
relationship between im and m and between im and m. Pooling all participants to
address noise,25 we …nd the expected statistically signi…cant negative trend on both
cases: im = 0:009m, im = 0:159m, rejecting a zero coe¢ cient with p < 0:10 in
both cases. (While our participant-speci…c estimates are subject to more noise, 68%
of the participant-speci…c trends are negative, and only 1 out of 80 trends is positive
and statistically signi…cant.)
  25
    We drop the one outlier participant with extreme parameters values (e.g.            = 27; 50 =
4.97e+09.) Including this participant still gives aggregate negative trends, signi…cant for but not
for :



                                                                24
4.4. Robustness
The common SDU discount functions (exponential, hyperbolic, generalized hyper-
bolic) produce a linear delay function and are thus appropriately tested for in our
analysis above. However, some SDU discount functions treat t = 0 specially and
produce a nonlinear delay function that is not of the form considered in Proposition
3.3. For instance, the quasi-hyperbolic        model produces a linear delay function
when no option is available at t = 0; but has a nonlinearity at t = 0: Similarly, the
Benhabib, Bisin, and Schotter (2010) …xed-cost of delay model, in which payments
delayed from t = 0 to t > 0 incur a …xed-cost, has a nonlinearity at t = 0; nonethe-
less, it produces a linear delay function when t > 0: Additionally, immediate t = 0
payments may be treated di¤erently due to confounds, such as trust, uncertainty, or
transactions costs.
    To account for special treatment of t = 0, we repeat the above analysis excluding
all choices in which the smaller-sooner option is available at t = 0: We compare the
SDU-Linear model (which would be produced by the quasi-hyperbolic model and
…xed-cost of delay model) to the NonSDU models. Results are very similar:26 with
a likelihood ratio test, the SDU-Linear model is rejected in favor of the NonSDU-
Linear model for 64% of participants and rejected in favor of the NonSDU-NonLinear
model for 69% of participants. Moreover, the AIC best-…t criterion only chooses the
SDU-Linear model for 22% of subjects.
    We also explore robustness to sample selection. We examine an expanded sample
that drops only participants who always choose the larger-later option for more than
10 of the m; t pairs or who ever make a non-monotonic choice.27 For the resulting 51
participants, the AIC model selection criteria prefers the SDU-Linear model for only
24% of the sample, and we still reject the SDU-Linear model for 63% of the sample
in favor of the Non-Linear Non-SDU model via a likelihood ratio test.


5. Concluding Remarks
This paper approaches the practical question of how to design intertemporal choice
experiments from the perspective of decision theory: the behavioral foundations for
  26
      Dropping the t = 0 choices, we have di¢ cult …tting the model for 4 participants, who we then
exclude from this analysis.
   27
      In this expanded sample, we need to impute the indi¤erence point for lists on which the par-
ticipant always chose the larger-later option. We impute their choices as though they choose the
earlier option when the later option was available at an additional delay of 93 weeks, a 25 week
increment over the last option they actually faced. We explored alternative imputation strategies,
which gave similar results.


                                                25
the object of interest (discount functions) is studied by writing a behavioral de…nition
and characterizing the connection between the two. The general mapping is obtained
by behaviorally de…ning the discount function by the delay function , and second by
noting that functional equations provide a means of characterizing the connection
between      and the representations (D; u). This result suggests a procedure for
experimentally testing theories and eliciting discount functions.
    While separability is an assumption made for the sake of parsimony in economic
models, we evaluate whether there is an empirical price for assuming it. In both our
main experiment and pilot experiment, we …nd that more than half our participants
are not well-characterized by separable discounted utility. More than simply rejecting
SDU, we show that the form of our estimated delay functions are consistent with a
magnitude-dependent discount function. The general framework we examine invites
further exploration. Our results suggest that exploring non-SDU preferences will be
fruitful, and that empirical applications might bene…t from searching for explanations
for observed behavior that do not rely on SDU.
    On the extent of magnitude dependence, our experiment shows that subjects
treat $50 di¤erently enough than $100 to give rise to a highly signi…cant rejection
of separability. Take the canonical representation D(m; t) = e a(m) t where all
parameters are …xed by the data, a(50) = 1:36 from Table 2 and a(100) = 1 by
regularity. With a one week delay t = 1 (in order to shut down time distortion), we
see that
                            D(50; 1)
                                     = et (a(100) a(50)) = 0:70;
                           D(100; 1)
that is, the agent discounts $50 much heavier than she does $100. It seems intuitive
that $50 and $100 might be treated very di¤erently, just as it is also intuitive that
for larger stakes a $50 di¤erence may not lead to a very pronounced di¤erence.
    While our delay function approach is de…ned for the analysis of time preference,
it can be adapted easily to other domains as well. For instance, experiments on risk
often o¤er subjects lotteries that have one nonzero payo¤. Such lotteries can be
written as (m; p), where p is the probability of the nonzero outcome. By de…ning
‘time’as t = p1 1 our procedure becomes immediately applicable to the study of risk
preference, where the general representation takes the form U (m; p) = f (m; p)u(m)
and where f is the decision weight.




                                          26
A. Appendix: Regularity and Proof of Proposition 2.1
Say that a preference % over X is regular if it satis…es the following basic restric-
tions:28
    1- Order: % is complete and transitive.
    2- Continuity: For each (m; t), the sets f(m0 ; t0 ) : (m0 ; t0 ) % (m; t)g and f(m0 ; t0 ) :
(m; t) % (m0 ; t0 )g are closed.
    3- Impatience:
    (i) For all m > 0 and t < t0 ; (0; t) (0; t0 ) and (m; t) (m; t0 ).
    (ii) For each m; m0 such that m0 > m > 0, there is t such that (m; 0) (m0 ; t).
    4- Monotonicity: For all t, if m < m0 then (m0 ; t) (m; t).

   We establish some basic results on regularity which are used later, though not
always explicitly.

Lemma A.1. For any continuous increasing u : M ! R, a regular preference %
admits a representation U : M T ! R such that U ( ; t) is continuous and strictly
increasing, U (m; ) is continuous and strictly decreasing if m > 0 and constant if m =
0, and U (m; 0) = u(m). Conversely, any preference that admits such a representation
is regular. By de…ning D(m; t) = Uu(m)
                                    (m;t)
                                          for any m > 0 , any such representation can
be written as a GDU representation (D; u).

Proof. The …rst claim is established in [1982, Thm 1]. The remaining are trivial.

Lemma A.2. If % is regular then
    (a) For every m; t and d there exists m0       m such that (m0 ; t)     (m; t + d).
                                 0
Moreover, for every m; t and m       m there exists d such that (m0 ; t) (m; t + d).
    (b) For any s l and such that (s; 0) (l; ), and for every t0           there exists
                        0
t such that (s; t) (l; t ): Moreover, when s > 0 then for any t 0 there is a unique
T t such that (s; t) (l; T ).
    (c) For each (m; t) there exists a unique ‘present value’ (m; t) satisfying

                                    ( (m; t); 0)     (m; t):

Moreover, (0; ) = 0, (m; ) is strictly decreasing for any m > 0, limt!1 (m; t) =
0 for all m, and (m; ) is continuous.
    (d) If (s; 0) (l; ) and (s; t) (l; T + ), then T +     t:
  28
    Continuity presumes that R+ has the euclidean topology, any subset of R+ has the subspace
topology, and X has the product topology.


                                               27
Proof. Part (a) follows from Impatience, Monotonicity and Continuity; we omit
the proof. The t in part (b) exists by Impatience, Monotonicity and Continuity: By
Monotonicity, (s; t0 ) - (l; t0 ). By Impatience and the fact that (s; 0)         (l; ) and
t0
      , it follows that (s; 0) % (l; t ). Thus, by Continuity, (s; 0) % (l; t ) % (s; t0 )
                                       0                                        0

implies that there is t such that (s; t) (l; t0 ); as desired. For the second claim in (b),
the existence of T is established in a similar way. Impatience guarantees uniqueness
when s > 0.
    Turning to part (c): part (a) establishes the existence of present values, and
Impatience implies that (m; ) is strictly decreasing for any m > 0. To see that
limt!1 (m; t) = 0 for all m, suppose not. Then there exists m and s > 0 such that
(s; 0) ( (m; t); 0) (m; t) for all t. But this contradicts Impatience. Finally, to see
that (m; ) must be continuous, take any strictly increasing homeomorphism and
consider the representation U delivered in Lemma A.1. Since u( (m; t)) = U (m; t)
and in particular, (m; t) = u 1 (U (m; t)), continuity of u 1 implies that of (m; ):
    For part (d), note that if T + < t then (s; T + ) (l; T + ) by Impatience,
which then violates Monotonicity.

    The next lemma (stated as Proposition 2.1 in the text) characterizes regularity
in terms of properties of . Say that : M T ! T is generated by % if for any
0 < m m and each t, (m; t) (m; (m; t)).

Lemma A.3.       is generated by a regular preference % if and only if:
  (i) (m; t) is continuous.
  (ii) For any t; ( ; t) is strictly decreasing and limm!0 (m; t) = 1.
  (iii) For m > 0, (m; ) is strictly increasing and (m; t) = t for all t.

Proof. Prove the ‘if’ part. Let 0 1 (t) be de…ned by ( 0 1 (t); 0) = t. De…ne a
function U (m; t) = 0 1 ( (m; t)), where the inverse exists and is continuous by the
monotonicity and continuity properties in (i)-(ii). Intuitively, U (m; t) is the present
value of (m; t); that is, if there was a regular preference generating then (x; 0)
(m; t) (m; (m; t)) and (x; 0) (m; (x; 0)) would hold. Thus (x; 0) = (m; t),
and in turn, U (m; t) = x = 0 1 ( (m; t)).
    We …rst verify that U represents a regular preference. By (ii), for …xed t, since
  (m; t) strictly decreases in m and 0 1 is also strictly decreasing, it follows that
   1
  0 ( (m; t)) is strictly increasing in m. Therefore U (m; t) is strictly increasing
in m. Similarly, U (m; t) is strictly decreasing in t if m > 0. By continuity of
U and by (ii), U (0; t) = limm!0 U (m; t) = limm!0 0 1 ( (m; t)) = 0 for any t.
The other Impatience property follows from the fact that by (ii) and (iii), 0


                                            28
limt!1 U (m; t) = limt!1 0 1 ( (m; t))      limt!1 0 1 ( (m; t)) = limt!1 0 1 (t) =
0, that is, limt!1 U (m; t) = 0. As already noted, U is continuous.
    Finally, we check that      is generated by the preference % represented by U ,
that is, U (m; t) = U (m; (m; t)). Note that by de…nition and by (iii), U (m; t) =
   1                1                               1
  0 ( (m; t)) =    0 (t). Thus, U (m; (m; t)) =    0 ( (m; t)) = U (m; t), as desired.




B. Appendix: Proof of Theorem 2.2
B.1. Proof
We formally prove the result by taking M = R+ and noting that the same argument
establishes Theorem 2.2 as a corollary when M = [0; m].
    For a given preference % and any rewards 0 < s l, de…ne the function s;l ( )
by the indi¤erence:
                                 (s; t) (l; s;l (t)):                      (B.1)
For s = 0 < l, let s;l (t) := 1.
   We …rst clarify the exhaustive implications of regularity on         .

Lemma B.1.         is generated by a regular % if and only if:
  (i) (s; l; t) is continuous,
  (ii) (s; ; t) is strictly increasing and ( ; l; t) is strictly decreasing in s, and
moreover lims!0 (s; l; t) = 1 when l > 0,
  (iii) (s; l; ) is strictly increasing if s; l > 0, and (m; m; t) = t for all t,
  (iv) m1 ;m2 ( m0 ;m1 (t)) = m0 ;m2 (t) for all t and m0 m1 m2 :
                                            1             1
Proof. Prove the ‘if’part. De…ne (l;0)         (r) by ( (l;0) (r); l; 0) = r. Let U (m; t) :=
    1
  m;0 (t), where the inverse exists by the monotonicity and continuity properties in
(i)-(ii). Intuitively, U (m; t) is the present value of (m; t); that is, it is a small reward
s = U (m; t) that satis…es,
                                          (s; m; 0) = t:
We …rst verify that U represents a regular preference.
   To see that U is continuous, suppose mn ! m, tn ! t and to ease notation
write sn := U (mn ; tn ), that is, (sn ; mn ; 0) = tn . We show that sn converges. Since
mn ! m, there is some M and N such that mn M for all n N (wlog let N = 1).
De…ne Tn := (mn ; M; tn ). By (i), Tn converges. Observe that (sn ; M; 0) = Tn
                                                                                    1
by (iv). Since ( ; M; 0) is strictly monotone and continuous, it follows that M;0     ()


                                             29
is continuous. Therefore, since Tn converges to T := (m; M; t), it must be that
         1                          1          1
sn = M;0   (Tn ) converges to s := M;0 (T ) = M;0 ( (m; M; t)), and in particular,
                                      (s; M; 0) = (m; M; t):
It remains to show that (s; m; 0) = t. By the displayed equality and (iv), (m; M; (s; m; 0)) =
  (s; M; 0) = (m; M; t) and so by (iii), (s; m; 0) = t, as desired. Thus U is contin-
uous.
    Now show the remaining regularity properties. By (ii), for …xed t, the equation
  (s; m; 0) = t implies that as m increases, s must also increase. Therefore U (m; t)
is strictly increasing in m. Similarly, U (m; t) is strictly decreasing in t if m > 0.
To show the second Impatience property, take any m; m0 such that m0 > m > 0.
By (ii), there is a small enough s0 > 0 s.t. (s0 ; m0 ; 0) > 0 = (m; m; 0). De…ne
t := (s0 ; m0 ; 0). Then by (ii), U (m0 ; t) < U (m; 0), as desired. Finally we show the
…rst Impatience property, that is, U (0; t) = 0. By (ii) and (iii), since (m; m; t) = t,
it must be that for s that satis…es (s; m; 0) = t it must be that s            m. That
is, 0    U (m; t)    m. Then by continuity of U , U (0; t) = limm!0 U (m; t) = 0, as
desired.
    To conclude, we check that is generated by the preference % represented by
U . By de…nition, for any s          l, s = U (l; (s; l; 0)). Take any t and suppose
 00
s = U (l; (s; l; t)), that is,
                                        (s00 ; l; 0) = (s; l; t):
Since (iii) implies (s; l; t)    (s; l; 0), it follows that s00 = U (l; (s; l; t)) U (l; (s; l; 0)) =
              00
s: That is, s      s    l. By (iv), (s; l; (s00 ; s; 0)) = (s00 ; l; 0) and so, by the dis-
played equality, (s; l; (s00 ; s; 0)) = (s; l; t). By (iii), (s00 ; s; 0) = t, and this
implies that U (s; t) = s00 = U (l; (s; l; t)), and thus is generated by U , as desired.


Lemma B.2. If D solves the functional equation (FE) below, then for any 0 <
m1 m2 m3 ,
               D(m2 ;   m1 ;m2 (0))    D(m3 ;      m2 ;m3 (0))     = D(m3 ;       m1 ;m3 (0))

Proof. Suppose m1        m2      m3 then the functional equation implies
          D(m2 ;   m1 ;m2 (0))   D(m3 ;      m2 ;m3 (0))   = D(m3 ;       m2 ;m3 (    m1 ;m2 (0)):

But transitivity of % implies         m2 ;m3 (   m1 ;m2 (0))   =    m1 ;m3 (0).   The assertion follows.



                                                   30
Lemma B.3. The following statements hold:
    (a) Consider any regular preference % and its -function. Then D can be at-
tributed to % if and only if D solves the functional equation:

                         D(s; t) D(l;    s;l (0))   = D(l;     s;l (t));                 (FE)

for all 0 < s l and t.
    (b) Suppose % is a regular preference with the function , and that D is a solution
to (FE). Then (D; u) represents % if and only if u is given by

                      D(m;    m;m (0))  u(m)    if m m
           u(m) =                        1                ;                 for all m;
                      [D(m;   m;m (0))]    u(m) otherwise

where m > 0 and u(m) > 0 are arbitrary.

Proof. We prove (a), and part (b) follows as a corollary of the proof.
     First show that any attributable D must satisfy the functional equation. By
regularity, % admits a representation U . Any representation can be written as a GDU
model with some D and u. By de…nition of the -function (1.1), it must be that for all
s; l > 0 and t, both u(s) = D(l; s;l (0))u(l) and D(s; t)u(s) = D(l; s;l (t))u(l) hold.
Rearranging yields the functional equation. Observe that we have also determined
that a solution must always exist if comes from a regular preference %.
     For the converse, suppose D is a solution. Take any m > 0 and assign it any
utility u(m) > 0. De…ne

                       D(m;    m;m (0))u(m)          if m m
            u(m) =                      1                      ;           for all m:
                       D(m;    m;m (0)) u(m)         otherwise

By continuity of D, the utility u is continuous as well (monotonicity will be deter-
mined shortly). Next we show that, given transitivity of %, the utility u is consistent
with D in the sense that it satis…es

                               u(s) = D(l;      s;l (0))u(l)                             (B.2)

for all s; l s.t. s l: To see this, consider the following cases:
    Case 1- s; l m.
    Then u(s) = D(m; s;m (0))u(m) and u(l) = D(m; l;m (0))u(m), which implies

                                       D(m;     s;m (0))
                              u(s) =                       u(l):
                                       D(m;     l;m (0))


                                           31
                                                                            D(m;   s;m (0))
By the Lemma, D(l; s;l (0)) D(m; l;M (0)) = D(m; s;M (0)), that is, D(m;           l;m (0))
                                                                                              =
D(l; s;l (0)). It follows that (B.2) holds.
   Case 2- s m l
   Then u(s) = D(m; s;m (0))u(m) and u(l) = D(l;u(m)
                                                  m;l (0))
                                                           , which implies

                       u(s) = D(m;       s;m (0))D(l;       m;1 (0))u(l):


By the Lemma, D(m; s;m (0)) D(l; m;l (0)) = D(l; s;l (0)), and (B.2) follows.
   Case 3- m s l:
   Then u(s) = D(s;u(m)
                     m;s (0))
                              and u(l) = D(l;u(m)
                                               m;l (0))
                                                        , which implies

                                         D(l;    m;l (0))
                                u(s) =                      u(l):
                                         D(s;    m;s (0))

By the Lemma, D(s; m;s (0)) D(l; s;l (0)) = D(l; m;l (0)), and (B.2) follows.
   Thus u is consistent with D in the sense of (B.2). Observe that the equality also
assures us that u must be strictly increasing: D is strictly increasing in its second
argument and by Monotonicity and Impatience s;l (0) must be strictly increasing in
s. To show that there is a GDU representation with D, de…ne U (m; t) := u(p(m; t)),
where p(m; t) is the present value of (m; t). Since p(m; t) is a representation for %
and u is strictly increasing, it follows that U (m; t) represents %. But then U (m; t) =
u(p(m; t)) = D(m; t)u(m), as desired.

   The next lemma determines how to check if D solves (FE) on the basis of infor-
mation on m;m , m;m and the present value of (m; t) for all m > m and t < m;m (0).
Write pmt for the present value of (m; t), that is, (pmt ; 0) (m; t).

Lemma B.4. Fix any m > 0. Then D solves (FE) for all 0 < s            l and t if and
only if:
   i) D solves (FE) for all s; l s.t. 0 < s l for s = m or l = m, and all t; and
                  D(m; m;m (0))
   ii) D(m; t) = D(pmt ; m;p (0))
                                  for all m > m and t < m;m (0).
                           mt


Proof. The ‘if’part is straightforward –note that part (ii) follows from lemma B.2.
Turn to the ‘only if’part. Suppose the hypothesis holds. Take any 0 < s l and t.
Consider the following cases. We make frequent use of the fact that if m1 m2 m3
then transitivity implies m2 ;m3 ( m1 ;m2 (t)) = m1 ;m3 (t) for any t.
   Case 1- s; l m.
   By hypothesis, D(s; t) D(m; s;m (0)) = D(m; s;m (t)) and D(l; t) D(m; l;m (0)) =
D(m; l;m (t)). Moreover, by transitivity, l;m ( s;l (t)) = s;m (t). Observe that:

                                            32
   D(l; s;l (t))
   = D(l; l;m1 (       s;m (t))) by transitivity
                     1
       D(m;  l;m l;m ( s;m (t))])
                [
   =         D(m; l;m (0))
                                  by hypothesis
       D(m; s;m (t))
   =   D(m; l;m (0))
       D(s;t)D(m; s;m (0))
   =     D(m; l;m (0))
                             by hypothesis
                D(m; s;m (0))                               D(m;       (0))
   =   D(s; t)[ D(m; l;m (0)) ]. We are done if   we show that D(m; s;m
                                                                    l;m (0))
                                                                             = D(l; s;l (0)).
But this follows
   since
   D(l; s;l (0))D(m; l;m (0))
   = D(m; l;m ( s;l (0))) by hypothesis
   = D(m; s;m (0)) by transitivity. This completes the argument.
   Case 2- s m l:
   By hypothesis D(s; t) D(m; s;m (0)) = D(m; s;m (t)) and D(m; t) D(l; m;l (0)) =
D(l; m;l (t)) and by transitivity, m;l ( s;m (t)) = s;l (t). Observe that
   D(l; s;l (t))
   = D(l; m;l ( s;m (t))) by transitivity
   = D(m; s;m (t)) D(l; m;l (0)) by hypothesis
   = [D(s; t) D(m; s;m (0))] D(l; m;l (0)) by hypothesis
   = D(s; t) [D(m; s;m (0)) D(l; m;l (0))]. We are done if D(m; s;m (0)) D(l; m;l (0)) =
D(l; s;l (0)). But this follows since
   D(m; s;m (0)) D(l; m;l (0))
   = D(m; m;l ( s;m (0))) by hypothesis
   = D(m; s;l (0)) by transitivity. This completes the argument.
   Case 3(i)- m < s l and t              m;s (0).
   By hypothesis D(m; t) D(s; m;s (0)) = D(s; m;s (t)) and D(m; t) D(l; m;l (0)) =
D(l; m;l (t)) and by transitivity, s;l ( m;s (t)) = m;l (t). The restriction t       m;s (0)
                  1
implies that m;s    (t) exists. Observe that:
   D(l; s;l (t))
                      1
   = D(l; m;l ( m;s     (t))) by transitivity
                1
   = D(m; m;s (t)) D(l; m;l (0))
                   1
       D(s; m;s ( m;s (t)))
   =     D(s; m;s (0))
                               D(l; m;l (0))
                 D(l;       (0))                         D(l;   (0))
    =  D(s; t) D(s; m;l m;s (0))
                                        if we show that D(s; m;l
                                 . We are done               m;s (0))
                                                                      = D(l; s;l (0)): ob-
serve that by hypothesis and transitivity, D(s; m;s (0))D(l; s;l (0)) = D(l; s;l ( m;s (0))) =
D(l; m;l (0)), as desired.
    Case 3(ii)- m < s l and t < m;s (0).


                                                 33
                                     D(m;    (0))
                                            m;m
    By hypothesis, D(m; t) = D(pmt ; m;p               where pmt satis…es (pmt ; 0) (m; t).
                                               mt (0))
Since t < m;s (0), it must be that pmt m.
    D(s; t) D(l; s;l (0))
        D(s;     (0)) D(l; ml (0))
    = D(p; m;s
             m;p (0)) D(s; m;s (0))
                                    by hypothesis, where p is the present value of (s; t) (s
is the present value of (l; s;l (0)) by de…nition)
        D(l; ml (0))
    = D(p;   mp (0))
    = D(l; s;l (t)) by hypothesis since by transitivity p must be the present value of
(l; s;l (t)) as well.
    This completes the proof.

       Fix any m > 0. For any m > 0 and t         0, de…ne   (m; t) by:
                            (m; t)    (m; (m; t)) if m m
                            (m; t)    (m; (m; t)) otherwise.
Lemma B.5. D is attributable i¤ there is a continuous, strictly increasing and
unbounded function g satisfying g(0) = 0 such that
                   8 [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))]
                   < e                          if m m
                              1
        D(m; t) =        [g(    (t)) g( (m;0))]
                      e                         if m m and t     m;m (0) :
                             m
                   : [g(m;0) g( (p(m;t);0)]
                      e                         if m > m and t < m;m (0)
Proof. By lemma B.3, D is attributable if and only if it solves (FE). Suppose
D solves (FE). Then by lemma B.3, (D; u) represents % for some u. Wlog, let
u(m) = 1. By regularity, (m; 0) is continuous and strictly decreasing in m for
m < m and strictly increasing for m > m. Since u is strictly increasing, there is a
continuous strictly increasing function g satisfying g(0) = 0 such that29
                                        e g( (m;0)) if m     m
                           u(m) =                              :
                                        eg( (m;0)) if m      m
We will see shortly that g must be unbounded.30 Given that (D; u) represents %
and u(m) = 1, the de…nition of implies u(m) = D(m; (m; 0)) for m       m, and
                       1
u(m) = D(m; (m; 0)) for m > m: Therefore,
                                              g( (m;0))
                        D(m; (m; 0)) = e                  for m    m
                                              g( (m;0))              .
                        D(m; (m; 0)) = e                  for m    m
  29
     By regularity (m; 0) = 0 and so u(m) = e g( (m;0)) = e g( (m;0)) = 1, consistent with our
assumption that u(m) = 1.
  30
     This does not imply that u is unbounded: though u(m) = eg( (m;0)) for m m for unbounded
g, regularity does not require ( ; 0) to be unbounded.

                                             34
We use this observation below. Another observation is that by regularity                   (m; 0)
ranges from 0 to 1 as m varies over [0; m], and so we have
                                                           g(t)
                                       D(m; t) = e                :
Moreover, since D is a discount function it must satisfy the property limt!1 D(m; t) =
0, which implies that g must be unbounded.
    To …nd the general solution of (FE), we …rst show that D has the desired form
for 0 < m m. By the previous lemma, D solves the functional equation for s; l s.t.
[0 < s l = m] and all t, and in particular, it solves
                      D(m; t) D(m; (m; 0)) = D(m; (m; t))
                                                                                         g(t)
for any 0 < m m and all t. Since we have determined that D(m; t) = e                            , this
functional equation therefore implies
                                 [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))]
                D(m; t) = e                                 for all m   m and t;
as desired.
   Next consider m       m. By the previous lemma, D must satisfy
                      D(m; t) D(m; (m; 0)) = D(m; (m; t)):
Then, given the earlier observations, D(m; (m; t)) = D(m; t) D(m; (m; 0)) =
e [g(t)+g( (m;0))] . Therefore,
                                1
                         [g(   m (t))+g(   (m;0))]
           D(m; t) = e                               for all m > m and t      m;m (0).

Finally, to consider the case [m > m and t < m;m (0)], we note that by the previous
                     D(m; m;m (0))
lemma D(m; t) = D(pmt ; m;p     (0))
                                     and therefore by our earlier observations,
                               mt

                         [g( (m;0)) g( (p(m;t);0))]
           D(m; t) = e                                    for m > m and t <   m;m (0):

Thus, we have shown that if D is attributable to the preference then it must have
the desired form.
    To complete the proof, we need to check that the discount function solves (FE).
This is straightforward to establish in light of the previous lemma. For instance, for
the case where l = m, we see that
    D(m; t) D(m; (m; 0)) = D(m; (m; t))
    () e [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))] e [g( (m; (m;0))) g( (m;0))] = e [g( (m; (m;t))) g( (m;0))]
    () e [g( (m;t)) g( (m;0))+g( (m; (m;0))) g( (m;0))] = e [g( (m; (m;t))) g( (m;0))]
    () g( (m; t)) g( (m; 0))+g( (m; (m; 0))) = g( (m; (m; t))). But (m; x) :=
  m;m (x) = x, and thus the last equation is an identity.


                                                     35
C. Appendix: Proof of Theorem 2.3
It follows from the de…nition of admissibility that D(t) = e g(t) is admissible for the
data f (pI1 ; t) : t = 2 ; ::; J g if and only if g solves the functional equation
              g( (pI1 ; t)) = g(t) + g( (pI1 ; 0);      for all t =   2 ; ::;   J:

The set of admissible D(t) = e g(t) is nonempty (the ‘true’one is in the set). Take
any admissible D, and corresponding g.
    Below we extend the data f (pI1 ; t) : t = 2 ; ::; J g to some function          on a
                    2
subset of X = R+ in a way that is consistent with the present value data, and then
proceed to prove the theorem. Speci…cally, we inductively de…ne on fpij g R+ .
It will be convenient to de…ne, for each 1          I, the set S   fpij g of all observed
present values of rewards m ; ::; mI , that is, S := fpij :      i I and j = 0; ::; Jg.
Note that by regularity, mi = pi0 .
    First consider = I. De…ne (mI ; t) = t for all t. For all j, de…ne (pIj ; 0) = tj
and moreover, (pIj ; t) = g 1 (g(t) + g( (pIj ; 0)):
    Next suppose that, for 1 <        I,
    (a) is de…ned for m 2 S and all t,
    (b) ( ; 0) is strictly increasing on S ,
    (c) for all pij 2 S ,
                                    (pij ; 0) = (mi ; tj );
   (d) for all mi 2 S ;
                          g(tj ) = g( (mi ; tj ))    g( (mi ; 0))
Observe that this is satis…ed for the case = I that we just de…ned. We now extend
   to S 1 and all t such that these conditions are satis…ed.
    If m 1 (= p 1;0 ) equals some m 2 S then de…ne (m 1 ; t) = (m; t) for
all t. If m 1 < S then de…ne (m 1 ; 0) by taking any arbitrary number in
(maxm2S (m; 0); 1) and let (m 1 ; t) = g 1 (g(t) + g( (m 1 ; 0)) for all t. If
neither of these cases hold, then there exist m ; m 2 S such that m is the smallest
element in S that is greater than m and m is the largest element smaller than it.
De…ne (m 1 ; 0) by taking any number in the interval ( (m ; 0); (m ; 0)) (regular-
ity and the construction ensures that the interval is nonempty) and let (m 1 ; t) =
g 1 (g(t) + g( (m 1 ; 0)) for all t. Next for all j, de…ne (p 1;j ; 0) = (m 1 ; tj )
and moreover, (p 1;j ; t) = g 1 (g(t) + g( (p 1;j ; 0)): Then is de…ned on S 1 and
all t, and moreover, the analogues of (a)-(d) hold by construction. Continue this
construction till we obtain on fpij g R+ . This satis…es the analogues of (a)-(d)
for = 1.

                                            36
   To prove the theorem, take the admissible discount function D(t) = e g(t) . By
property (b), we can extend ( ; 0) continuous and monotonically to all of R+ and
de…ne the utility index,
                               u(m) = e g( (m;0)) :
Given properties (c) and (d), determine that, for all i; j,
    u(pij ) = e g( (pij ;0))
    = e g( (mi ;tj )) = e [g( (mi ;tj )) g( (mi ;0))] e g( (mi ;0))
    = e g(tj ) u(mi ) = D(tj )u(mi ):
    Thus, we have shown that any D that is attributable to                          data is also attributable
to the present value data.

D. Appendix: Proof of Proposition 3.1
Most of the assertions follow from Proposition 3.2. Regularity implies that a must
be weakly decreasing: if m > m0 then by monotonicity (m; t) (m0 ; t) for all t. The
representation implies

                                                          g(t)[a(m) a(m0 )]       u(m0 )
                         (m; t)          (m0 ; t) () e                        >          ;
                                                                                  u(m)
                                                                                                       0
but if a(m) > a(m0 ) then, although the inequality holds for t = 0 (since u(m  )
                                                                            u(m)
                                                                                 < 1),
the unboundedness of g implies that the above inequality cannot hold for all t, which
violates monotonicity. Therefore a is weakly decreasing.
    To see that the linearity of g corresponds to that of in t, recall that by Propo-
sition 3.2,
                        g( (m; t)) g( (m; 0)) = a(m) g(t);
for all m; t. If g is linear then (m; t) = a(m) t + (m; 0), a linear function.
Conversely if is a linear function (m; t) = (m) t + (m) then clearly linear g
and a( ) = ( ) is a solution to the functional equation. We want to show there are
no other solutions. Suppose there is a solution g that is twice di¤erentiable. Then
using the functional equation we see that
                                                                                          g 0 (t)
           g 0 ( (m; t))         00
                                      (m; t) = a(m) g 00 (t)     g 00 ( (m; t))                    :
                                                                                     g 0 ( (m; t))
                           00
If   is linear then             (m; t) equals 0 and so does the term in the square brackets,
that is, for all m; t;
                                             g 00 (t)  g 00 ( (m; t))
                                                      = 0             :
                                             g 0 (t)   g ( (m; t))

                                                         37
                                                    00
By varying m between 0 and m we see that gg0 (t)
                                              (t)
                                                  must be a constant, in which case
it can either be linear or of the CARA form g(r) = e r 1, where > 0 (since g
must be unbounded and satisfy g(0) = 0). However the CARA form does not solve
the functional equation and so g must be linear.


E. Appendix: Proof of Proposition 3.3
We exploit proposition 3.2 which yields that a separable discount function D(t) =
 g(t)
      can be attributed if and only if g satis…es:
                                           1
                        g((a(s)t + b(s) ) ) = g(t) + g(b(s)):

  First suppose a g that satis…es this equation exists. We show that a(s) and b(s)
must be linearly related. Take any s0 . Letting t = (s0 ; 0) = b(s0 ) we see that
                             1                                                 1
      g((a(s)b(s0 ) + b(s) ) ) = g(b(s0 )) + g(b(s)) = g((a(s0 )b(s) + b(s0 ) ) );

and since g is strictly increasing, a(s)b(s0 ) +b(s) = a(s0 )b(s) +b(s0 ) , which implies

                                 a(s) 1   a(s0 ) 1
                                        =          :
                                  b(s)     b(s0 )

Thus if an g exists, then the ratio a(s) b(s)
                                              1
                                                must be a constant k for all s, and so
the equation a(s) = 1 + kb(s) must hold, as desired. To see that k 0, note when
                                                                                  1
a(s) 1
 b(s)
       = k for all s, then we have a functional equation g(((1 + kb(s) )t + b(s) ) ) =
g(t) + g(b(s)). Denoting x = t and y = b(s) we can write this as:
                                                1
                        g((x + y + kx y ) ) = g(x) + g(y):
                                                                                     1
Suppose by way of contradiction that k < 0. Write g((x + y (1 jkj x )) ) =
g(x) + g(y) and take x such that (1 jkj x ) < 0. Then as y increases the LHS
decreases and the RHS increases (since g is strictly increasing), a contradiction.
Thus k 0 must hold.
   Conversely, suppose a(s) = 1 + kb(s) holds with k        0. Consider the above
displayed functional equation. Consider various cases:
   (i) k = 0.
   A solution is g(x) = cx , c > 0. Then D(t) = t is attributable for any 2 (0; 1).
   (ii) k > 0.

                                           38
   Then it is easily veri…ed that g(x) = ln(1 + kx ) is a solution, and so for any
r > 0, an attributable discount function is D(t) = e r ln(1+kt ) = (1 + kt ) r .
   Finally, the uniqueness properties of the SDU model (Fishburn and Rubinstein
[1982]) con…rm that in each of the above cases there are no other attributable discount
functions within the SDU class.




References
 Aczel. J. (1966): Lectures on Functional Equations and Their Applications, NY
 Academic Press.

 Ainslie, G. (1992): Picoeconomics, Cambridge University Press.

 Andersen, S., G. Harrison, M. Lau and E. Rutström (2008): ‘Eliciting Risk and
 Time Preferences’, Econometrica 76(3), pp 583-618.

 Andersen, Ste¤en, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström.
 2013. “Discounting Behaviour and the Magnitude E¤ect: Evidence from a Field
 Experiment in Denmark.”Economica 80 (320): 670–97. doi:10.1111/ecca.12028.

 Andreoni, J. and C. Sprenger (2012): ‘Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
 Budget Sets’, American Economic Review, 102(7): 3333-56.

 Attema, A., H. Bleichrodt, K. Rohde and P. Wakker (2010): ‘Time-Tradeo¤ Se-
 quences for Analyzing Discounting and Time Inconsistency’, Management Science
 56:11, pp 2015-2030.

 Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. 2013. "Working Over
 Time: Dynamic Inconsistency in Real E¤ort Tasks." NBER Working Paper 18734.

 Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Andrew Schotter. 2010. “Present-Bias, Quasi-
 Hyperbolic Discounting, and Fixed Costs.”Games and Economic Behavior 69 (2):
 205–23. doi:10.1016/j.geb.2009.11.003.

 Booij, Adam S., and Bernard M. S. van Praag. 2009. “A Simultaneous Ap-
 proach to the Estimation of Risk Aversion and the Subjective Time Dis-
 count Rate.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 70 (1–2): 374–88.
 doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2009.01.005.


                                          39
Coller, M. and M. Williams (1999): ‘Eliciting Individual Discount Rates,’Experi-
mental Economics 2, pp 107-127.
Cubitt, Robin P., and Daniel Read. 2007. “Can Intertemporal Choice Experiments
Elicit Time Preferences for Consumption?” Experimental Economics 10 (4): 369–
89. doi:10.1007/s10683-006-9140-2.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli, John Myles White, David Laibson, and Jonathan D.
Cohen. Forthcoming. “Money Earlier or Later? Simple Heuristics Explain Intertem-
poral Choices Better than Delay Discounting.”Psychological Science.
Fishburn, P. (1967): ‘Methods of Estimating Additive Utilities’, Management Sci-
ence 13(7), pp 435-453.
Fishburn, P. and A. Rubinstein (1982): ‘Time Preference’, International Economic
Review 23:3, pp 677-94.
Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein and T. O’Donoghue (2002): ‘Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review’, Journal of Economic Literature 40(2), pp
351-401.
Fudenberg, Drew, and David K. Levine. 2006. “A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Con-
trol.”The American Economic Review 96 (5): 1449–76.
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. “Temptation and Self-Control.”
Econometrica 69 (6): 1403–35. doi:10.1111/1468-0262.00252.
Harrison, G., M. Lau, and M. Williams (2002): ‘Estimating Individual Discount
Rates in Denmark: A Field experiment,’ American Economic Review 92(5), pp
1606-1617.
Harrison, G. and E. Rutström (2009): ‘Risk Aversion in Experiments’, Research in
Experimental Economics 12, pp 41–196.
Krantz, D.H., R. D. Luce, P. Suppes and A. Tversky (1971): Foundations of Mea-
surement, Vol. I: Additive and Polynomial Representations, NY Academic Press.
Laibson, D. (1997): ‘Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting’, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112, pp 443-77.
Laury, Susan K., Melayne Morgan McInnes, and J. Todd Swarthout. 2012. “Avoid-
ing the Curves: Direct Elicitation of Time Preferences.” Journal of Risk and Un-
certainty 44 (3): 181–217. doi:10.1007/s11166-012-9144-6.

                                      40
Mazur, J. E. (1987): ‘An Adjustment Procedure for Studying Delayed Reinforce-
ment’in M. L. Commons, J. E. Mazur, J. A. Nevin and H. Rachlin (Eds), Quan-
titative Analyses of Behavior: Vol. 5. The E¤ect of Delay and Intervening Events
on Reinforcement Value, pp 55-73, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

McClure, Samuel M., David I. Laibson, George Loewenstein, and Jonathan D.
Cohen. (2004). “Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary
Rewards.”Science 306 (5695): 503–7. doi:10.1126/science.1100907.

Noor, J. (2011): ‘Intertemporal Choice and the Magnitude E¤ect’, Games and
Economic Behavior 72(1), pp 255-270.

Olea, J. and T. Strzalecki. (2014). "Axiomatization and measurement of Quasi-
hyperbolic Discounting," Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), pp. 1449-1499.

Ok, E. and Y. Masatlioglu (2007): ‘A Theory of (Relative) Discounting’, Journal
of Economic Theory 137(1), pp 214-245.

Rohde, K. (2008): ‘The Hyperbolic Factor: A Measure of Time-Inconsistency’,
mimeo.

Takeuchi, K. (2010): ‘Nonparametric Test of Time-Inconsistency: Present Bias and
Future Bias’, Games and Economic Behavior 71(2), pp 456–478.

Wakker, P. and D. Dene¤e (1996): ‘Eliciting von Neumann-Morgenstern Utilities
when Probabilities are Distorted or Unknown’, Management Science 42, pp 1131-
1150.

Zauberman, Gal, B. Kyu Kim, Selin A Malkoc, and James R Bettman. 2009.
“Discounting Time and Time Discounting: Subjective Time Perception and
Intertemporal Preferences.” Journal of Marketing Research 46 (4): 543–56.
doi:10.1509/jmkr.46.4.543.




                                      41
