                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE HALF-LIFE OF HAPPINESS:
     HEDONIC ADAPTATION IN THE SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING OF POOR SLUM
                DWELLERS TO A LARGE IMPROVEMENT IN

                                       Sebastian Galiani
                                         Paul J. Gertler
                                      Raimundo Undurraga

                                       Working Paper 21098
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21098


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, and Raimundo Undurraga. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Half-Life of Happiness: Hedonic Adaptation in the Subjective Well-Being of Poor Slum
Dwellers to a Large Improvement in Housing
Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, and Raimundo Undurraga
NBER Working Paper No. 21098
April 2015, Revised March 2016
JEL No. I31

                                          ABSTRACT

Subjective well-being may not improve in step with increases in material well-being due to
hedonic adaptation, a psychological process that attenuates the long-term emotional impact of a
favorable or unfavorable change in circumstances, such that people’s happiness eventually
returns to a stable reference level. We use a multi-country field experiment to examine the impact
of the provision of improved housing to extremely poor populations on subjective measures of
well-being to test whether poor populations exhibit hedonic adaptation when their basic housing
needs are met. After sixteen months, we find that subjective perceptions of well-being improve
substantially for recipients of better housing but that after, on average, eight additional months,
60% of that gain disappears.


Sebastian Galiani                                         Raimundo Undurraga
Department of Economics                                   Wagner School of Public Service
University of Maryland                                    New York University
3105 Tydings Hall                                         rau214@nyu.edu
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu

Paul J. Gertler
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu
1.Introduction

Some 2,300 years ago, Aristotle posited that the pursuit of happiness “…is a first principle; for it is
for the sake of this that we do all that we do.” In other words, happiness is what we value, and
everything else, including health and material well-being, is valued only to the extent that it makes us
happy. This raises the fundamental question as to whether the colossal improvement in material
conditions that has occurred since the time of Aristotle has made human beings substantially happier.
If happiness monotonically increases with development, then the enhancement of material well-being
should have made human beings many orders of magnitude happier today than they were at the time
of Aristotle.

One reason why subjective well-being may not improve in step with increases in material well-being
is put forward by the hedonic adaptation hypothesis, which states that there is a psychological process
that attenuates the long-term emotional impact of a favorable or unfavorable change in circumstances,
such that people’s happiness eventually returns to a stable reference level (Frederick and Loewenstein,
1999). According to this hypothesis, then, variations in happiness and unhappiness are no more than
short-lived reactions to changes in people’s circumstances. In other words, while people initially have
strong reactions to events that change their material level of well-being, they eventually return to a
baseline level of life satisfaction that is determined by their inborn temperament (Diener et al., 2006).
In psychology, this idea is known as the set point theory and was labeled the hedonic treadmill in the seminal
work of Brickman and Campbell (1971).1

Veenhoven (1991) and Frederick and Loewenstein (1999) further hypothesize that people do not
adapt to shocks to the level of satisfaction of basic necessities that are related to survival and
reproduction. This suggests that hedonic adaptation is manifested the most in people who have
achieved a certain level of basic material well-being rather than being a persistent phenomenon that is
evenly distributed across all socioeconomic groups. This idea is analogous to the notion of diminishing
marginal utility, where the marginal increase in happiness derived from material gain is higher at lower
levels of material wealth. The analog in hedonic adaptation is that adaptation is more limited at lower
levels of material wealth. In essence, then, the idea is that the poor do not display hedonic adaptation,

1In a widely cited paper, Brickman et al. (1978) present evidence that lottery winners and accident victims report life
satisfaction levels that are almost comparable to those of people who did not win a lottery nor were accident victims one
year after the event, suggesting that at least partial hedonic adaptation to both positive and negative shocks may take place.
However, this evidence should be viewed with caution as it is based on a small and selected sample of lottery winners and
accident victims that was then compared with a small, geographically matched and self-selected sample of individuals.
                                                              2
or at least, do not adapt completely, to shocks to the satisfaction of their basic needs. Along these
same lines, Di Tella and MacCulloch (2008) argue that there is a need to test whether income buys
long-term happiness in a low-income context in which the majority of the population has not yet
attained a minimum standard of living – something that, to our knowledge, has not yet been done.


In this paper we use data from field experiments in three developing countries to test the hypothesis
that material well-being buys long-term happiness among extremely poor slum dwellers. Specifically,
we present the first piece of evidence on hedonic adaptation among the poor to an improvement in
the satisfaction of one of their basic needs: shelter. The 1948 United Nation Universal Declaration of
Human Rights identified housing, along with food and clothing, as a basic requirement for achieving
an adequate standard of living.2 Despite this, almost one billion people, primarily in the developing
world, live in urban slums and lack proper housing (United Nations, 2003).3 Most slum dwellers live
in houses with dirt floors and with roofs and walls that are constructed out of discarded cardboard,
tin or plastic. These houses do not provide proper protection from inclement weather, are not secure,
and are not pleasant to live in. Many have insufficient access to services such as clean water, sanitation
and electricity (UN-Habitat, 2003, and Marx et al., 2013).


We use data on subjective perceptions of well-being generated by a large-scale, multi-country
randomized field experiment that provided basic housing units to extremely poor populations living
in slums in three Latin American countries: El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay. We test the hedonic
adaptation hypothesis using experimentally generated variations in the supply of houses combined
with quasi-experimental variations in the length of exposure to the treatment. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper to examine hedonic adaptation by the poor to an improvement in
the satisfaction of basic needs and the first to use experimentally generated variation for this purpose.


We find that subjective perceptions of well-being are substantially greater sixteen months after receipt
of improved housing, but that, eight months later, about 60% of that gain disappears. Indeed, we find
that the degree of hedonic adaptation is consistent across different satisfaction indicators, from
satisfaction with quality of life to satisfaction with quality of housing characteristics. Our results
suggest that an at least partial degree of hedonic adaptation is a common human behavior that is

2 United Nations, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 25 (1948 ).
3 In line with previous work, we define a slum as an overcrowded settlement that affords poor-quality housing and
inadequate access to safe water and sanitation and which suffers from insecurity of tenure (UN-Habitat, 2003).
                                                       3
present even among extremely poor populations that experience a major improvement in the level of
satisfaction of their basic necessities.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related literature and the
contribution made by this paper. In Section 3, we describe the intervention and the experimental
design. In Sections 4 and 5, we discuss the strategy of measurement of subjective well-being and
introduce the identification strategy and econometric methods used in this study. In Section 6 we
present our empirical results, while in Section 7 we discuss alternative interpretations and implement
robustness checks. Finally, Section 8 concludes.

2. Related Literature


A number of previous studies have used observational data to test whether happiness levels in non-
poor settings vary with changes in living standards. Many of these papers examine adaptation to
negative shocks such as unemployment (Clark and Oswald, 1994, and Winkelman and Winkelman,
1998), disability (Oswald and Powdthavee, 2008), hemodialysis (Riis et al., 2005), major illness (Ferrer-
i-Carbonell and Van Praag, 2002, and Groot et al., 2004), divorce (Clark et al., 2008) and falling below
the poverty line (Clark, D’Ambrosio and Ghislandi (forthcoming)).4 Others have studied adaptation
to positive shocks, including Yap, Anusic and Lucas (2012 and 2015) and Grover and Helliwell (2015),
who show that marriage has large and long-lasting effects on life satisfaction in the United Kingdom,
Switzerland and other developed countries. Nakazato, Schimmack and Oishi (2010) find that moving
to a better home in Germany had lasting effects on housing satisfaction that were measurable five
years later, but no effects at all on life satisfaction. Gardner and Oswald (2007) and Apouey and Clark
(2015) document continuing mental health and life satisfaction gains from lottery winners in the
United Kingdom. Di Tella, Haisken-De New and MacCulloch (2010) used observational data to study
happiness adaptation to both positive and negative changes in income and status in Germany and
found that, within the space of four years, individuals completely adapt to changes in income. With a
few exceptions, this research generally shows that people at least partially revert to their reference level
of happiness over time. Nonetheless, all of these studies are based on samples that either do not

4They use observational panel data for the period from 1992 to 2011 in Germany to estimate the effect of falling below
the poverty line on the level of satisfaction with quality of life. They find that life satisfaction falls with poverty and that
there is little evidence of adaptation within a poverty spell. Their results may, however, suffer from potential selection
problems associated with time-varying non-observable variables, such as productivity or effort, that may well be correlated
with both the probability of entering poverty and achieving perceived life satisfaction over time (for causal evidence
concerning the positive effects of happiness on productivity, see Oswald, Proto and Sgroi (2015)).
                                                               4
include people living in extreme poverty or do not separate out the effects on poor households from
the effects on non-poor households.

In low-income contexts, there have been a number of well-known studies on the effect of major
improvements in housing and of cash transfer programs on happiness, but none of these studies has
investigated the phenomenon of adaptation. Cattaneo et al. (2009) find that replacing dirt floors with
cement floors both increases happiness and reduces symptoms of depression in Mexican slums. Ozer
et al. (2011) find that beneficiaries of Mexico’s Oportunidades program have significantly lower rates of
depression. Ludwig et al. (2012) find that a one standard deviation decline in neighborhood poverty
substantially increased the subjective well-being of the beneficiaries of the Moving to Opportunity
(MTO) experiment. Devoto et al. (2012) find that greater access to clean municipal water supplies
significantly increases happiness. Galiani et al. (2016) find that giving poor Mexicans non-contributory
pensions reduces their symptoms of depression. Taken together, this body of work suggests that
reducing poverty is associated with positive effects in terms of happiness. However, the literature does
not include experiments based on the kind of data that would make it possible to test whether these
effects change as a result of hedonic adaptation over time.

There is also a related body of literature on the general relationship between income and subjective
well-being. In contrast to the papers cited above, which examine the impact of large shocks in material
well-being on people’s subjective well-being, this literature estimates the smooth association of income
and subjective well-being. This part of the literature reports conflicting results from the longitudinal
and cross-sectional evidence that has been gathered. Easterlin (1974, 2005 and 2006) provides
evidence that increased income has not been associated with improvements in subjective well-being
over time in the United States, and his analyses have been replicated in various other countries and
for different periods of time.5 Paradoxically, while there generally appears to be little evidence of a
positive association between income and subjective well-being based on longitudinal time-series data,6
there is substantial evidence of a positive and statistically significant association between income and
happiness in the cross-sectional data on countries and on income groups within countries.7

5 See, for example, Blanchflower and Oswald (2004), Diener and Ohishi (2000), Di Tella, MacChulloch and Oswald (2003)
and Clark, Fleche and Senik (2014).
6
  An exception is Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), who find a positive time-series correlation between per capita GDP and
average subjective well-being, but only for a few specific countries.
7
  See, for example, Blanchflower and Oswald (2004); Clark, Frijters and Shields (2008a); Deaton (2008); Diener and Biswas-
Diener (2002); Diener and Seligman (2004); Diener et al. (2010); Di Tella and MacCulloch (2006); Frey and Stutzer (2002);
Inglehart and Klingemann (2000); Senik (2005); Stevenson and Wolfers (2008); and Veenhoven (1991).
                                                            5
A common explanation of the Easterlin Paradox is based on the diminishing marginal utility of income
(Frey and Stutzer, 2002; Layard, 2005; and Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2008). According to this line of
reasoning, there is a satiation point before which happiness increases with income and after which
additional income buys little, if any, extra happiness. This view is consistent with the hedonic
adaptation models of Veenhoven (1991) and Frederick and Loewenstein (1999), who hypothesize that
poor people do not adapt to shocks to the satisfaction of basic necessities that are related to survival
and reproduction. This model is also consistent with both a positive longitudinal association between
income and happiness in low-income countries and a weak or null association in high-income
countries. Then, in the cross-country analyses, developed countries that have already reached a certain
minimum level of GDP would mainly compose the “flat of the curve”, while poorer countries would
be positioned on the incline. In contrast, Clark, Frijters and Shields (2008b) put forward an alternative
explanation in which individuals evaluate their life satisfaction by comparing their level of wealth with
the wealth level of some reference individual or group in society. Under this hypothesis, increases in
income will produce increases in happiness only if the distance between the individual and the
reference group is shortened. Under this hypothesis, income growth has not increased subjective well-
being within countries because the relative income differences across countries have not changed.



3.The Experiment

The houses were supplied by Un Techo Para Mi País (“A Roof for My Country” (TECHO)), a Latin
American NGO whose mission is to provide basic, pre-fabricated houses to extremely poor
populations with the express goal of improving their well-being. TECHO targets the poorest informal
settlements and, within these settlements, the families who live in the most extremely substandard
housing.8 TECHO houses are a significant improvement over existing housing in terms of flooring,
roofs and walls (Galiani et al., 2015). The targeted settlements are communities comprised of families
that, for the most part, inhabit plots of land that they do not own and that are plagued by a host of
problems, including insufficient access to basic utilities (water, electricity and sanitation), significant

8
 While the work primarily involves building homes, over 3,500 regular volunteers also commit at least one day a week to
community organization and participation in social inclusion programs. This second phase of the intervention aims at
developing skills through the implementation of these programs. Our study focuses on evaluating the impact of the first
phase of the program: the construction of TECHO houses. We limit the evaluation sample frame to settlements that did
not receive the services provided during the second phase of the intervention; accordingly, no intervention other than the
construction of housing took place in the settlements studied during the period of analysis.
                                                            6
levels of soil and water contamination, and overcrowding. Typical houses are rudimentary units
constructed from discarded materials, such as cardboard, tin and plastic, and have dirt floors.



TECHO houses are 18 square meters (6m by 3m) in size. The walls are made of pre-fabricated,
insulated pinewood panels or aluminum, and the roofs are made of tin and are designed to keep
occupants warm and to protect them from humidity, insects and rain. The floors are raised between
30 and 80 cm off the ground to reduce dampness and to protect the occupants from floods and
infestations. Although these houses are a major improvement over the recipients’ previous housing,
the facilities are limited in that they do not include bathrooms or kitchens or amenities such as
plumbing, drinking water hook-ups, or gas connections. The cost of a TECHO house is less than
US$1,000 – with the bulk of the cost being the acquisition, storage and transportation of the materials,
since there are essentially no labor costs; the beneficiary family pays 10% of the cost. In El Salvador,
US$100 is approximately equivalent to 3.3 months’ per capita baseline earnings, while in Mexico and
Uruguay, it is roughly equivalent to 1.6 and 1.4 months of baseline earnings, respectively. Figure 1
shows examples of TECHO houses.

                                                Figure 1. TECHO houses.




TECHO budget constraints limit the number of housing units that can be built at any one time.9
Under these constraints, TECHO opted to select beneficiaries by means of a lottery system that gives
all eligible households within a pre-determined geographical neighborhood an equal opportunity to
receive one of the units. TECHO first selected a set of eligible settlements and then conducted a

9
    This also constrained the size of the sample used in our study in each country.
                                                                7
census to identify eligible households within each settlement.10 The eligible households were then
surveyed (baseline survey) and randomly assigned to treatment and control groups within each
settlement. 11, 12 In general, the number of treatments represents a small portion of all the households
in the settlement. For example, in around 40% of the settlements, less than 10% of the households
were treated, and the proportion of treated households exceeded 50% of the slum population in only
8% of the settlements. In order to obtain accurate information from the households and to avoid
creating any desirability bias in the treatment group, the data collection work was separated from the
implementation of the intervention by contracting a highly respected survey firm in each country. The
enumerators told the interviewees that they were collecting data for a study on living conditions and
did not make any reference to TECHO verbally or in writing. After randomization, treatment
households were told about the program and its requirements by TECHO officials. Some of them
accepted the program and some rejected it. Note that control households were not told that they
would receive the benefits provided by the program in the future, so their behavior should not have
been affected by the expectation of being treated in the next round, although they may have felt
frustrated when they realized that they had lost the lottery (we will come back to this later in Section
6).

Since TECHO did not have the capacity to work in all settlements at the same time, the program was
rolled out in each country in two phases at the settlement level. Baseline surveys were conducted
approximately one month before the start of the construction work in each settlement, which gave
households time to acquire the funds to make the 10% contribution required by the program, while
the follow-up surveys were conducted simultaneously for all settlements for both phases in each
country (see Table 1). This process generated variations in the amount of time that beneficiaries had
occupied the house at the time of the follow-up survey. Phase I settlements had 24 months of

10
   Eligible settlements were those where: (i) at least 50% of the residents do not have title to the land that they occupy
and/or (ii) the slum lacks access to at least one of the following three basic services: electricity, drinking water and
sanitation. Settlements where TECHO had worked in the past were considered ineligible and were not part of the
evaluation. In El Salvador, we first randomly selected states, then randomly selected municipalities within each selected
state, and then TECHO did a census of eligible settlements within each selected municipality. In the case of Mexico, we
first randomly selected municipalities within Estado de Mexico, and then TECHO did a census of slums within each
selected municipality. Finally, in the case of Uruguay, since TECHO had already worked in most of the settlements in
Montevideo and Canelones departments, the sampling was non-random and based on a census of settlements where the
program had not been implemented in the past. See the Appendix, Figure A1, for a map of regions where the settlements
included in the study are located in each country.
11
   In El Salvador and Uruguay, some settlements were randomly assigned a higher intensity-of-treatment level. However,
since the number of clusters (settlements) was small, we do not exploit this feature to any significant extent in our analysis.
12
   Within each settlement, every household had the same probability of being chosen for inclusion in the intention-to-treat
group, but this was not necessarily the case across settlements.
                                                              8
exposure, on average, while Phase II settlements had an average of 16 months of exposure, for a
difference of 8 months, on average. Figure 2 shows the timeline of the surveys in each country.




                                             Figure 2. Timeline




Our sample includes a total of 74 settlements, of which 29 were in Phase I and 45 were in Phase II.
The total number of eligible households in these settlements was 2,373. Treatment was offered to
57% of the households, and over 85% of those households actually received a new house (see Galiani
et al., 2015). The remaining 15% that were assigned to treatment could not afford the required 10%
co-payment and hence did not receive a house. The compliance rate with the treatment is balanced
across phases.


Attrition rates between baseline and follow-up amounted to 6% of the households in the assigned-to-
treatment group and 7% of those in the control group, with most of the attriters being households
whose members moved out of the slum and could not be reached in their new locations. This
difference is not statistically significant at conventional levels (see Table 2). The difference between
the attrition rates of the assigned-to-treatment and control groups within each phase was not
statistically significant either. Finally, the attrition rates are also balanced across phases.


Under randomization, the outcomes of the assigned-to-treatment and control groups should be equal,
on average, prior to treatment. Galiani et al. (2015) tested for the null hypothesis of no difference
between the groups for a large set of variables measured at baseline which included socioeconomic
characteristics, housing characteristics, assets, satisfaction with quality of housing and life, perception
of security, education and health. The analysis indicates that there was a statistically significant
difference between groups for only 4 out of 44 variables at conventional levels, which is about what

                                                      9
would be expected to occur by chance. The test results also show that the samples were balanced in
each of the countries, as was the sample when pooled across all the countries.


4. Measurement


We measure subjective well-being with respect to housing quality and overall quality of life using self-
reported Likert-scale measures. The measures are based on responses to the following question, each
part of which highlights the specific attribute to be evaluated: “How satisfied are you with… (i) the
quality of your floor; (ii) the quality of your walls; (iii) the quality of your roof; (iv) the protection of
your house against water when it rains; and (v) the quality of your life. Would you say you are
“Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”, Satisfied”, or “Very Satisfied”? These measures
have been used extensively to measure general life satisfaction, to arrive at assessments of how people
believe their lives are going and, increasingly, to assess the impact of social programs and public policy
(Dolan, Layard and Metcalfe (2011).


The possibility of constructing a happiness metric is based on research that demonstrates that people
have a common understanding of happiness and that numerical measures are effective in capturing
those feelings. For example, van Praag (1991) reports that people are able to translate numerical
happiness indicators into verbal labels, and Diener and Lucas (1999) show that people are able to
predict the happiness levels of others.


Our metric allows 4 response points for relative happiness. Jacoby and Matell (1971) and Lehmann
and James (1972) report that three-point scales do well when the focus is on group averages. Andrews
and Withey (1976) find that three-point response scales capture 80%-90% of the variation captured
by seven-point scales for the U.S. Finally, Alwin (1992) shows that there are diminishing returns after
three-point scales to additional response options on happiness scales.


One issue that arises with respect to Likert-scale measures is how to best summarize the responses
into a single indicator. A simple sum requires us to assume cardinality, i.e., that responses to the
happiness question fall on a linear scale. One concern is that different individuals may have different
utility reference points for each of the thresholds. As Ludwig et al. (2012) notes, however, in
randomized experiments such as ours, even if respondents use different thresholds to map the
response categories for happiness into utility, this is not a problem so long as the TECHO treatment

                                                     10
itself did not affect the happiness thresholds. In this case, the distribution of happiness thresholds
would be the same across experimental groups by virtue of random assignment.

With these issues in mind we construct two different measures. The first, our primary measure, is a
simple dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent reports that s/he is satisfied or very satisfied,
and 0 otherwise. This measure minimizes the potential problem with cardinality, but discards variation.
As a robustness check, we follow Kling et al. (2007) and Ludwig et al. (2012) to construct a
standardized measure using all the values from the satisfaction scale. Specifically, we use the full four-
point indicator as a continuous measure and standardize it for each settlement using the mean and
standard deviations for the control group of that settlement. The standardization procedure is based
on the assumption that respondents have common views of how the thresholds map into utility within
settlements but allows for them to vary by settlement. This second measure also has the virtue of
enabling us to interpret the estimated effects in terms of standard deviations of subjective well-being
and to compare the order of magnitude of the effects to those found in other studies.

5. Identification Strategy

We report estimates of intention-to-treat effects by time of exposure (phase) for:

                    𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛼 + 𝛾1 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 + 𝛾2 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗                        (1)

where Yij is the subjective well-being of household i living in settlement j; 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if family i in settlement j was offered a TECHO house and 0 otherwise; 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if settlement j was treated in phase I and 0 otherwise; Xij is a vector of household
characteristics measured at baseline; 𝜇𝑗 is a settlement fixed effect; and ij is the error term.13

The settlement fixed effects capture the average unobservable differences across settlements (and
hence countries). This is important, since randomization was conducted within each settlement. One
point that is of particular importance is that settlement fixed effects also control for differences in the
reference points for subjective well-being, which may vary geographically. Controlling for settlement

13
  As we explained in the last section, our subjective well-being measures can take the form of a binary outcome (limited
dependent variable (LDV)) or a continuous outcome (z-scores). The problem posed by causal inference with LDVs is not
fundamentally different from the problem of causal inference with continuous outcomes. If there are no covariates or the
covariates are sparse and discrete, linear models are no less appropriate for LDVs than for other types of dependent
variables. This is certainly the case in a randomized control trial where controls are included only in order to improve
efficiency but their omission would not bias the estimates of the parameters of interest.
                                                          11
fixed effects, we assume that the error terms are independent and thus report only robust standard
errors.14



The parameters of interest are 𝛾1, the treatment effect for Phase II (short-exposure) households; 𝛾1 +
𝛾2 , the treatment effect for Phase I (long-exposure) households; and 𝛾2 , the degree of hedonic
adaptation – i.e., the difference in the treatment effect between Phase I (long exposure) and Phase II
(short exposure). A negative γ2 is consistent with at least partial hedonic adaptation. If γ2 fully offsets
γ1 , then we have full or complete hedonic adaptation, i.e., subjective well-being returns to its reference
level.



Our identification strategy is two-fold. First, random assignment of treatment status guarantees
treatment exogeneity, both overall and within phases, and thus provides the identification for both
𝛾1 and 𝛾2. Galiani et al. (2015) demonstrate that the overall sample was balanced over a large number
of characteristics, and in Table 3 we further show that the samples are balanced within phases.



Second, a negative and significant 𝛾2 can be interpreted as evidence of hedonic adaptation only if the
samples in both phases started from the same level of subjective well-being. This would be the case if
the allocation of settlements to phases in each country were orthogonal to their characteristics. Indeed,
even though the time of exposure to the treatment was not randomly assigned, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis of no differences in baseline subjective well-being outcomes and covariates between
Phase I and Phase II settlements (see Table 3). In particular, these results show that populations from
Phases I and II were statistically comparable before treatment, thereby lending credibility to our
interpretation of 𝛾2 as a measure of hedonic adaptation. Note that pre-treatment measures are also
statistically balanced across intention-to-treat groups within each phase. Hence, potential time effects
are controlled for by our experimental design.




14
  As long as the phasing design of the intervention is given at settlement level, then there is no within-settlement variation
in phase. Thus, controlling for phase effects makes no sense, since phase and settlement fixed effects span the same
subspace.
                                                             12
6. Results

We report the results of estimating equation (1) for two different specifications – one with and one
without a set of control variables – and for both ways of constructing the dependent variables.15,16
The dependent variable in all models is the indicator of satisfaction. We first estimate specifications 1
and 2 for limited dependent variables and then, as a robustness check, we replicate the exercise using
z-score measures of satisfaction. The specific control variables included in the second specification
are listed in the notes to Table 4. This table presents estimates of γ1 and γ2 on satisfaction with the
housing unit (satisfaction with floor quality, satisfaction with wall quality, satisfaction with roof quality
and satisfaction with the protection afforded by the house when it rains) as well as with an overall self-
reported measure of quality of life. In each model, we also report the p-statistic for an F-test of the
null hypothesis of full hedonic adaptation to the TECHO house (γ1 + γ2 = 0).

First of all, treatment substantially increased the subjective well-being of beneficiaries in Phase II
(short exposure) as indicated by the estimated γ1 (Table 4). They are happier with their houses and
with their lives once they have received their TECHO houses.17 This is systematic for all self-reported
measures of satisfaction and is robust across models. Using the indicator-dependent variable,
satisfaction with housing quality increased by between 54% and 97%, and gains in the households’
overall subjective well-being amounted to increases of about 40%. This smaller effect on satisfaction
with quality of life compared to the larger effects on satisfaction with housing quality is not surprising,
as housing is only part of what determines quality of life.

Adaptation: The initial gains in subjective well-being afforded by the treatment do not appear to be
fully sustained over time, as indicated by the negative estimates of γ2 . The treatment effect on
satisfaction with quality of life is 60% lower in households treated in Phase I than it is in those treated
in Phase II.18 However, we reject the null hypothesis of full adaptation in satisfaction with quality of

15
   Table A1 provides a detailed definition and sample size for each variable considered in this study.
16 The statistical inference of our results is robust to clustering the standard errors at the settlement level since rejection
decisions of the null hypothesis remain the same at conventional levels of statistical significance. This result lends credibility
to our assumption that the settlement fixed effect captures the systematic unobserved differences across slums. These
results are available upon request.
17 In order to interpret these results more accurately, it is important to note that, for all the outcome variables considered

in this study, there was no instance in which the average outcome for the control group decreased between the baseline
and follow-up measures, which suggests that, if there was any frustration effect among lottery losers, it was not reflected
in their reports of subjective well-being.
18 Due to a problem with data collection in the follow-up survey in El Salvador, the non-response to this question was

differentially greater for the control group. Thus, to be on the safe side, we randomly impute a value equal to 3 ("Satisfied
                                                               13
life. After eight months of additional exposure to the treatment, on average, TECHO beneficiaries
partially adapted but were still happier compared to the reference level for no treatment. With respect
to satisfaction with housing quality (floor, roof, walls and protection from rain), we find overall
positive effects that decrease from short to long exposure by between 41% and 55%. Again, the results
are consistent with partial but not full hedonic adaptation.19, 20


The results for satisfaction with quality of life and with various aspects of the quality of housing are
displayed in Figure 3. For each variable, the first bar represents the mean level of satisfaction for the
control group measured at follow-up. The next bar represents the mean level of satisfaction of the
treatment group measured 16 months after construction, on average. It is computed as the mean of
the control group plus the treatment effect for the Phase II group. Finally, the last bar represents the
mean level of satisfaction of the treatment group 24 months after construction and is estimated as the
mean of the control group plus the treatment effect for the Phase I group. The difference between
the first bar and the second bar is the treatment effect on subjective well-being for the Phase II group,
and the difference between the second and third bar is the extent of hedonic adaptation. While the
third bar is lower than the second bar in all outcomes, it is still higher than the first bar, which is
consistent with partial but not total adaptation.


Multiple Outcomes: Statistical Inference. In studies with multiple outcomes, a few statistically significant
effects may emerge simply by chance. The larger the number of tests, the greater the likelihood of a
type I error. We reduce the risk of false positives deriving from an examination of large numbers of
individual outcomes by using Bonferroni Family-Wise Error Rates (FWER) to adjust the p-values of
the individual tests as a function of the number of outcome variables. We compute Bonferroni FWER

with quality of life") to 84 missing values in the control group observations, which reduces the non-response rate for this
variable from 43% to 7% (the same level as recorded for the intention-to-treat group). Without performing this imputation,
𝛾1 and 𝛾2 are 0.261 and -0.165, respectively, for Model 1 and are 0.262 and -0.165, respectively, for Model 2.
19
   Though one could always worry about a “priming” effect on subjective well-being questions, that is less of a concern
here, since we find large differences in all measures of satisfaction with the house rather than only in satisfaction with
quality of life, which could have been subject to priming. More importantly, this should not be an issue in testing the
hedonic adaptation hypothesis, since both experimental groups were asked the same questions in the same order.
20 As we mentioned earlier, linear models assume cardinality, i.e., that the difference in happiness between, for example, a

ranking of 2 and one of 3 for any individual is the same as between a ranking of 3 and one of 4 for any other individual.
Hence, as a robustness check, we relaxed this assumption and re-estimated equation (1) using an ordered probit model,
with the results being qualitatively the same. The probability of a household being in the highest satisfaction category
always increases with treatment in the second phase (𝛾1 positive), and the difference across phases is positive for phase 2
(𝛾2 negative); likewise, the probability of a household being in the lowest satisfaction category always decreases with
treatment in the second phase (𝛾1 negative), and the difference across phases is negative for phase 2 (𝛾2 positive). See the
Appendix, Tables A2 and A3.
                                                            14
corrections at the 10% level of statistical significance by dividing the desired size of the test by the
number of satisfaction variables (5 in total). Hence, the Bonferroni corrected for a multiple-outcomes
p-value is 0.02 for a significance level of 0.10. As can be observed in Table 4, all the results remain
significant under this stringent test except the adaptation effect on satisfaction with quality of floors.


Country Specific Estimates. In Table 5, we report the estimates separately by country. The estimated
magnitudes of the short-run effect on subjective well-being, γ1 , are statistically significant for all three
countries and are the same magnitudes for El Salvador and Mexico. The effect size for Uruguay is half
of what it is for the other two countries. The hedonic adaptation effect, γ2 , is consistent across
countries but is only statistically significant for Mexico, most likely owing to the smaller size of the
sample. The magnitudes of the estimates for the γ2 parameters are about the same relative to the
estimated γ1 parameters in all three countries, which is consistent with the finding that the degree of
hedonic adaptation is the same for all three countries. In addition, we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that the estimated coefficients are jointly equal for all countries (see the p-value for the F-Test for the
pooling of countries). The evidence is robust across models, which lends credibility to the external
validity of the results.


Standardized Measure of Subjective Well-Being: Our analysis thus far has considered a binary state of
satisfaction, which ignores substantial variance in the outcomes. As described above, we repeated the
exercise using the formation of the dependent variable proposed in Kling et al. (2007) and Ludwig et
al. (2012). Specifically, we constructed standardized satisfaction outcomes, as well as a summary index
of subjective well-being. The summary index is computed as the sum of standardized satisfaction
variables (with the sign of each measure oriented so that more beneficial outcomes have higher scores)
divided by the number of satisfaction variables. This summary index aggregates information across
related outcomes and is useful both as a summary statistic and possibly as a means of augmenting the
statistical power to detect effects of the intervention that are consistent across groups of outcomes.


First, as shown in Table 6, treatment substantially increased the subjective well-being of the short-
exposure beneficiaries (γ1 ), which is consistent with the results presented for binary outcomes. While
the beneficiaries’ satisfaction with housing quality increases by between 0.56 and 0.81 standard
deviations, gains in their general subjective well-being are about 0.48 standard deviations relative to
the control group.

                                                     15
In terms of adaptation (γ2 ), we find that the treatment effect on satisfaction with quality of life is
around 50% lower in households treated in Phase I than in those treated in Phase II; this is about the
same extent of the adaptation effect found using a binary life satisfaction measure. With respect to
satisfaction with housing quality (floor, roof, walls and protection from rain), we find overall positive
effects from treatment that decrease from short to long exposure by a proportion similar to that
detected for the adaptation effects found using binary satisfaction measures.

Finally, all the estimated effects except those for satisfaction with the quality of floors remain
significant after adjusting the p-values for multiple outcomes, which rules out the presence of false
positives in our analysis. Indeed, based on our summary index of satisfaction, we find that, after 16
months of exposure to the TECHO program, beneficiaries’ satisfaction with their housing and life
increased by 0.66 standard deviations but that 47% of that gain had disappeared eight months later.

Effect Size in Context: The estimated effect on subjective well-being is large even accounting for hedonic
adaptation. Using baseline data, the effect size in the long-run (0.25 standard deviations) is equivalent
to six times the average difference in subjective well-being between households whose incomes are
above (0.24) and below the median (0.20) in Phase I (long exposure). The effect size is also equal to
the difference in subjective well-being between non-beneficiary slum dwellers whose monthly income
per capita differs by around US$125 – a huge effect given that the average monthly income per capita
in the control group at baseline is US$55. In other words, the effect on subjective well-being is roughly
equivalent to quadruplicate the average monthly per capita income. Considering that beneficiary
households invested US$100 as a co-payment to obtain the TECHO house (worth about US$1,000),
then, on average, their return on the housing investment was around 100% in terms of subjective well-
being – in other words, around two times as much as their baseline average income yielded a subjective
well-being equivalent to the level of subjective well-being that they would obtain if they earned four
times as much as their baseline income.

An advantage of the standardized measure is that it also allows us to compare the order of magnitude
of the effects with those found in other studies. Using standardized data on general subjective well-
being from the World Values Surveys in El Salvador (1999), Uruguay (2011) and Mexico (2012), our
estimated effect is somewhat higher than the difference in average subjective well-being of those who
completed the tertiary level of education and those who just completed elementary education – a huge
effect considering that the control group in our study had 3.9 years of schooling, on average, at

                                                   16
baseline. The effect size is also equivalent to the difference in subjective well-being between individuals
who report being in the eighth decile (third richest) and those who report being in the third decile
(third poorest) of the income distribution.21

7. Alternative Interpretations

Housing Quality: One concern regarding our interpretation of the results is that housing quality may
have deteriorated over time. In this case, γ2 could represent a decline in satisfaction due to reduced
housing quality rather than hedonic adaptation. We test for this possibility by estimating equation (1)
for various measures of housing quality. In general, the results reported in Table 7 show a large and
significant increase in the housing quality of the TECHO houses (γ1 ), but no difference in housing
quality between Phase I and Phase II (γ2 ).

Material Well-being: A second concern regarding our interpretation of the results is that income and
wealth may have deteriorated over time. In this case, γ2 could represent a decline in satisfaction due
to reduced material well-being rather than hedonic adaptation. We test for this possibility by estimating
equation (1) for various measures of material well-being, including assets, income and labor-force
participation. In general, the results reported in Table 8 show no difference between treatment and
control groups in Phase II (γ1 ), and no difference in the treatment effect across phases (γ2 ).

Relative Status Effects: Finally, Clark, Frijters and Shields (2008b) and Di Tella, Haisken-De New and
MacCulloch (2010) hypothesize that if people only care about their relative position or “status”, then
the dissipation of income effects on happiness would be explained by relative position effects to which
individuals do not adapt. In this case, increasing levels of income would not buy happiness unless
higher incomes generate positive changes in a person’s relative position.

We examine whether the dissipation of satisfaction gains can be explained through relative status
effects by testing for heterogeneous effects of housing improvements on hedonic adaptation across
high versus low socio-economic status (SES) groups. Since all beneficiaries received the same kind of
house, we hypothesize that the lower-income beneficiaries within a slum increased their wealth
proportionally more than their richer counterparts, in which case differences in the adaptation effects

21
  The subjective well-being measure taken from the World Values Survey (WVS) consists of a four-point response scale
to the question: “Taking all things together, would you say you are very happy, happy, not very happy, not happy at all?”.
While TECHO’s subjective well-being question also includes a four-point response scale, TECHO’s phrasing and scale
responses are not exactly the same as those of the WVS survey, which implies that there may be differences in cardinality
across the surveys’ subjective well-being questions. Therefore, these results should be interpreted cautiously.
                                                           17
across SES groups may be indicative of the presence of relative status effects. To look more closely at
this possibility, we extend model (1) and estimate the following linear probability model:


              𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛼 + 𝛾1 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 + 𝛾2 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾3 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 +
       𝛾4 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾5 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗                   (2)


The parameters of interest are 𝛾3 , the relative treatment effect for high-status Phase II (short
exposure) households with respect to their low-status counterparts; 𝛾3 + 𝛾4 , the relative treatment
effect for high-status Phase I (long exposure) households with respect to their low-status counterparts;
and 𝛾4 , the relative degree of hedonic adaptation for high-status households with respect to
households with a low status within the settlement – i.e., the relative difference in the treatment effect
between Phase I (long exposure) and Phase II (short exposure) across high- and low- status groups.
A negative γ4 is consistent with a relative differential in hedonic adaptation in favor of the low-status
group. In other words, low-status households (those that increased their wealth proportionally more
and thus are more likely to improve their relative position within the slum) adapt less than high-status
counterparts do, with the difference in the patterns of adaptation across SES groups explained by the
larger relative positional changes experienced by low-status households as compared to their high-
status counterparts.


We use two different measures of SES. First, we construct a summary index of housing quality of a
number of housing quality measures (see Table A1). We first standardize each outcome variable by
subtracting the mean value of the control group in the settlement and by dividing by its standard
deviation. The summary index is then computed as the sum of standardized outcome variables in the
group with the sign of each measure oriented so that more beneficial outcomes have higher scores
divided by the number of outcome variables. Then, households with a positive z-score summary index
are considered to have a high status of housing, and accordingly, those with a zero or negative z-score
are considered to have a low status. Second, we use income status where households with a monthly
income per capita above the within-settlement median income were classified as high-income status
and those below that median were classified as low-income status.


As shown in Tables 10 and 11, there is no evidence that higher status measured either by housing
quality or income play any role in the hedonic adaptation of beneficiary households. Overall, both

                                                   18
high and low status households hedonically adapt at the same pace to the housing improvements over
time and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no differences in hedonic adaptation across them.

8. Conclusion

A fundamental question in economics is whether happiness increases pari passu with material
conditions or whether people grow accustomed to better conditions over time. Previous research has
tested these ideas in high-income countries where most residents have already met their basic needs
and hedonic adaptation is likely to be the strongest. In contrast, we test these ideas in the slums of
three low-income countries where adaptation is less likely to occur.

Specifically, we use data from a large-scale, multi-country field experiment to examine what kind of
impact the provision of housing to extremely poor slum dwellers in Latin America has on subjective
well-being and to test whether poor populations display hedonic adaptation to the happiness derived
from reducing the shortfall in the satisfaction of their basic need for housing. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to test the hypothesis of hedonic adaptation to a change in the level of
satisfaction of basic necessities among poor populations.

Our results are conclusive. We find that subjective perceptions of well-being are substantially higher
after 16 months for recipients of improved TECHO housing but that after, on average, another eight
months, 60% of that gain disappears. What it is more, our results are consistent across different
satisfaction indicators, from satisfaction with quality of life to satisfaction with quality of housing
characteristics. Thus, we conclude that hedonic adaptation, at least to a partial degree, is a common
human trait that is present even among poor populations that experience a major improvement in the
level of satisfaction of their basic necessities. Our results are consistent with the theoretical work of
Pollak (1970), Wathieu (2004), Rayo and Becker (2007), and Graham and Oswald (2010).

Interestingly, Ludwig et al. (2012) measure the long-run effects of the randomly assigned MTO
program on subjective well-being and find that after the program had been in effect for 10 to 15 years,
a one standard deviation decline in neighborhood poverty (13 percentage points) increased the
subjective well-being of MTO beneficiaries by an amount equal to two thirds of the gap in subjective
well-being between U.S. blacks and whites, or equivalent to the gap between people whose per capita
incomes differ by around US$250 per month –a large effect given that the annual income of the
control group in that study is around US$400 per capita per month. Note, however, that the effect of

                                                   19
the MTO program on subjective well-being is roughly equivalent to a 60% increase in the per capita
monthly income of an average household, which is a proportionally smaller effect than that of the
TECHO intervention, even after considering an adaptation effect of 50%. While the populations and
treatment exposures across studies are not totally comparable (subjective well-being measures are
relatively similar across samples, but TECHO beneficiaries are much poorer than their MTO
counterparts), what this evidence suggests is that even though poor populations in developing
countries exhibit hedonic adaptation in their satisfaction of basic housing needs, improvements in the
housing and neighborhood conditions of poor households seems to have a greater effect in developing
countries than in developed ones.




                                                  20
References
Alwin, D.F. (1992): “Information transmission in the survey interview: Number of response categories
       and the reliability of attitude measurement”, Sociological Methodology, 22(83).
Andrews, F.M., and S.B Withley (1976): “Social indicators of well-being: Americans’ perceptions of
      life quality”, Plenum, New York.
Anusic, Ivana, Stevie C.Y. Yap and Richard E. Lucas (2014): “Does personality moderate reaction and
       adaptation to major life events? Analysis of life satisfaction and affect in an Australian national
       sample”, Journal of Research in Personality, Vol.51. pp. 69-77.
Anusic, Ivana, Stevie CY Yap and Richard E. Lucas (2014): “Testing set-point theory in a Swiss
       national sample: Reaction and adaptation to major life events”, Social Indicators Research, 119(3):
       1265-1288.
Apouey, Benedicte, and Andrew Clark (2015): “Winning big but feeling no better? The effect of lottery
      prizes on physical and mental health”, Health Economics, 24: 516-538.
Bertrand, Marianne (2013): “Career, family, and the well-being of college educated women”, American
       Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 103(3):244-250.
Blanchflower, D., and A. Oswald (2004): “Well-being over time in Britain and the USA”, Journal of
       Public Economics, 88:1359-1386.
Brickman, P., and D. T. Campbell (1971): “Hedonic relativism and planning the good society”, in M.
      H. Appley (ed.), Adaptation Level Theory: A Symposium, New York: Academic Press.
Brickman, P., D. Coates and R. Janoff-Bulman (1978): “Lottery winners and accident victims—is
      happiness relative?”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36:917–927.
Cattaneo, Matias D., Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, Sebastian Martinez and Rocio Titiunik (2009):
       “Housing, health, and happiness", American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1):75-105.
Clark, A.E., and A.J. Oswald (1994): “Unhappiness and unemployment”, Economic Journal, 104:648–
        659.
Clark, A.E., E. Diener, Y. Georgellis and R.E. Lucas (2008): “Lags and leads in life satisfaction: a test
        of the baseline hypothesis”, Economic Journal, 118(529):222–243.
Clark, A.E, P. Frijters and M. Shields (2008a): “A survey of the income happiness gradient”, Journal of
        Economic Literature, 46(1): 95-144.
Clark, A. E., Paul Frijters and Michael A. Shields (2008b): "Relative income, happiness, and utility: An
        Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and other puzzles", Journal of Economic Literature,
        46(1):95-144.
Clark, A.E. (2016): "Adaptation and the Easterlin Paradox", in T. Tachibanaki (ed.), Advances in
       Happiness Research: A Comparative Perspective, Springer.
Clark, A.E., Conchita D’Ambrosio and Simone Ghislandi (forthcoming): “Adaptation to poverty in
        long-run panel data”, The Review of Economics and Statistics.
Deaton, A. (2008): “Income, health and well-being around the world: Evidence from the Gallup
      World Poll”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2): 53-72.
Deaton, A. (2013): The Great Escape: Health, Wealth and the Origin of Inequality, Princeton University Press.
                                                     21
Devoto, F., E. Duflo, W. Pariente and V. Pons (2012): “Happiness on tap: Piped water adoption in
      urban Morocco”, AEJ: Economic Policy, 4(4): 68-99
Diener, E., and R.E. Lucas (1999): “Personality and subjective well-being” in Well-Being: The Foundations
        of Hedonic Psychology, D. Khaneman, E. Diener and N. Schwarz (eds.), Guilford Press, 37:213-
        299.
Diener, E., and S. Oishi (2000): “Money and happiness”, in E. Diener and S. Eunkook (eds.), Culture
       and Subjective Well-Being, Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 185–218.
Diener, E, and M.E.P. Seligman (2004): “Beyond money: Toward an economy of well-being”,
       Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5(1):1–31.
Diener, E., R. Lucas and C. Scollon (2006): “Beyond the hedonic treadmill: Revising the adaptation
       theory of well-being”, American Psychologist.
Diener, E., W. Ng, J. Harter and R. Arora, (2010): “Wealth and happiness Across the world: Material
       prosperity predicts life evaluation, whereas psychosocial prosperity predicts positive feeling”,
       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99:52–61.
Di Tella, R., R. MacCulloch and A. Oswald (2003): “The macroeconomics of happiness”, Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 85(4):793–809.
Di Tella, R. and R. MacCulloch (2006): “Some uses of happiness data in economics”, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 20:25–46.
Di Tella, R, and R. MacCulloch (2010): “Happiness adaptation to income beyond
        ‘basic needs’” in E. Diener, J. Helliwell and D. Kahneman (eds.), International Differences in Well-
        Being, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Di Tella, R., John Haisken-De New and R. MacCulloch (2010): “Happiness adaptation to income and
        to status in an individual panel”, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 76:834–852.
Dolan, P, R. Layard and R. Metcalfe (2011): “Measuring subjective wellbeing for public policy:
        Recommendations on measures”, Centre for Economic Performance (Special Paper No. 23),
        available at http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/special/cepsp23.pdf.
Easterlin, R. (1974): “Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence”, in
        Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder (eds.), Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in
        Honor of Moses Abramovitz, New York: Academic Press.
Easterlin, R. (2005): “Feeding the illusion of growth and happiness: A reply to Hagerty and
        Veenhoven”, Social Indicators Research, 74(3):429 – 443.
Easterlin, R. (2006): “Building a better theory of well-being” in Luigino Bruni and Pier Luigi Porta
        (eds.), Economics & Happiness: Framing the Analysis, New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 29-
        64.
Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A., and B.M.S. Van Praag (2002): “The subjective costs of health losses due to
        chronic diseases. An alternative model for monetary appraisal”, Health Economics,,11:709–722.
Frederick, S., and G. Loewenstein (1999): “Hedonic adaptation” in D. Kahneman, E. Diener and N.
        Schwarz (eds.), Hedonic Psychology: Scientific Approaches to Enjoyment, Suffering, and Well-being, New
        York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Frey, Bruno, and Alois Stutzer (2002): “What can economists learn from happiness research?”. Journal
        of Economic Literature, 40(2): 402-435.
                                                     22
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul J. Gertler, Ryan Cooper, Sebastian Martinez, Adam Ross and Raimundo
        Undurraga (2015): “Shelter from the storm: Upgrading housing infrastructure in Latin
        American      slums”,    Social  Science  Research   Network,   available at   SSRN:
        http://ssrn.com/abstract=2296901.
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul J. Gertler and Rosangela Bando (2016): “Non-contributory pensions”, Labour
        Economics.
Graham, C., and A.J. Oswald (2010): “Hedonic capital, adaptation, and resilience”, Journal of Economic
      Behavior and Organization, 76:372-384.
Graham, C., S. Chattopadhyay and M. Picon (2010): “The Easterlin and other paradoxes: Why both
      sides of the debate may be correct” in E. Diener, J. Helliwell, and D. Kahneman (eds.),
      International Differences in Well-Being, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Groot, W., H.T.M. van den Brink and E. Plug (2004): “Money for health: The equivalent variation of
       cardiovascular diseases”, Health Economics, 13:859–872.
Grover, Shawn, and Jhon F. Helliwell (2014): “How’s life at home? New evidence on marriage and
       the set point for happiness”, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper
       No. 20794.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Hans-Dieter Klingemann (2000): “Genes, culture, democracy and happiness”
       in Ed Diener and Eunkook Suh (eds.), Culture and Subjective Well-Being, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jacoby, J., and M.S. Matell (1971): “Three-point Likert scales are good enough”, Journal of Marketing
        Research, 8(4):495-500.
Layard, Richard (2005): “Happiness: Lessons from a new science”, London: Penguin Books.
Ludwig J, G. J. Duncan, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. Kessler, J. R. Kling and L. Sanbomastu (2012):
      “Neighborhood effects in the long-term well-being of low-income adults”, Science,
      337(6101):1505-1510.
Marx, Benjamin, Thomas Stoker and Tavneet Suri (2013): “The economics of slums in the developing
       world", The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(4):187-210.
Oswald, A.J., and N. Powdthavee (2008): “Does happiness adapt? A longitudinal study of disability
      with implications for economists and judges”, Journal of Public Economics, 92(5–6):1061–1077.
Oswald, A.J., Eugenio Proto and Daniel Sgroi (2015): “Happiness and productivity”, Journal of Labor
      Economics, 33(4).
Ozer, E., L. C. Fernald, A. Weber, E. Flynn and T. J. VanderWeele (2011): “Does alleviating poverty
       affect      mothers'    depression?       A      quasi-experimental       investigation   of
       Mexico's Oportunidades program”, International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(6): 1565-1576.
Pollak, R. (1970): “Habit formation and dynamic demand functions”, Journal of Political Economy ,78:
        745–763.
Rayo, L., and G. Becker (2007): “Evolutionary efficiency and happiness”, Journal of Political Economy,
       115(2):302–337.
Riis, J., G. Loewenstein, J. Baron and C. Jepson (2005): “Ignorance of hedonic adaptation to
         hemodialysis: A study using ecological momentary assessment”, Journal of Experimental
         Psychology: General, 134(1):3–9.
                                                  23
Sacks, D. W., B. Stevenson and J. Wolfers (2010): “Subjective well-being, income, economic
       development, and growth”, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper
       No 16441.
Sacks, D. W., B. Stevenson and J. Wolfers (2012): “The new stylized facts about income and subjective
        well-being”, Emotion, 12(6):1181–1187.
Senik, C. (2005): “Income distribution and well-being: What can we learn from subjective data?”,
       Journal of Economic Surveys, 19:43–63.
Stevenson, B., and J. Wolfers (2008): “Economic growth and subjective well-being: reassessing the
       Easterlin Paradox”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 39(1 Spring):1–102.
Stevenson, B., and J. Wolfers (2013): “Subjective well-being and income: Is there any evidence of
       satiation?”, American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 103(3):598–604.
UN-Habitat (2003a): The challenge of slums: Global report on human settlements, UN-Habitat, Earthscan
     London.
UN-Habitat (2003b): Slums of the world: The Face of Urban Poverty in the New Millennium?, UN-Habitat.
B.M.S van Praag (1991): “Ordinal and cardinal utility: An integration of the two dimensions of the
       welfare concept”, Journal of Economics, 50(1-2):69-89.
Veenhoven, Ruut (1991): “Is happiness relative?”, Social Indicators Research, 24:1–34.
Wathieu, L. (2004): “Consumer habituation”, Management Science, 50:587–596.
Winkelmann, L., and R. Winkelmann (1998): “Why are the unemployed so unhappy? Evidence from
      panel data”, Economica, 65:1–15.




                                                   24
                   Table 1. Length of Treatment Exposure and Sample Sizes
                                  Phase I                 Phase II
                                                                            Combined
                                Construction            Construction
El Salvador
       Average Exposure          25 months               17 months
  Household Sample Size             288                      368              656
  Number of Settlements              8                       15                23
Uruguay
       Average Exposure          27 months               17 months
  Household Sample Size             353                      375              728
  Number of Settlements              6                        6                12
Mexico
       Average Exposure          20 months               15 months
  Household Sample Size             286                      540              826
  Number of Settlements              15                      24                39
All Countries
       Average Exposure          24 months               16 months
  Household Sample Size             927                     1,283            2,210
  Number of Settlements              29                      45                74




                                               25
                                      Table 2: Sample Size, Attrition and Compliance


                           Phase I                     Phase II            Combined Phases I and II     Phase I vs Phase II
                                                                                                       Phase    Phase
                  Treat.   Control   Diff.    Treat.   Control    Diff.    Treat.   Control   Diff.                      Diff.
                                                                                                         I       II
Number of Households

      Baseline     653      342                703       675               1,356     1,017              995     1,378

   Follow-Up       611      316                658       625               1,269     941                927     1,283

 Attrition Rate    0.07     0.08     -0.01     0.06      0.07     -0.01     0.06     0.07     -0.01     0.07     0.07     0.00
                  (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)

Compliance With Treatment/Control Assignment
   Compliance
                  0.88      0.99              0.86       1.00              0.87      1.00              0.92     0.93
         Rate




                                                            26
                                                             Table 3: Baseline Balance Within and Between Phases


                                                            Phase I                                      Phase II                                    Phase I vs Phase II
                                               Treat.       Control        Diff.             Treat.       Control        Diff.             Phase I        Phase II         Diff.
                                                0.19          0.21          0.01              0.25          0.27          0.01              0.20            0.26           -0.06
      Satisfaction with Floor Quality
                                               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)            [0.02]          [0.04]          [0.04]
                                                0.15          0.18         -0.02              0.16          0.16          0.02              0.16            0.16           -0.01
       Satisfaction with Wall Quality
                                               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)            [0.02]          [0.02]          [0.03]
                                                0.17          0.20         -0.02              0.16          0.17          0.02              0.18            0.16            0.01
      Satisfaction with Roof Quality
                                               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)            [0.02]          [0.02]          [0.03]
                                                0.15          0.18         -0.01              0.15          0.14          0.03              0.17            0.14            0.02
   Satisfaction with Rain Protection
                                               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)            [0.02]          [0.02]          [0.03]
                                                0.28          0.25          0.02              0.28          0.27          0.01              0.27            0.27            0.00
    Satisfaction with Quality of Life
                                               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)            [0.02]          [0.03]          [0.03]
                                               58.54         49.38         -0.16             45.25         42.13         -0.92             48.75           45.23            3.52
                   Assets Per Capita
                                               (6.50)        (4.33)        (9.02)            (2.92)        (2.57)        (3.97)            [4.93]          [2.98]          [5.71]
                                               59.85         49.45         -8.61             58.74         52.86         -5.08             53.08           55.77           -2.69
         Monthly Income Per Capita
                                               (4.29)        (2.63)        (5.99)            (2.94)        (2.54)        (4.32)            [4.01]          [4.27]          [5.82]
      Head of Household's Years of              4.09          4.34         -0.01              4.37          3.87          0.26              4.18            4.13            0.05
                        Schooling              (0.14)        (0.20)        (0.21)            (0.12)        (0.12)        (0.17)            [0.52]          [0.29]          [0.59]
                                                0.69          0.69         -0.01              0.69          0.71          0.00              0.69            0.70           -0.01
         Head of Household is Male
                                               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)            [0.04]          [0.03]          [0.05]
                                               42.09         41.33          0.52             41.20         40.73          1.01             41.83           40.97            0.86
          Head of Household's Age
                                               (0.63)        (0.77)        (1.07)            (0.59)        (0.61)        (0.87)            [0.95]          [0.70]          [1.17]
Note: This table reports baseline means and differences in means of the sample. For the Phase I and Phase II columns, differences in means are estimated by regressions that
include settlement fixed effects, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. For the Phase I vs Phase II columns, standard errors clustered at the settlement level are
reported in brackets. In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.




                                                                                        27
             Table 4: Hedonic Adaptation in Satisfaction with Quality of Life and Housing Characteristics
                       (Dependent variable = 1 if satisfied or very satisfied and zero otherwise)

                                           Mean                       Model 1                           Model 2
                                          Control                              Treatment                      Treatment
                                          Group            Treatment                          Treatment
                                                                               × Phase I                      × Phase I
                                                                 γ1                γ2              γ1                γ2

  Satisfaction with Quality of Life         0.53               0.20               -0.12           0.20              -0.12
                                                            (0.03)***           (0.05)***      (0.03)***          (0.05)***

                p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                   0.04                               0.04

    Satisfaction with Floor Quality         0.37               0.20              -0.05            0.20             -0.05
                                                            (0.03)***            (0.05)        (0.03)***           (0.05)

                p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                   0.00                               0.00

     Satisfaction with Wall Quality         0.30               0.29               -0.16           0.29              -0.16
                                                            (0.03)***           (0.05)***      (0.03)***          (0.05)***

                p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                   0.00                               0.00

    Satisfaction with Roof Quality          0.32               0.29               -0.12           0.29              -0.12
                                                            (0.03)***           (0.05)***      (0.03)***          (0.05)***

                p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                   0.00                               0.00

 Satisfaction with Rain Protection          0.29               0.25               -0.12           0.25              -0.13
                                                            (0.03)***           (0.05)***      (0.03)***          (0.05)***

                p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                   0.00                               0.00

Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the
respondent reports being “satisfied” or “very satisfied” and zero otherwise. The first column reports the mean of the
dependent variable for the control group measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1,
report the results of a regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted
with Phase I plus settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two
columns, under the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as
well as the value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the
baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal
to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed.
Finally, we report the p-values of the F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient on treatment + the
estimated coefficient on treatment × Phase I = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant
at 1%. The Bonferroni corrected for multiple outcomes p-value is 0.02, for a significance level of 0.10.




                                                            28
                   Table 5: Hedonic Adaption in Satisfaction with Quality of Life, by Country
                    (Dependent variable = 1 if satisfied or very satisfied and zero otherwise)

                                            Mean                     Model 1                      Model 2
                               Sample
                                           Control
                                Size                                     Treatment                       Treatment
                                           Group          Treatment                      Treatment
                                                                         × Phase I                       × Phase I
                                                                γ1              γ2           γ1                 γ2

            El Salvador          606         0.51            0.25             -0.13          0.25             -0.13
                                                          (0.05)***           (0.10)      (0.06)***           (0.10)

               Uruguay           715         0.45            0.13             -0.07          0.13             -0.07
                                                           (0.05)**           (0.08)       (0.05)**           (0.08)

                Mexico           822         0.60            0.22              -0.14         0.22              -0.14
                                                          (0.04)***          (0.07)**     (0.04)***          (0.07)**

          All Countries         2,143        0.53            0.20              -0.12         0.20              -0.12
                                                          (0.03)***          (0.05)***    (0.03)***          (0.05)***

           p-value for F-test of Pooling Countries                    0.54                            0.50
Note: Each row represent a different country. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the respondent
reports being “satisfied” or “very satisfied” and zero otherwise. The second and third columns report the sample
size and the mean of the dependent variable for the control group at follow-up. The next two columns, under the
heading of Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and
treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients
and robust standard errors. The last two columns, under the heading of Model 2, additionally control for the
household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of household assets per capita and
monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following the standard
procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable
equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-
values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficients on treatment and the estimated coefficient
on treatment × Phase I are jointly equal to all countries for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%.
***Significant at 1%.




                                                           29
                     Table 6: Hedonic Adaptation in Satisfaction with Quality of Life and Housing
                                     (Dependent variable = satisfaction Z-score)

                                           Mean                        Model 1                            Model 2
                                          Control                              Treatment                        Treatment
                                          Group             Treatment                           Treatment
                                                                               × Phase I                        × Phase I
                                                                  γ1                γ2               γ1                γ2

 Satisfaction with Quality of Life          0.00               0.48                -0.23            0.48              -0.23
                                                            (0.06)***            (0.09)**        (0.06)***          (0.09)**

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                    0.00                                 0.00

   Satisfaction with Floor Quality          0.00               0.56                -0.17            0.56              -0.17
                                                            (0.06)***             (0.10)*        (0.06)***           (0.10)*

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                    0.00                                 0.00

    Satisfaction with Wall Quality          0.00               0.81                -0.47            0.81              -0.48
                                                            (0.07)***            (0.11)***       (0.07)***          (0.11)***

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                    0.00                                 0.00

   Satisfaction with Roof Quality           0.00               0.74                -0.30            0.75              -0.31
                                                            (0.06)***            (0.10)***       (0.06)***          (0.10)***

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                    0.00                                 0.00

Satisfaction with Rain Protection           0.00               0.69                -0.35            0.70              -0.36
                                                            (0.06)***            (0.10)***       (0.07)***          (0.10)***

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                    0.00                                 0.00

     Satisfaction Summary Index             0.00               0.66                -0.31            0.66              -0.31
                                                            (0.05)***            (0.08)***       (0.05)***          (0.08)***

               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                      0.00                               0.00
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. Satisfaction measures are z-scores, standardized by the
control group mean and standard deviation within each settlement. The satisfaction summary index is defined as the
average of the z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial
outcomes have higher scores. The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable for the control group
measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the
dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus settlement fixed
effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, under the heading
Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of
household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round.
Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a
dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report
the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient on treatment + the estimated coefficient on
treatment × Phase I = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%. The Bonferroni
corrected p-value for multiple outcomes is 0.02 for a significance level of 0.10.




                                                             30
                                         Table 7: Adaptation in Housing Quality

                                             Mean                      Model 1                           Model 2
                                            Control
                                                                           Treatment ×                          Treatment
                                            Group           Treatment                           Treatment
                                                                             Phase I                            × Phase II
                                                                  γ1              γ2                γ1                γ2
         Share of Rooms with Good
                     Quality Floors           0.44              0.18             -0.01              0.19            -0.01
                                                             (0.02)***           (0.03)          (0.02)***          (0.03)
              p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                      0.00                                0.00
         Share of Rooms with Good
                       Quality Walls          0.35              0.20             -0.06              0.20             -0.06
                                                             (0.02)***          (0.04)*          (0.02)***          (0.04)*
              p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                      0.00                                0.00
         Share of Rooms with Good
                       Quality Roof           0.43              0.17             -0.02              0.17            -0.01
                                                             (0.02)***           (0.03)          (0.02)***          (0.04)
               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                     0.00                                0.00
     Share of Rooms with Windows              0.36              0.18             -0.02              0.18            -0.02
                                                             (0.02)***           (0.03)          (0.02)***          (0.03)
               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                      0.00                              0.00
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable
for the control group measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a
regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus
settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, under
the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the
value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline
round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and
add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we
report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient on treatment + the estimated coefficient
on treatment × Phase I = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.




                                                             31
                               Table 8: Adaptation in Income, Assets and Labor Outcomes


                                             Mean                       Model 1                             Model 2
                                            Control
                                                                            Treatment ×                          Treatment
                                            Group           Treatment                           Treatment
                                                                              Phase I                            × Phase II
                                                                  γ1               γ2               γ1                 γ2
             Assets Value Per Capita           60              -1.21             -1.65             -0.08             -2.80
                                                               (7.89)           (11.53)            (7.77)           (11.27)
               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                     0.73                                0.73

        Monthly Income Per Capita              59              -1.83               1.73            -2.24               1.70
                                                               (4.91)             (7.92)           (4.99)             (7.91)

            p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                        0.99                                0.93
 Hours Worked Last Week by Head
                    of Household               40               0.03               1.86             0.28               1.55
                                                               (1.33)             (2.18)           (1.33)             (2.13)
               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                     0.28                                0.27
       Hours Worked Last Week by
                          Spouse               34              -2.27               3.46            -2.08               3.58
                                                               (2.48)             (3.80)           (2.51)             (3.82)
               p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)                                     0.68                                0.60
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable
for the control group measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a
regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus
settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, under
the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the
value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline
round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and
add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we
report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient on treatment + the estimated coefficient
on treatment × Phase I = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.




                                                             32
                               Table 9: Hedonic Adaptation across Housing Quality Status
                          (Dependent variable = 1 if satisfied or very satisfied and zero otherwise)
                                                Mean                           Model 1                          Model 2
                                               Control
                                                                                       Treatment                         Treatment
                                               Group             Treatment
                                                                                        × High       Treatment ×          × High
                                                High              × High
                                                                                        Status ×     High Status          Status ×
                                                Status             Status
                                                                                        Phase I                           Phase I
                                                                       γ3                 γ4               γ3               γ4

  Satisfaction with Quality of Life              0.55                 -0.02              -0.06           -0.02             -0.07
                                                                      (0.05)             (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.27                              0.24

    Satisfaction with Floor Quality              0.39                 -0.08               0.06           -0.08              0.05
                                                                      (0.05)             (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.78                              0.64

     Satisfaction with Wall Quality              0.30                 -0.04               0.03           -0.04              0.01
                                                                      (0.05)             (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.88                              0.64

    Satisfaction with Roof Quality               0.32                 -0.05               0.01           -0.05              0.01
                                                                      (0.05)             (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.60                              0.54

 Satisfaction with Rain Protection               0.27                  0.01              -0.01            0.05             -0.02
                                                                      (0.05)             (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.97                              0.95
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the
respondent reports being `satisfied" or ``very satisfied" and zero otherwise. High status is a dummy variable that equals
one if the (within settlement) normalized z-score on housing quality is positive and zero otherwise. The first column
reports the mean of the dependent variable for control households with high status on housing quality measured at
follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of estimating 𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛼 + 𝛾1𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 +
𝛾2 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾3 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 + 𝛾4 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾5 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 . Reports are the
estimated coefficients and robust standard errors of 𝛾3 and 𝛾4 . The last two columns, under the heading Model 2,
additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of household assets
per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following the standard
procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to
1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of F-tests of
the null hypothesis that γ3 + γ4 = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.




                                                                 33
                                    Table 10: Hedonic Adaptation by Income Status
                          (Dependent variable = 1 if satisfied or very satisfied and zero otherwise)
                                                 Mean                          Model 1                           Model 2
                                                Control
                                                                                       Treatment                          Treatment
                                                Group            Treatment
                                                                                        × High        Treatment ×          × High
                                                 High             × High
                                                                                        Status ×      High Status          Status ×
                                                 Status            Status
                                                                                        Phase I                            Phase I
                                                                       γ3                 γ4                γ3               γ4

  Satisfaction with Quality of Life               0.51                 0.04               0.05             0.03              0.06
                                                                      (0.06)             (0.10)           (0.06)            (0.10)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.24                               0.23

    Satisfaction with Floor Quality               0.35                 0.05               0.06             0.05              0.05
                                                                      (0.06)             (0.09)           (0.06)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.17                               0.20

     Satisfaction with Wall Quality               0.31                 0.02               0.03             0.02              0.03
                                                                      (0.06)             (0.09)           (0.06)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.55                               0.57

    Satisfaction with Roof Quality                0.30                 0.08              -0.05             0.07             -0.04
                                                                      (0.06)             (0.09)           (0.06)            (0.09)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.68                               0.64

 Satisfaction with Rain Protection                0.26              0.11                 -0.11            0.10              -0.10
                                                                   (0.06)*               (0.09)          (0.06)*            (0.10)

             p-value (γ3 + γ4 = 0)                                              0.93                               0.99
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the
respondent reports being `satisfied" or ``very satisfied" and zero otherwise. High status is a dummy variable that equals
one if the household income is above the median income within the settlement and zero otherwise. The first column
reports the mean of the dependent variable for control households with high status on housing quality measured at
follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of estimating the linear probability model
𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛼 + 𝛾1 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 + 𝛾2 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾3 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 + 𝛾4 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗 × 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 × 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑗 + 𝛾5 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑗 +
𝜀𝑖𝑗 . Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors of 𝛾3 and 𝛾4 . The last two columns, under the heading
Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of household
assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following the
standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable
equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of F-
tests of the null hypothesis that γ3 + γ4 = 0. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.




                                                                 34
                                                                                                        Figure 3


                                                Satisfaction with Quality of Life and Housing Characteristics
                                                                                         Mean and 90% Confidence Interval
                                          1
                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
Satisfaction




                                          0




                                                                       fe                           y                     y                    y                         n
                                                                    Li                          lit                   lit                  lit                      io
                                                                o f                          ua                    ua                   ua
                                                                                                                                                                ect
                                                            y                            Q                    lQ                   fQ                        ot
                                                      lit                           or                      al                  o o                       Pr
                                                    ua                            lo                    W                      R                      n
                                                Q                             F                                                                     ai
                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                            Control Mean                                16 Months                  24 Months

               Note: This figure displays the estimated parameters reported in Table 4. The groups of bars represent estimated
               satisfaction with quality of life and various aspects of the quality of housing. The first bar denotes the mean level of
               satisfaction for the control group measured at follow-up. The next bar represents the mean level of satisfaction for the
               treatment group measured 16 months after construction, on average. It is computed as the mean of the control group
               plus the treatment effect for Phase II. The last bar represents the mean level of satisfaction of the treatment group 24
               months after construction, on average, and is estimated as the mean of the control group plus the treatment effect for
               the Phase I group. The difference between the first bar and the second bar represents the effect of the treatment on the
               subjective level of well-being for the Phase II group; the difference between the second and third bar can be interpreted
               as the extent of hedonic adaptation.




                                                                                                             35
Online Appendix




                  36
                                                                        Table A1: Description of Variables and Sample Sizes. Intention to Treat Groups. Follow Up Survey
                                                                                                                                                     Phase I             Phase II           All
Variable                            Description                                                                                                   Obs.     Obs.       Obs.     Obs.    Obs.     Obs.
                                                                                                                                                 Control Treat.     Control Treat.    Control Treat.

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)     Monthly Income per capita in US dollars of July 2007. It is calculated as the sum of the monthly earnings        265   513       532      557      797     1,070
                                    of each household's member divided by the household size.
Assets Value Per Capita (USD)       Total Asset Value per capita reported by the household.                                                          316   611       625      658      941     1,269
Head of HH's Age                    Age of head of household in years.                                                                               312   601       618      651      930     1,252
Head of HH's Gender                 Indicator equal to one if the head of household is a man.                                                        316   611       625      658      941     1,269
Head of HH's Years of Schooling     Years of Schooling of head of household equivalent to the higher level of education reached.                     313   594       609      649      922     1,243
Hours worked last week by Head      Hours worked last week by Head of Household                                                                      230   469       469      504      699      973
Hours worked last week by Spouse    Hours worked last week by the Spouse of Head of Households                                                       107   190       143      179      250      369
Satisfaction with Floor Quality     Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of floors,   313   606       623      657      936     1,263
                                    measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories: "Unsatisfied", "Regular", "Satisfied", "Very Satisfied".

Satisfaction with Wall Quality      Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of walls,    313   607       623      657      936     1,264
                                    measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories: "Unsatisfied", "Regular", "Satisfied", "Very Satisfied".

Satisfaction with Roof Quality      Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of roofs,    313   607       623      657      936     1,264
                                    measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories: "Unsatisfied", "Regular", "Satisfied", "Very Satisfied".

Satisfaction with Rain Protection   Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being satisfied or very satisfied with the house's protection       313   607       623      657      936     1,264
                                    against water when it rains, measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories: "Unsatisfied", "Regular",
                                    "Satisfied", "Very Satisfied".
Satisfaction with Quality of Life   Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of life of her   293   584       622      644      915     1,228
                                    family in that house, measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories: "Unsatisfied", "Regular", "Satisfied", "Very
                                    Satisfied".
Share Rooms Good Quality Floors     Proportion of rooms with floors made of good quality materials like cement, brick, or wood (observed             312   608       625      658      937     1,266
                                    by the enumerator).
Share Rooms Good Quality Walls      Proportion of rooms with walls made of good quality materials like wood, cement, brick or zinc metal             316   610       621      658      937     1,268
                                    (observed by the enumerator).
Share Rooms Good Quality Roof       Proportion of rooms with roofs made of good quality materials like cement, brick, tile and zinc metal            315   609       623      657      938     1,266
                                    (observed by the enumerator).
Share Rooms with Windows            Proportion of rooms with at least 1 window (observed by the enumerator).                                         315   610       625      658      940     1,268
High Housing Status                 Indicator equal to one if the equally weighted average of z-scores of Number of Rooms, Share of Rooms            316   610       625      658      940     1,268
                                    with Good Quality Floors, Share of Rooms with Good Quality Walls, Share of Rooms with Good
                                    Quality Roofs, and Share of Rooms with Window is positive at baseline, and zero otherwise.
High Income Status                  Indicator equal to one if the household's Monthly Income Per Capita is above the median income within            265   513       532      557      797     1,070
                                    the settlement at baseline, and zero otherwise.




                                                                                                      37
                Table A2: Hedonic Adaptation in Satisfaction with Quality of Life and Housing Ordered Probit
    (Dependent variable = 1 if “Very Satisfied”; 2 if “Satisfied”; 3 if “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”; and 4 if “Unsatisfied”)

                                                  “Very Satisfied”                  Model 1                           Model 2
                                                   in the Control                         Treatment                          Treatment
                                                  Group (Prop.)            Treatment                         Treatment
                                                                                          × Phase I                          × Phase I
                                                                               γ1              γ2                γ1               γ2

         Satisfaction with Quality of Life              0.14                   0.07          -0.03               0.07           -0.03
                                                                            (0.01)***      (0.01)**           (0.01)***       (0.01)**

          Satisfaction with Floor Quality               0.02                   0.05           -0.01              0.05           -0.01
                                                                            (0.01)***         (0.01)          (0.01)***         (0.01)

           Satisfaction with Wall Quality               0.02                   0.06          -0.02               0.06           -0.02
                                                                            (0.01)***      (0.01)**           (0.01)***       (0.01)**

           Satisfaction with Roof Quality               0.02                   0.07          -0.02               0.07            -0.02
                                                                            (0.01)***       (0.01)*           (0.01)***         (0.01)*

        Satisfaction with Rain Protection               0.02                   0.06          -0.02               0.06            -0.02
                                                                            (0.01)***       (0.01)*           (0.01)***         (0.01)*

Note: Each row represents a separate categorical dependent variable that equals 1 if the individual is “Very satisfied”; 2 if “Satisfied”;
3 if “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”; and 4 if “Unsatisfied”. The first column reports the proportion of individuals in the control
group that report being “Very satisfied” at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of an
ordered probit regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus
settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated marginal effects for the first category and robust standard errors. The last two
columns, under the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the
value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following
the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal
to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant
at 1%.




                                                                     38
               Table A3: Hedonic Adaptation in Satisfaction with Quality of Life and Housing Ordered Probit
       (Dependent variable = 1 if “Unsatisfied”; 2 “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”; 3 if “Satisfied”; 4 if “Very Satisfied”)

                                                 “Unsatisfied” in                   Model 1                          Model 2
                                                   the Control                           Treatment                          Treatment
                                                  Group (Prop.)            Treatment                        Treatment
                                                                                         × Phase I                          × Phase I
                                                                               γ1              γ2               γ1               γ2

         Satisfaction with Quality of Life             0.20                  -0.12           0.05              -0.12           0.05
                                                                           (0.01)***       (0.02)**          (0.01)***       (0.02)**

          Satisfaction with Floor Quality              0.36                  -0.17             0.03            -0.17            0.03
                                                                           (0.02)***          (0.03)         (0.02)***         (0.03)

           Satisfaction with Wall Quality              0.38                  -0.21           0.09              -0.22            0.09
                                                                           (0.02)***      (0.03)***          (0.02)***       (0.03)***

           Satisfaction with Roof Quality              0.38                  -0.22          0.06               -0.22            0.06
                                                                           (0.02)***       (0.03)*           (0.02)***         (0.03)*

        Satisfaction with Rain Protection              0.40                  -0.20          0.06               -0.20            0.06
                                                                           (0.02)***       (0.04)*           (0.02)***         (0.04)*
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable that equals 1 if the individual is “Unsatisfied”; 2 if “Neither Satisfied nor
Unsatisfied”; 3 if “Satisfied”; and 4 if “Very satisfied”. The first column reports the proportion of individuals in the control group
that report being “Unsatisfied” at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of an ordered
probit regression of the dependent variable on treatment assignment and treatment assignment interacted with Phase I plus
settlement fixed effects. Reports are the estimated marginal effects for the first category and robust standard errors. The last two
columns, under the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head's years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the
value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following
the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal
to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant
at 1%.




                                                                    39
Figure A1




   40
