                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ASSETS WITH "WARTS":
                   HOW RELIABLE IS THE MARKET FOR TECHNOLOGY?

                                           Vincenzo Palermo
                                           Matthew J. Higgins
                                           Marco Ceccagnoli

                                         Working Paper 21103
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21103


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2015

We thank Rajshree Agarwal, Dan Breznitz, Chris Forman, Daniel Spulber, Marie and Jerry Thursby,
Arvids Ziedonis, seminar participants at Georgia Tech, CCC doctoral consortium (MIT), 2014 Academy
of Management annual meeting, for helpful comments and suggestions. We are indebted to Deloitte
ReCap for access to their data. We also thank IMS Health Incorporated for their generous support
and access to their data. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and
expressed herein are not necessarily those of IMS Health Incorporated or any of its affiliated or subsidiary
entities. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed in this
article are based in part on data obtained under license from the following IMS Health Incorporated
or affiliate information service(s): IMS MIDAS™, June 1997 to December 2008, IMSA Health Incorporated
or its affiliates. Higgins acknowledges funding from the Imlay Professorship and Palermo acknowledges
funding from the Kauffman Dissertation Program Fellowship. The usual disclaimers apply. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21103.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Vincenzo Palermo, Matthew J. Higgins, and Marco Ceccagnoli. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assets with "Warts": How Reliable is the Market for Technology?
Vincenzo Palermo, Matthew J. Higgins, and Marco Ceccagnoli
NBER Working Paper No. 21103
April 2015
JEL No. L10,L24,L65,O32

                                              ABSTRACT

Existing research has focused on why and when firms may choose to access the external technology
market. Surprisingly, however, less is known about the reliability of the patents attached to these external
technologies in the face of litigation. “Weak” external patents expose a firm to the potential loss of
downstream revenues. To address this question we construct a novel dataset of patent litigation in
the pharmaceutical industry. We exploit a change in U.S. patent law as a natural experiment to test
whether external patents are more reliable than those developed internally. We find that acquired patents
are more likely to fall during litigation; they are less reliable then internal technologies. Losses lead
to an average reduction in market capitalization of $450 million. Overall, our results demonstrate the
critical importance of the underlying reliability of external patents and provides a cautionary note to
the potential benefits of accessing external technology markets.


Vincenzo Palermo                                     Marco Ceccagnoli
Munk School of GLobal Affairs                        Scheller College of Business
University of Toronto                                Georgia Institute of Technology
1 Devonshire Pl                                      800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Toronto, ON M5S 3K7                                  Atlanta, GA 30308
vincenzo.palermo@utoronto.ca                         marco.ceccagnoli@scheller.gatech.edu

Matthew J. Higgins
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu
1. Introduction

       The development of new technologies has become a process that often involves many

firms in multiple stages (Arora et al., 2001). Expanding markets for technology allow firms to

boost their performance by combining different technological inputs acquired externally, such as

through licensing or acquisitions. While much research on this topic has focused on the supply-

side of the technology markets, recent work has begun to analyze the role of the demand-side of

the technology markets (Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Laursen and Salter, 2006), highlighting

the effect of externally acquired technologies on firm performance.

       Patents and their enforcement strategies have also increasingly become a crucial

component of firm competitive advantage and patent enforcement has been identified as a

strategic capability (McGahan and Silverman, 2006; Somaya, 2012). Firms can exploit internally

or externally generated technology to boost productivity and firm performance, but once a

downstream product is commercialized its protection is limited by the uncertainty of patent

litigation (Lemley and Shapiro, 2005). Little is known, however, on the role of acquired patents

in case of litigation and their importance as a defensive strategy for protecting downstream

revenues. Specifically, if acquired patents are more likely to be considered invalid during

litigation, technology buyers can suffer from significant revenue losses. Therefore, it is

strategically important to understand the differences between acquired and internally developed

patents in the context of patent enforcement.

       To fill this gap, we combine insights from the economics and law literature on patent

litigation (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001; Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; Somaya, 2012) with

research on markets for technology (Gambardella et al., 2007; Arora and Gambardella, 2010) to

provide new evidence on the reliability of acquired patents in litigation cases. In particular, we



                                                 1
analyze litigation challenges and outcomes of internally developed or externally acquired

patents, including the impact of patent litigation on subsequent revenue loss if patents are held

invalid.

           To answer our research question, we focus on the pharmaceutical industry and on the

early entry of generic products through a specific regulatory mechanism called a Paragraph IV

certification or challenge.1 In the U.S., new branded chemical-based drugs are granted data

exclusivity that runs in parallel with patent protection. After the expiration of data exclusivity,

generic manufacturers can challenge a branded product by filing a Paragraph IV challenge with

the FDA that usually results in litigation.2 This unique setting offers us the opportunity to

compare internally generated and externally acquired patents and their ability to successfully

defend their incumbent position through litigation. Our results suggest that external patents are

more likely to fall during patent litigation. This loss is significant because it allows for early

entry by generic manufacturers, negatively impacting a pharmaceutical firm’s future revenues.

We approximate this loss through the use of an event study and find that a litigation loss

corresponds to a real reduction in firm market capitalization of between $446m and $451m.

         Our results provide a note of caution to the benefits associated with external technology

acquisition in boosting innovative performance. To our knowledge this is the first paper that

separates and analyzes the effects of internal and external patents on the probability of litigation,

final litigation outcomes and the resulting impact on firm market value. We contend that the




1
   Interestingly, and more generally, sophisticated investors have been using Inter Partes Review (IPR) petitions to
challenge patents they feel should be invalidated. Investors appear to be searching for questionable patents, filing an
IPR petition and concurrently selling short the company’s stock. IPR petitions were created by Congress in 2011 to
fight patent-trolls and are evaluated by a panel of three administrative judges. http://www.wsj.com/articles/hedge-
fund-manager-kyle-bass-challenges-jazz-pharmaceuticals-patent-1428417408
2
  The interested reader can see Voet (2013) for a complete discussion of the Paragraph IV challenge process.

                                                          2
reliability of external patents during ex post litigation is as important as the value of external

technology itself.

       Our findings also call into question the due diligence process firms undertake prior to

licensing a patent. If firms knowingly are licensing technologies with known patent deficiencies

or “assets with warts” then our results suggest that firms may need to identify and license

potential technologies prior to their initial patenting. In this manner, the licensing

(pharmaceutical) firm would be able to direct (and fund) the writing of the focal patent. As we

will discuss, these firms have more experience writing patents and greater resources to commit to

the patenting process.

       The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the current literature on external

technologies and patent litigation. Section 3 describes our industry setting. We discuss our data

and empirical findings in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. In Section 6, we quantify the economic

value of a litigation loss and we discuss the implications of our findings and conclude in Section

7.

2. The reliability of externally acquired patents

       In the last few decades the importance of external technologies in boosting innovative

activity has grown dramatically and an extensive stream of literature has developed focusing on

the role played by technology commercialization, especially through licensing (Teece, 1986;

Arora et al., 2001; Gans et al., 2002; Chesbrough, 2003; Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006;

Gambardella et al., 2007; Arora and Gambardella, 2010). In many industries, firms utilize and

build on external innovation to maintain their competitive market position, suggesting that

markets for technology are a key component of a firm’s innovative effort. For instance, Scherer

(2010) shows that a larger proportion of revenues for pharmaceutical companies are derived



                                                   3
from products that were discovered outside of the firm. Similarly, Ceccagnoli et al. (2010)

support this finding in their sample of new drugs introduced into the market; almost half of the

patents linked to new products were developed outside the firm.

       Despite the positive effects related to external technologies, there are potential downsides

that may affect the ability to realize the payoffs generated by technology acquisition. First,

contractual uncertainties can undermine the supply of technologies. For example, uncertainty and

opportunistic behavior may increase transaction costs thereby reducing technology transfer

(Williamson, 1985). Second, the level of tacit knowledge may reduce the positive spillovers

generated by the transfer. In fact, when knowledge is difficult to transfer, the incentive to acquire

external technologies may be reduced (Kogut and Zander, 1993; Ceccagnoli and Jiang, 2013).

       Previous analyses on optimal patent policy have usually assumed that there is no

uncertainty about the scope of patent protection (Gallini, 1984; Gallini and Winter, 1985).

However, subsequent perspectives recognize that patent protection is imperfect until it

successfully survives a challenge in court (Shapiro, 2003; Lemley and Shapiro, 2005). As

Lemley and Shapiro (2005) explain, the strength of patents is linked to the examination process

and, in general, the structure of patent review favors the approval of weak patents. As a result,

almost half of challenged patents are found invalid when litigated. For this reason, patents have

been defined as “probabilistic” since they do not confer an absolute right to exclude imitators but

they confer the right to try to exclude them through litigation (Lemley and Shapiro, 2005;

Hemphill and Sampat, 2011).

       Existing research has extensively focused on either the role of external patents in

boosting a firm’s innovative effort or on the determinants and conditions that facilitate

technology transfer. However, there is no clear evidence of the reliability of acquired



                                                  4
technologies. Previous work comparing the quality of internally generated and externally

acquired technology has focused on assessing the importance of the “lemons problem” in

affecting technology trade. Asymmetric information between technology buyers and sellers

could lead to lower-quality technology transactions, which would result in higher quality

internally developed technology. While empirical results to date are scant and mixed, a recent

review of this literature suggests the information problems have been overemphasized and that,

especially in the context of licensing in the pharmaceutical industry, “…licensed compounds

appear to be drawn from the same distribution as the internally generated compounds of the

licensor” (Arora and Gambardella, 2010). While we do not directly contribute to this debate, our

work shifts the focus of the comparison downstream by comparing the quality of internal and

external technology from the point view of its legal strength rather than the technological quality

(as measured by the probability of successful development).

       Our focus is on the extent to which firms are able to appropriate the returns generated by

external technologies once embedded in commercialized products. The argument behind this

logic is that holding a patent in the early stages, and conditional on successful development, it

may be easier to appropriate the economic rewards of the technology. If acquired technologies

are more reliable, from a legal standpoint, than those developed internally, firms may reduce the

litigation uncertainty and increase their ability to appropriate the monetary effects of innovation.

        Patents acquired through the markets for technology may differ in quality than those

developed internally. Large pharmaceutical companies typically have an in-house patent

department that has a quality assurance program that emphasizes best practices in drafting and

prosecution of patents (Knowles and Higgins, 2011). These in-house attorneys have been trained

in potential pitfalls that could lead to invalidation and are kept closely up to date on the



                                                  5
company’s own litigation experiences and those of similar companies. Patent attorneys can

easily access research notebooks and data that can be discussed with the scientists. This fully

transparent landscape is valuable to determine whether the final granted patent can be relied

upon by the company to a hold a market (Knowles and Higgins, 2011). These large companies

also have the resources to engage the most experienced, high quality external patent attorneys, if

needed.

       In contrast, suppliers of technology such as smaller research-intensive firms may not

have any experience with Hatch-Waxman generic litigation (i.e., Paragraph IV challenges) or

global litigation scenarios. Moreover, the licensor may only have limited research assets and

little commercial experience. Often these companies are resource constrained (Lerner et al.,

2003) and patents are drafted by outside counsel who themselves may have limited experience in

these issues (Knowles and Higgins, 2011).

       We know from conversations with senior industry executives that externally acquired

patents go through a significant due diligence process. However does this selection process

ensure lower quality patents are simply not acquired? While this may be the goal, the process is

more nuanced and opaque. For example, during due diligence counsel for the licensee (large

pharmaceutical company) may not be allowed to inspect notebooks or raw data before giving a

binding offer. In some cases access to inventors may even be restricted during the negotiation

phase, or important contracts or documents withheld or heavily redacted (Knowles and Higgins,

2011). Compounding these issues is often the limited supply of licensable drug leads within

highly disaggregated markets. As such, pharmaceutical companies may knowingly license

‘assets with warts’ (Knowles and Higgins, 2011). The result of this complex, nuanced and often




                                                 6
opaque process is that internally generated patents may end up exceeding the average quality of

externally acquired patents.3

         In sum, due to the offsetting effects on the legal quality of internal and external patents

highlighted above, answering the question of reliability of external patents is inherently

empirical in nature. In what follows, we therefore turn to our empirical framework.

3. The pharmaceutical industry and its regulatory environment

         The pharmaceutical industry provides a natural setting for our analysis. Because of the

regulatory environment in the U.S., generic manufacturers can litigate the patents of a branded

drug before they expire thereby potentially undermining the branded companies incumbent

position. There is an extant literature on generic entry (Scott Morton, 2000; Reiffen and Ward,

2005; Grabowski and Kyle, 2007) along with an emerging literature relating this entry to

competition and innovation (Branstetter et al., 2011, 2014). An additional stream of research has

discussed patent challenges and their role in affecting the length of market protection

(Grabowski, 2004; Grabowski and Kyle, 2007; Hemphill and Sampat, 2011). In general, an

increasing number of drugs are being challenged and those with larger sales attract more

competitors (Scott Morton, 1999; Grabowski and Kyle, 2007; Hemphill and Sampat, 2011).

Berndt et al. (2007) finds similar results on the increasing rate of Paragraph IV challenges.

Despite their focus on the impact of authorized generics, which may reduce the incentive for

entry by new firms, the authors conclude that the number of Paragraph IV challenges remains

high.

3
  It is critical to note that a weak or ‘bad’ patent does not mean the drug molecule or underlying technology is ‘bad’.
In fact, from our field interviews we actually anticipate the opposite – a pharmaceutical company may license a
weaker patent, the proverbial ‘asset with warts’, precisely because of the promise of the underlying molecule or
technology. In this respect, our paper builds upon Arora et al. (2009). They focus on the differences between
internally and externally developed drugs and show that external products are equally likely to succeed as internally
developed molecules. However, that paper implicitly makes an assumption about the relative reliability of the
internal and external patents. Equal success of clearing clinical trials and making it to market means less if the
underlying patents are not reliable.

                                                          7
        This last stream of literature suggests that generic challenges are driven by branded drug

sales and as a consequence of this increase in competition, branded companies face an increased

uncertainty over future revenues and reduction of R&D incentives. While results converge

towards the role played by sales as an incentive for generic entry, there is little evidence on the

role played by patents and their characteristics in the pre-entry decision and lawsuit outcome.4

To our knowledge, Hemphill and Sampat (2011) provide the first attempt to link litigation

initiated by generic manufacturers to patent characteristics. They find that conditional on sales

and drug characteristics, “weaker patents”, defined by citations and family size, are more likely

to face Paragraph IV challenges. In a follow up study, Hemphill and Sampat (2012) expand their

findings on Paragraph IV challenges confirming that patents that do not refer to the drug’s active

ingredient draw more challenges. They argue that these types of patents are often used by

branded companies to extend the effective market life of a drug, however the disproportionate

increase in challenges towards these patents limits the effectiveness of “evergreening”.

        Branded drug protection was fundamentally changed with the passage of the Drug Price

Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act in 1984, informally known as the Hatch-Waxman

Act (HW). HW was introduced with the intent to establish a balance between incentivizing

innovative pharmaceutical research on the one hand and providing access to cheaper (generic)

drugs on the other hand. Under HW once a drug is approved, pharmaceutical firms are required

to list materially relevant patents in the FDA’s Orange Book.5 The FDA does not actively

regulate the patents that are listed and only these identified patents can be used to protect the


4
  It should be noted that while product sales are important, we see a wide variance in the distribution of sales of
those products that get challenged (Grabowski and Kyle, 2007).
5
  The FDA Orange Book Preface states the following: “The patents that FDA regards as covered by the statutory
provisions for submission of patent information are: patents that claim the active ingredient(s); drug product
patents which include formulation/composition patents; use patents for a particular approved indication or method
of using the product; and certain other patents as detailed on FDA Form 3542.” Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/ucm079068.htm

                                                         8
drug in case of litigation.6 Since the FDA has not precisely defined “materially relevant”

innovations, however, branded companies enjoy a certain level of freedom in selecting the

patents to list.

         HW introduced “data exclusivity” for branded drugs in parallel to patent protection. Data

exclusivity is an exclusive marketing right granted upon approval and it runs concurrently with

patent protection. It protects the ownership of the underlying clinical trial data and prevents the

entry by generic manufacturers during that time period. It was intended to provide branded

products monopoly protection should underlying patent protection be limited. The majority of

chemical-based drugs receive 5 years of data exclusivity protection. Orphan drugs receive 7

years of protection while reformulations of an existing product receive only 3 additional years.

Firms can gain an additional 6 months of data exclusivity for the addition of a pediatric

indication. More recently, the GAIN Act provides an additional 5 years of data exclusivity for

select antibiotics.

         Data exclusivity was balanced by a system that facilitated generic entry. Under this

system, the FDA can approve a new generic drug through an Abbreviated New Drug Application

(ANDA). To be approved, generic manufacturers only have to demonstrate that their product is

bioequivalent to a referenced NDA’s branded product (as opposed to running their own costly

clinical trials). While there are four ‘certifications’ that a generic manufacturer may claim in

order to enter the market, our focus is in the fourth certification, Paragraph IV.7 This is the only




6
  This lack of oversight has led to criticisms of potential gaming of patent listings (Bulow, 2004) and evergreening
or attaching new patents in the FDA Orange Book after approval by the FDA (Hemphill and Sampat, 2012)
7
  Other certifications reflect a less competitive choice: under Paragraph I and II, patent protection has already
expired therefore generic competitors can directly enter the market. Generic manufacturers apply for Paragraph III
certifications when patent protection is still active, however the generic version of the drug can be commercialized
only after patent protection has expired.

                                                          9
pathway that allows for the direct challenge of underlying branded patents prior to their

expiration.

       The process related to Paragraph IV challenges is not linear and it is conditioned by

several strategic decisions. The process starts with the Paragraph IV challenge by a generic

manufacturer. Paragraph IV applicants are required to list and identify all the patents they want

to challenge. As part of the challenge, the ANDA filer has to notify the patent holder about the

challenge and submit a detailed statement of the legal basis by which its product does not

infringe on the listed patents or why the patents are invalid. A generic product may not infringe

on the patent if the manufacturer has discovered a way to produce a bioequivalent drug through a

different process, it has discovered a different structure of the same active ingredient, or it has

adopted a different delivery mechanism. Alternatively, a patent may be considered invalid if it

was wrongfully granted, it was anticipated by prior art, or if the invention was in public use for

more than one year before the USPTO application (Herman, 2011).

       Once a branded patent holder (pharmaceutical firm) receives notice, they have 45 days to

initiate a suit. If an ANDA filer (generic manufacturer) wins the lawsuit, HW awards a 180-day

exclusivity right to the first Paragraph IV applicant. It has been estimated that the 180-day

exclusivity period generates potential revenues of approximately $60 million, more than

compensating the generic challenger for the cost of litigation (Higgins and Graham, 2009).

Figure 1 summarizes the Paragraph IV challenge process.

                                           <Insert Figure 1 Here>

       As described by (Knowles, 2010), the regulatory framework faced by pharmaceutical

firms can be modified both by new legislation and by the courts that apply them. A change in the

interpretation of patent law, for example, may alter the validity of patents (or vice versa). We



                                                  10
specifically focus on one such critical 2007 Supreme Court case, KSR International Co. v.

Teleflex Inc. This case affected whether a patent was considered non-obvious based on existing

prior art and involved the placing of a sensor on a fixed pivot point of the accelerator pedal of an

automobile.8 At first, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC) affirmed the validity

of the patent using the “teaching, suggestion, or motivation” test (TSM test). Under this test, a

patent is proved obvious only if there is some motivation or suggestion to combine prior art that

can be already found in the prior art or in the knowledge of a person with ordinary skill in the art.

        However, the U.S. Supreme Court revised the CAFC decision and decided the TSM test

was too narrow and rigid. It concluded that an innovation could be obvious even if prior art did

not teach, suggest or motivate the innovation. The Supreme Court considered the Teleflex patent

as obvious and invalid and in doing so introduced a broader (and vaguer) definition of

obviousness. With this broader standard in place the obviousness of some branded product

patents became questionable. Thus, KSR should make it more likely that a generic firm initiates a

Paragraph IV challenge. A recent report by PwC (2013) appears to bear this out; generic

litigation jumped from 43 cases during 2001-2006 to 77 cases in the more recent post-KSR 2007-

2012 time period (PwC, 2013).

4. Data description and methodology

        Our sample consists of all the new chemical entities approved by the FDA between 1995

and 2004 and their reported patents listed in the FDA Orange Book. Our analysis is limited to

drugs approved up to 2004 in order to allow all our drugs to have the opportunity to be targeted




8
 U.S. Supreme Court Case No. 04-1350. http://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/04-
1350.pdf

                                                    11
by a Paragraph IV challenge. Our final sample consists of 324 unique chemical-based drugs

approved by the FDA between 1995 and 2004, covered by 773 unique patents.9

        We linked the drugs and patents collected from the FDA Orange Book to several data

sources. First, litigation data was gathered from The Paragraph Four Report. This data includes

information on the number of Paragraph IV applicants, the products and patents being

challenged, the status of pending court cases and the ultimate court decision. Next, we obtained

drug level data on sales and promotion expenditure from IMS MIDAS™. Patent approval dates,

number of claims, citations, and type were collected from Delphion™, IMS Patent Focus™ and

the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Finally, stock market data was

obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).

        We identify whether a patent was acquired or internally developed through the

reassignment database of the USPTO. We compared the original patent assignee with the

company that commercialized the focal drug; if the two were different we defined that patent as

externally developed. Descriptive statistics and correlations are provided in Table 1 and 2,

respectively. All financial variables are converted into constant 2000 U.S. dollars and foreign

currencies are converted by using their respective average twelve-month exchange rate against

the U.S. dollar.

                                          <Insert Table 1 and Table 2 here>

        Our empirical approach relies on the adoption of a difference-in-difference (diff-in-diff)

specification (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). The diff-in-diff estimator identifies the effect of an

exogenous event on two groups of observations (e.g., firms and state). The simplest set up

includes two groups observed for two time periods. One of the groups is exposed to a treatment

9
  We exclude biologic-based drugs in our sample because they are not covered by the same HW procedures as
chemical-based drugs. In short, there is not (currently) an equivalent Paragraph IV mechanism for biologic-based
drugs.

                                                        12
(exogenous shock) in the second period but not in the first period. In a non-parametric approach,

the average gain in the second (control) group is subtracted from the average gain in the first

(treatment) group. This removes biases in second period comparisons between the treatment and

control group that could be the result from omitted variables given differences between the two

groups and it reduces biases from comparisons over time in the treatment group that could be the

result of trends.

        Practically, we exploit the 2007 KSR U.S. Supreme Court decision as an exogenous

temporal shock to estimate the diff-in-diff model. We consider externally acquired patents as the

treated group to be compared to the control group of internally developed patents. Our main

reported results are from a linear probability model. We also show the results are robust to logit

and probit formulations. This robustness confirms that there is typically little qualitative

divergence between the different specifications (Angrist and Pischke, 2008).

        First, we analyze the probability of Paragraph IV related litigation. Our intent is to

understand whether the new legal environment (post-KSR) has an impact on the possibility of

challenge after controlling for other important factors, such as drug sales. Second, conditional on

being challenged, we estimate the diff-in-diff model on the lawsuit outcome to estimate the

implications of the change in patent law on patent litigation. Finally, we conduct an event study

on the firms whose drugs faced a Paragraph IV challenge in order to estimate the economic

impact of litigation outcomes.

        We follow McWilliams and Siegel (1997) to compute cumulative abnormal returns

(CAR). First we estimate the market model using OLS over a period of 250 days prior to the

event. The estimation equation is the following:




                                                 13
(1)



       where Rit is the return for firm i at time t and Rmt is the market return. The estimated OLS

parameters represent the stock’s “normal” return with respect to the market in a period prior to

the event. The abnormal return (AR) is defined as the return during a time span that includes the

event, in our case the generic challenge, minus the estimated return accounting only for the

market effect. In other words, the abnormal return is the forecast error between the “actual” and

the “normal” rate of returns. Empirically it is estimated as follow:


(2)


       After estimating the abnormal returns for each firm i at time t, the CAR variable is computed

as the cumulative value of the standardized abnormal returns. The CAR equation is:


(3)


       where ARit is defined by Equation 2, SDit is the abnormal return standard deviation and k

represents the cumulative number of days. We consider different event windows as a robustness

check for our analyses: we assume k equal to 3, 5 and 7 days. The event date is defined as t=0

and it represents the date of the litigation outcome.10

           Finally, we multiple CARs by relevant firm market capitalization data. We argue that this

monetized value of the abnormal return represents the potential change in the discounted value of

future streams of revenues. For example, a negative outcome of a Paragraph IV challenge should

elicit a negative CAR. When multiplied by a firm’s market capitalization, the value should


10
     No confounding events were identified over any of the event windows tested.

                                                          14
reflect the discounted value of lost future revenues due to early generic entry. On the other hand,

if branded patents survive a Paragraph IV challenge, generic manufacturers cannot enter the

market. In this case, we expect no abnormal market response because there will be no

unanticipated expected change in the level of market competition. In other words, a branded

company that wins a Paragraph IV challenge will be expected to continue to generate the already

anticipated future revenues.


4.1.     Dependent variables

         We rely on data from The Paragraph Four Report to create a dummy that equals one for a

drug that was challenged in a given year between 1999 and 2010, and zero otherwise. We are

able to identify a total of 264 unique Paragraph IV challenges. Among our drugs about 51%

experience at least one Paragraph IV challenge; Figure 2 maps the trend in challenges on a yearly

basis.

                                                <Insert Figure 2 Here>


         Prior to 2003 only 33 drugs were challenged. In the subsequent 5 years (2004-2008),

however, this number increased to 132, with 99 of these challenges occurring in the final two

years. The horizontal lines (Figure 2) represent the average number of challenges in three

different periods. It is easy to visualize the impact of policy changes on the number of Paragraph

IV challenges. Firstly, after the introduction of the Medicare Modernization Act in 2003, generic

manufacturers embraced Paragraph IV challenges as a viable strategy due to lower litigation

costs.11 Secondly, we observe another shift in the number of drugs challenged after 2008. This



11
   The Medicare Modernization Act has limited the ability to “stack up” multiple 30-month periods of protection, a
strategy known as evergreening. This changed forced pharmaceutical companies to make all their claims against a
generic manufacturer in their initial lawsuit in response to a Paragraph IV challenge (Bulow, 2004).

                                                        15
increase is related to changes in patent law due to the KSR decision; the average number of

challenges increased by 87% compared to the previous period.

       Our first dependent variable is a patent level dummy, Paragraph IV (patent level), that

equals one if the ANDA generic filer challenges a focal patent in a given year, and zero

otherwise. Out of the 773 unique patents, 356 of them were challenged at least once in our data.

As shown in Figure 3, the distribution of patents per number of Paragraph IV challenges is

skewed towards zero. About 17% of our patents (131 patents) received at least 2 challenges, and

29% (225 patents) were litigated only once. Among the 417 patents that were not litigated, 349

patents are listed for drugs that did not receive any Paragraph IV challenges while 68 were not

challenged but listed under drugs that were litigated.


                                           <Insert Figure 3 Here>

       Our second dependent variable classifies the Paragraph IV lawsuit outcome. We identify

two potential scenarios: first, the court decides on the validity of the litigated patents, and

second, the companies can privately settle the case. For the latter, we collected data from

companies’ statements and SEC filings to identify the terms of the agreements. We categorized

four different outcomes:

   1. The court rules in favor of the Paragraph IV applicant (i.e., generic manufacturer). One or

       more patents listed in the FDA Orange Book are considered either invalid or not

       infringed on by the generic product. It follows that the generic manufacturer can enter the

       market

   2. The parties settled prior to trial and the agreement, in contrast to the previous case, allows

       generic manufacturers to enter as an “authorized generic”. We coded this outcome as




                                                  16
       favorable to generic manufacturers because the branded drugs market share will begin to

       diminish.

   3. The parties settled prior to trial, but the agreement either delays or blocks generic entry.

       We coded this outcome as favorable to a pharmaceutical company.

    4. The court rules in favor of the pharmaceutical company. Patents listed in the FDA

       Orange Book are considered either valid or infringed by the generic product and

       therefore, the generic manufacturer cannot enter the market.

       To create the outcome dummy variable, we classify the first two cases as favorable to

generic manufacturers and the last two cases as favorable to pharmaceutical companies.

Therefore, Paragraph IV outcome is a dummy that equals one in case of favorable outcomes for

generic manufacturers, and zero otherwise. On average, a favorable outcome for generic

manufacturers occurs in about 47% of the cases and is almost always equally divided between

court decisions (63 occurrences) and settlement agreements (61 cases).



4.2.   Independent variables

       External Patent is a dummy that takes a value of one if a patent was originally assigned

to a different company than the pharmaceutical company that marketed the drug, and zero

otherwise. With the available data we are not able to identify the method of procurement (i.e.,

licensing or acquisition) because we can only track changes in patent assignees over time and

compare the original assignee with the company that marketed the branded drug. The number of

external patents does not significantly differ from internal patents; 383 patents in our sample

(about 49%) represent external technologies. Additionally, only 41% of these patents (159 out of




                                                17
383 external patents) are challenged compared to 50% of the internal patents (197 out of 390

internal patents).

        To implement our diff-in-diff estimation strategy, we create a dummy (2007 Dummy) that

equals one for all the observations after the 2007 KSR Supreme Court decision. The dummy

variable identifies the time period after the Supreme Court decision, which we consider an

exogenous event. While the case was known the final determination of the case was unknown as

was its impact on the pharmaceutical industry. Ultimately, the case represented an important

legal change that affected the outcome of Paragraph IV challenges.

        Next, we define yearly branded product level sales, Drug Sales, as one of our drug-level

independent variables. Our intent is to study whether higher revenue drugs influence the decision

for entry by generic manufacturers since more profitable segments may attract more competitors.

Prior literature has shown that more profitable drugs have a higher probability of being attacked

(Grabowski and Kyle, 2007; Hemphill and Sampat, 2011). Similarly, Caves et al.

(1991)_ENREF_11 find that market share is a key determinant of generic entry.

        To control for differences across types of patents we include a set of dummies, Type of

Patent. We rely on data from the IMS Patent Focus™ database that describes the function and

use of focal patents. Each patent is categorized into one of the following groups: product patent,

compound patent, method of use patent, drug delivery system and “other”, which includes

process patents. Based on this classification, we create five dichotomous variables. In our sample

approximately, 21% of the patents are products, 21% are classified as method of use patents,

34% of the patents protect the drug composition, and finally, 14% are drug delivery system

patents. On average, we do not find significant differences in the distribution of patent types

between internal and external technologies.



                                                 18
       Based on prior research, we also include four variables to control for patent

characteristics (Allison and Lemley, 1998; Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001; Lemley and

Shapiro, 2005). First, we collected data on both Forward and Backward citations. Forward

citations are measured by cumulating the number of citations received by a patent from its grant

year up to any given year and represent the impact of the focal patent on subsequent innovations.

Patents with more forward citations may be more “important” due to their impact on future

innovation. Additionally, the economic value of patents may be positively related to the number

of times the patent is cited. Backward citations, on the other hand, equal the number of existing

patents cited and denote how fundamental and innovativeness of a patent. Patents with

significant numbers of backward citations extensively build on existing knowledge and therefore

may be less innovative. Among the challenged patents in our sample, external technologies have

significantly fewer backward citations than those developed internally.

       Second, we use the numbers of Claims as a measure of patent quality (Lanjouw and

Schankerman, 2004). The principal role of claims is to define and detail the novel features of the

invention. We construct a variable that counts the total number of claims in all the patents in our

sample. There are not any significant differences between internal and external patents.

       Third, following Hemphill and Sampat (2011), we control for the positive effect that late

expiring patents can have on the market life to the focal drug and that the timing of patenting

may affect generic entry. New Patent dummy takes a value of one if, within the patent portfolio

for a single drug, the grant date of a patent is the latest, zero otherwise. By doing so we are able

to trace from a temporal point of view which patents for a specific drug have the latest grant

date. Particularly in the pharmaceutical industry, the timing of technology patenting is not

necessarily coincident with its commercialization.



                                                 19
           Next, we add controls for drug specific characteristics. Patent per innovation controls for

the total number of patents attached to the focal NDA in the FDA’s Orange Book. By doing so,

we take into consideration the different sizes of the set of patents protecting each drug. On

average, drugs in our sample have four patents listed in the FDA Orange Book while the drug

with the largest set has 18 patents attached.

           Companies may also have different incentives in protecting their products. In particular,

we control for the relative importance of a focal drug to a specific company. We define Drug

importance as drug sales divided by firm sales in any given year. We control for the drug’s

relative importance because we assume that in case of a Paragraph IV challenge a company will

be more likely to commit greater resources to their most valuable products.

           Finally, we include a dummy to account for challenges that include Teva Pharmaceutical

Industries (Teva dummy). Teva is the largest generic company and has been active with

Paragraph IV challenges.12 In our sample Teva is involved with about 25% percent of Paragraph

IV cases (66 cases out of 264). We build a dichotomous variable that equals one if Teva is

among the first group of challengers in a Paragraph IV challenge, zero otherwise.



5. Results

5.1.      Probability of receiving a Paragraph IV challenge

           In our first set of analyses, we estimate the probability of a Paragraph IV challenge at the

patent level. Table 3 reports these estimates based on a variety of empirical specifications.

Models 1 through 5 report the results computed with a linear probability model, Model 6 through

10 are estimated with a probit model while Models 11 through 15 are based on a logit model. We

find no evidence of a difference between internal and external patents; the interaction terms
12
     http://www.tevapharm.com/en-US/About/Pages/AboutUs.aspx. Access 09/26/2011

                                                           20
between our primary dummies (External Patents and 2007 Dummy) are never significant. These

results should not be surprising given the common practice to challenge almost all patents listed

in the FDA Orange Book.


                                          <Insert Table 3 Here>


       Consistent with prior findings, we find that drug sales drive most of the variation in

explaining the probability of a generic challenge (Scott Morton, 1999; Grabowski, 2004;

Grabowski and Kyle, 2007; Hemphill and Sampat, 2011). As demonstrated by Higgins and

Graham (2009), the first generic producer to enter the market is granted 180 days of market

exclusivity, which translates into approximately $60 million in profits. Therefore, there is more

of an incentive to attack and focus on the most profitable drugs. In addition, it has also been

shown that sales affect the intensity of challenges, conditional on a challenge occurring (Berndt

et al., 2007; Hemphill and Sampat, 2011).

       We find a positive relationship between the 2007 KSR Supreme Court decision, 2007

Dummy, and an increase in litigation. This suggests that generic manufacturers are increasing

their Paragraph IV challenges in order to exploit the new post-KSR legal environment. Given the

less restrictive validity test for patents, generic manufacturers may perceive the new legal

environment as more favorable, thus creating more incentives to challenge branded drugs. This

increase in Paragraph IV challenges was an unintended consequence of KSR. We could find no

discussion of this feared development in the KSR decision or in any of the Amicus briefs filed in

the Supreme Court case.

5.2.   Paragraph IV outcomes




                                                 21
         After generic manufacturers file a Paragraph IV challenge, entrance into a market is

defined by either a positive outcome of the litigation or by a favorable settlement with the

pharmaceutical firm.13 Therefore, it is important to understand the role of patents in determining

the litigation outcome for each challenge. We do so by estimating litigation outcomes using a

diff-in-diff approach. Table 4 reports the estimated coefficient of this Paragraph IV outcome

regression. The dependent variable equals one if a generic manufacturer is able to enter the

market by either winning a challenge or by signing an agreement with a branded company to

become an authorized generic. The variable equals zero when the court rules in favor of branded

companies (i.e., litigated patents are valid and/or infringed) or when pharmaceutical companies

adopt a “pay-for-delay” strategy (Hemphill, 2006). We estimate our models through 3 different

specifications: linear probability models (Models 1 to 5), probit models (Models 6 to 10) and

logit models (Models 11 to 15).


                                                  <Insert Table 4 Here>


         Across all specifications, the interaction between External Patents and 2007 Dummy is

always positive and significant. This result suggests that acquired patents are less reliable than

those drafted internally. More specifically, after 2007 (post-KSR), external patents are more

likely to be considered invalid thus allowing for increased generic entry via Paragraph IV

challenges. Our findings suggest that there may be patent validity risk associated with the

acquisition of external patents and it supports the IP validity risk described by Knowles and

Higgins (2011). Pharmaceutical firms may very well be acquiring ‘assets with warts’. The shift



13
  Generic manufacturers can enter the market before court ruling. However, generic producers must weigh the
benefits and risks of an “at-risk launch” to minimize possible downstream risk in case the court rules in favor of the
pharmaceutical company.

                                                          22
in patent law as a result of KSR reveals that external patents, on the margin, were more sensitive

to the change in non-obviousness.

        Over the last few decades the pharmaceutical industry has increasingly turned to the

external technology markets to obtain new drug candidates and novel technologies (Arora et al.,

2001; Chesbrough, 2003; Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Ceccagnoli et al., 2014). However, the

external technology market is not a homogenous field of patenting capabilities. Firms may very

well be acquiring patents from companies with limited patenting experience. Few small,

research-intensive firms have the resources to hire high quality IP firms. And while a firm may

receive a patent, the deficiencies in the process and construction may ultimately affect its

reliability during litigation.

        On the demand side, pharmaceutical companies have extensive experience in the external

technology markets and conduct a due diligence process that should reduce the risk of acquiring

non-optimal patents (Arora et al., 2009). However, in practice the licensing decision is often

driven by a specific technology need to refill the R&D pipeline and whose supply may be very

limited. Such circumstances can create situations, as discussed earlier, where patent attorneys

may not have access to clinical notebooks or key scientific personnel during the due diligence

process (Knowles and Higgins, 2011). In extreme cases, potential licensors are required to make

a binding offer prior to having access to these items (Knowles and Higgins, 2011).

Consequentially, the decision to acquire external patents may rely on an imperfect set of

information and reduce the ability to evaluate the validity of a patent. In essence, pharmaceutical

firms may knowingly acquire ‘assets with warts’, a very different outcome than previously

assumed in the markets for technology literature.




                                                 23
        Finally, while we are unable to control for other lawsuit variables as suggested by Allison

and Lemley (1998) we are able to proxy for the “willingness to protect” a drug by focusing on its

relative importance to overall firm sales. We assume that pharmaceutical firms would adopt a

more aggressive defensive strategy (and committing more resources) to those drugs that

represent high volume of sales or have benefited from significant sunk costs, such as detailing or

considerable downstream investments. As expected, our results confirm that pharmaceutical

companies tend to allocate more resources to the defense of those drugs that are more important

to the firm.



6. Economic Impact

        Successful Paragraph IV challenges have detrimental economic consequences for

branded companies that lose their monopoly market position due to early generic entry. An

unanticipated loss of market position and resulting revenues should elicit a negative equity

response. We estimate the potential impact of successful Paragraph IV challenge (loss for the

branded pharmaceutical firm) with an event study at the time of the litigation decision.

        Following McWilliams and Siegel (1997), we make the following assumptions. First, we

assume that markets are efficient. The efficient market hypothesis implies that capital markets

are effective in incorporating all relevant information available to traders into the stock price of a

firm. Under this assumption, equities should respond when new relevant information is revealed.

Given our empirical setting, we argue that the litigation outcome of a Paragraph IV challenge

represents precisely such an event.

        Second, it is important that events are publicly announced so that markets may digest the

news. These types of suits are regularly reported in the general news as well as practitioner

publications and websites. Because of the probabilistic nature of patents (Lemley and Shapiro,

                                                  24
2005), it is rarely obvious which firm will prevail during court. In case of a pharmaceutical win,

markets will gain no new information from the announcement that would influence equity price.

The market position of the branded product will remain intact as will the flow of already

anticipated future revenues. If current equity price reflects discounted future cash flows, then

nothing from a pharmaceutical win will disturb this calculation. In the context of the event study

we would expect not to see any abnormal response since there is no unanticipated value being

created or destroyed.

       On the other hand, in case of successful challenge by a generic manufacturer, early entry

of new competitors in the market will dramatically erode branded product sales. This loss in

future revenues should negatively impact equity price. In terms of our event study, this

unanticipated negative shock should be reflected in a negative CAR value. Moreover, the

monetized value of this abnormal response should reflect the value of the lost future revenue.

       Table 5 reports CARs for two subsamples, cases where the pharmaceutical company wins

and cases where the pharmaceutical company loses, for three different event windows

encompassing the Paragraph IV litigation decision date. In contrast to Panattoni (2011), across

all event windows we find no significant CAR in the case where the pharmaceutical firm wins

the case. If we assume that markets are efficient then this result should not be surprising; there is

no reason to expect an abnormal market response. While a “win” might be unexpected, the

resulting market position of the branded drug will not change nor will the already anticipated

stream of future revenues, which should already be reflected in equity prices.

       However, in case of loss, we find significant negative cumulative abnormal returns

suggesting that the legal outcome was an unanticipated negative shock. In these cases

pharmaceutical companies lose their incumbent position due to early generic entry, suffering



                                                 25
significant loss of future revenues. Across the three event windows, the CAR is significant for

our two longer event windows. As we have correctly accounted for any potential confounding

events, this difference suggests that there may be a leakage of information prior to the

announcement date.


                                          <Insert Table 5 here>


       In order to quantify the actual loss in firm value we collected firm’s market capitalization

for the same month and year of our events. For our sample of losses, we estimate the average

market capitalization and multiply this by the estimated CARs. For our two significant windows

we find losses between $446m and $451m, respectively. The decline in firm value, representing

the loss in future revenues, is significant for a pharmaceutical company when compared to the

average cost of developing a new approved drug, which in the early 2000s, was equal to $1.2B

(DiMasi et al., 2003). This negative response represents about 30% of the R&D cost necessary to

develop a new drug. In line with Branstetter et al. (2014)_ENREF_9, these results provide one

mechanism (i.e., decline in revenues) as to why early generic entry may reduce the incentive for

new drugs within a specific therapeutic market.



7. Discussion and conclusion

       We use a unique patent litigation dataset to examine the relative reliability of external

patents. Our empirical context is the pharmaceutical industry and litigation arises from Paragraph

IV challenges filed by generic manufacturers. This paper expands our understanding of the

importance of acquired patents in protecting future downstream revenues. It is commonly

accepted that acquired technologies can increase innovative productivity, generate knowledge



                                                  26
spillovers and create unique synergies with existing internal competences (Arora et al., 2001;

Gans et al., 2002; Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Ceccagnoli et al., 2014). However the benefits

in terms of future revenue streams are not guaranteed from these activities. Instead, those

revenue streams will only be protected if the externally acquired patents are reliable during

litigation.

        By relying on the markets for technology and patent litigation literatures, our study

provides novel insights on the role that acquired patents play during ex post litigation. In our

research setting we find evidence that external patents are less reliable than those developed

internally. In fact, our results suggest that external patents increase the possibility that generic

manufacturers are able to successfully win their Paragraph IV challenges. Assuming that the

market is correctly discounting lost future revenues, we estimate these losses at between $446m

and $451m.

        It has been argued that pharmaceutical companies can effectively select patents available

in the market (Arora et al., 2009). However, the legal shift induced by the Supreme Court in KSR

(from the “TSM test” to a broadly defined “common sense” test) that we exploited in our

analysis suggests that firms may very well be selecting some ‘assets with warts’. On the margin,

external patents in the post-KSR era were more likely to fall during litigation, suggesting that

their reliability was more tenuous to begin with. Our findings suggest, contrary to prior belief,

that the due diligence process is not summarily looking past weaker patents.

        Why would a pharmaceutical firm knowingly acquire ‘assets with warts’? Our field

interviews, consistent with prior work (Knowles & Higgins, 2011), seem to provide two

explanations. Firstly, pharmaceutical companies have the financial resources and experience to

craft higher quality patents, taking into consideration broader IP strategies. However, smaller,



                                                  27
research-intensive firms are often resource constrained and as a result patents are written by

attorneys with more limited experience or familiarity with pharmaceutical litigation, including

Paragraph IV challenges (Knowles and Higgins, 2011). Therefore, the reliability of these patents,

on average, during litigation may be lower.

        Secondly, firms acquire external technologies to create synergies with internal

capabilities (Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006; Ceccagnoli et al., 2014) and to refill product

pipelines (Higgins and Rodriguez, 2006). At times the need of the pharmaceutical firm may be

great (and the supply of technology more limited) such that they knowingly take on this

reliability risk. More broadly, our results do suggest that if firms are going to acquire external

technologies they should do so prior to external patent construction so that the larger, acquiring

firm can put their considerable IP resources to work writing a more reliable patent.

        There are other reasons that may lead to this outcome. For example, it is often the case

that a licensor will retain prosecution control while the licensee must defend the prosecution

decisions during litigation. The licensor may also make short-term motivated decisions in

prosecution to accomplish a quick patent grant, which can add to longer-term litigation risk

(Knowles and Higgins, 2011). Such a nuanced distribution of control rights calls for an explicit

analysis of licensing contracts, a more clear understanding of how rights are distributed and,

ultimately, their effect on litigation outcomes.

        A natural question to ask, if our findings are correct, is whether this litigation risk is

accurately reflected in the price of the license. Our conversations with industry practitioners

seem to indicate that this risk is not fully appreciated. If this is the case, are firms, on average,

overpaying for external technologies that are already covered by patents? Another area for future

research would to explore a more complete valuation model that includes litigation risk.



                                                   28
Disaggregate data, at least for the pharmaceutical industry, exists such that it would be possible

to explore these issues.

       Ultimately, this heretofore-underappreciated aspect of the external technology markets

has profound implications on future R&D expenditures and innovation. For example, some have

called for the movement away from a traditional R&D model to one of “S&D” or “search and

develop” (Morgan Stanley, 2010). That is, large pharmaceutical firms should focus their

capabilities on development (clinical trials) while at the same time acquiring all their drug

candidates. And while not this extreme, we do see some companies, such as Glaxosmithkline

allocating close to 50% of their R&D budget towards externally acquired technologies. Such

calls need to be dampened, we believe, and take into account not just the technologies (which

may be superb) but also their associated patents (which may be poor). Given that future

innovation and current R&D are paid for from existing product sales the importance of stable

and reliable future revenue streams cannot be understated. If internal productivity within the

industry has slowed and externally acquired patents may not reliable, the answer to the industry’s

overall productivity crisis becomes more complex.

       Finally, recent work is beginning to document the longer-term impacts of generic

penetration into markets on pharmaceutical innovation (Branstetter et al., 2011). The authors are

agnostic about how generic entry occurs (whether via Paragraph III or Paragraph IV) but rather

focus on how quickly generics penetrate into a market. Our work complements that paper

because we explain what might be occurring behind the scenes via Paragraph IV challenges,

especially as it relates to externally acquired patents. They demonstrate that as a result of entry

pharmaceutical firms appear to be shifting away from chemical-based products towards

biologics-based products. The rotation is logical given that the current legislative framework



                                                 29
created under Hatch-Waxman is not applicable to biologic-based drugs; exclusivity periods are

longer and no mechanism comparable to a Paragraph IV (for chemical-based drugs) exists.

Future work should explore whether the rotation documented by (Branstetter et al., 2011)

_ENREF_8into biologics is also occurring with respect to externally acquired patents. Ultimately,

we need to understand how this rotation and changing nature of innovation impacts overall

welfare and the balance between access and innovation that Hatch-Waxman tried so hard to

create. As with all research much remains to be done.




                                                30
Allison JR, Lemley MA. 1998. Empirical Evidence on the Validity of Litigated Patents. American
         Intellectual Property Law Association (AIPLA) Quarterly Journal 26.
Angrist JD, Pischke J-S. 2008. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion. Princeton
         university press.
Arora A, Ceccagnoli M. 2006. Patent Protection, Complementary Assets, and Firms’ Incentives for
         Technology Licensing. Management Science 52(2): 293-308.
Arora A, Fosfuri A, Gambardella A. 2001. Markets for Technology: The Economics of Innovation and
         Corporate Strategy. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Arora A, Gambardella A. 2010. Ideas for rent: an overview of markets for technology. Industrial and
         Corporate Change 19(3): 775-803.
Arora A, Gambardella A, Magazzini L, Pammolli F. 2009. A Breath of Fresh Air? Firm Type, Scale, Scope,
         and Selection Effects in Drug Development. Management Science 55(10): 1638-1653.
Berndt E, Mortimer R, Parece A. 2007. Do Authorized generic drugs deter paragraph IV certifications?
         Recent evidence. In Working Paper.
Branstetter LG, Chatterjee C, Higgins M. 2011. Regulation and Welfare: Evidence from Paragraph IV
         Generic Entry in the Pharmaceutical Industry. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper Series No. 17188.
Branstetter LG, Chatterjee C, Higgins M. 2014. Starving (or Fattening) the Golden Goose?: Generic Entry
         and the Incentives for Early-Stage Pharmaceutical Innovation. National Bureau of Economic
         Research Working Paper Series No. 20532.
Bulow J. 2004. The Gaming of Pharmaceutical Patents. Innovation Policy and the Economy 4(ArticleType:
         research-article / Full publication date: 2004 / Copyright © 2004 The University of Chicago
         Press): 145-187.
Cassiman B, Veugelers R. 2006. In Search of Complementarity in Innovation Strategy: Internal R&D and
         External Knowledge Acquisition. Management Science 52(1): 68-82.
Caves RE, Whinston MD, Hurwitz MA, Pakes A, Temin P. 1991. Patent Expiration, Entry, and Competition
         in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics
         1991(ArticleType: research-article / Full publication date: 1991 / Copyright © 1991 The
         Brookings Institution): 1-66.
Ceccagnoli M, Graham SJH, Higgins MJ, Lee J. 2010. Productivity and the role of complementary assets in
         firms demand for technology innovations. Industrial and Corporate Change 19(3): 839-869.
Ceccagnoli M, Higgins MJ, Palermo V. 2014. Behind the Scenes: Sources of Complementarity in R&D.
         Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 23(1): 125-148.
Ceccagnoli M, Jiang L. 2013. The Cost of Integrating External Technologies: Supply and Demand Drivers
         of Value Creation in the Markets for Technology. Strategic Management Journal 34(4): 404-425.
Chesbrough H. 2003. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology
         Harvard Business School Publishing: Boston, MA.
DiMasi JA, Hansen RW, Grabowski HG. 2003. The price of innovation: new estimates of drug
         development costs. Journal of Health Economics 22(2): 151-185.
Gallini NT. 1984. Deterrence by Market Sharing: A Strategic Incentive for Licensing. American Economic
         Review 74: 931-941.
Gallini NT, Winter SG. 1985. Licensing in the Theory of Innovation. RAND Journal of Economics 16: 237-
         252.
Gambardella A, Giuri P, Luzzi A. 2007. The market for patents in Europe. Research Policy 36(8): 1163-
         1183.
Gans JS, Hsu DH, Stern S. 2002. When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur the Gale of Creative Destruction?
         The RAND Journal of Economics 33(4): 571-586.


                                                  31
Grabowski H. 2004. Are the Economics of Pharmaceutical Research and Development Changing?
        Productivity, Patents and Political Pressures. PharmacoEconomics 22(Suppl. 2): 15-24.
Grabowski HG, Kyle M. 2007. Generic competition and market exclusivity periods in pharmaceuticals.
        Managerial and Decision Economics 28(4-5): 491-502.
Hemphill CS. 2006. Paying for delay: pharmaceutical patent settlement as a regulatory design problem.
        New York University Law Review 81: 1553-1623.
Hemphill CS, Sampat BN. 2011. When Do Generics Challenge Drug Patents? Journal of Empirical Legal
        Studies, 2011.
Hemphill CS, Sampat BN. 2012. Evergreening, patent challenges, and effective market life in
        pharmaceuticals. Journal of Health Economics 31(2): 327-339.
Herman MR. 2011. The Stay Dilemma: Examining Brand and Generic Incentives for Delaying the
        Resolution of Pharmaceutical Patent Litigation. Columbia Law Review 111.
Higgins MJ, Graham SJH. 2009. Balancing Innovation and Access: Patent Challenges Tip the Scales.
        Science 326(5951): 370-371.
Higgins MJ, Rodriguez D. 2006. The outsourcing of R&D through acquisitions in the pharmaceutical
        industry. Journal of Financial Economics 80(2): 351-383.
Knowles SM. 2010. Fixing the Legal Framework for Pharmaceutical Research. Science 327: 1083 - 1084.
Knowles SM, Higgins M. 2011. Vertical disintegration in the pharmaceutical industry and the role of IP.
        Intellectual Asset Management 45: 10-15.
Kogut B, Zander U. 1993. Knowledge of the Firm and the Evolutionary Theory of the Multinational
        Corporation. Journal of International Business Studies 24(4): 625-645.
Lanjouw JO, Schankerman M. 2001. Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window on Competition. The
        RAND Journal of Economics 32(1): 129-151.
Lanjouw JO, Schankerman M. 2004. Patent Quality and Research Productivity: Measuring Innovation
        with Multiple Indicators. The Economic Journal 114(495): 441-465.
Laursen K, Salter A. 2006. Open for innovation: the role of openness in explaining innovation
        performance among U.K. manufacturing firms. Strategic Management Journal 27(2): 131-150.
Lemley MA, Shapiro C. 2005. Probabilistic Patents. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(2): 75-98.
Lerner J, Shane H, Tsai A. 2003. Do equity financing cycles matter? Evidence from biotechnology
        alliances. Journal of Financial Economics 67(3): 411-446.
McGahan AM, Silverman BS. 2006. Profiting from technological innovation by others: The effect of
        competitor patenting on firm value. Research Policy 35(8): 1222-1242.
McWilliams A, Siegel D. 1997. Event Studies in Management Research: Theoretical and Empirical Issues.
        The Academy of Management Journal 40(3): 626-657.
Morgan Stanley. 2010. Pharmaceuticals: exit research and create value.
PwC. 2013. 2013 Patent Litigation Study. Big cases make headlines, while

patent cases proliferate.
Reiffen D, Ward MR. 2005. Generic Drug Industry Dynamics. Review of Economics and Statistics 87(1):
        37-49.
Scherer FM. 2010. Pharmaceutical Innovation. In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. Hall BH,
        Rosemberg N (eds.): North Holland.
Scott Morton FM. 1999. Entry decisions in the generic pharmaceutical industry. RAND Journal of
        Economics 30(3): 421-440.
Scott Morton FM. 2000. Barriers to entry, brand advertising, and generic entry in the US pharmaceutical
        industry. International Journal of Industrial Organization 18(7): 1085-1104.
Shapiro C. 2003. Antitrust Limits to Patent Settlements. RAND Journal of Economics 34(2): 391-411.


                                                  32
Somaya D. 2012. Patent Strategy and Management An Integrative Review and Research Agenda. Journal
       of Management 38(4): 1084-1114.
Teece DJ. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
       licensing and public policy. Research Policy 15(6): 285-305.
Voet MA. 2013. The generic challenge: understanding patents, FDA and pharmaceutical life-cycle
       management. Universal-Publishers.
Williamson OE. 1985. The economic institutions ol capitalism. Free Press: New York.




                                              Generic manufacturer applies for ANDA and
                                                       Paragraph IV certification




                                                                                            Pharmaceutical
                                Pharmaceutical
                                                                                          company DOES NOT
                                 company sues
                                                                                              sue generic
                               generic applicant
                                                                                               applicant




  Court rules in favor of
                                                       Patent expires. FDA
     pharmaceutical
  company. FDA cannot                                  can approve ANDA                       Generic
   approve ANDA and                                       but 180 days                    manufacturer may
  generic manufacturer                                 exclusivity period is                   enter
      cannot enter.                                        not granted


                             Court rules in favor of
                             generic manufacturer.
                            FDA can approve ANDA
                                 and 180 days
                              exclusivity period is
                              granted to the first
                               generic applicant

Figure.1 Paragraph IV challenge description
Source: Re-adapted from Bulow (2004)




                                                           33
                          60
                          40                                                              49.5




                                                             26.4
                          20




                                  6.6
                              0




                                  1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010



                                   Figure 2. Number of unique drugs challenged per year



                                        417
                    400
                    300
Number of patents




                                               225
                    200
                    100




                                                        69

                                                                    32
                                                                          11      16
                                                                                             3
                          0




                                        0               2                  4                 6
                                                      Number of challenges

                          Figure 3. Distribution of patents per number of Paragraph IV challenges

                                                             34
                              Table 1. Descriptive statistics

Variable                            Obs.      Mean       Std. Dev.   Min     Max
Paragraph IV (patent level)         7013    0.083131       0.2761     0        1
Paragraph IV outcome                 676    0.491124     0.500291     0        1
2007 Dummy                          7013     0.41751     0.493184     0        1
External Patent                     7013    0.499216     0.500035     0        1
Ln(1+Sales)                         7013    10.76971     3.099298     0    15.92163
Product Patent                      7013     0.25082     0.433516     0        1
Drug Delivery patent                7013    0.136318     0.343151     0        1
Composition patent                  7013    0.344218     0.475146     0        1
Method Patent                       7013    0.206189     0.404596     0        1
Claims                              7013    19.82105     22.02607     1      396
Backward citation                   7013    15.49209      32.7743     0      276
Forward citation                    7013    9.204477     19.72723     0      428
Newest patent                       7013     0.48182     0.499705     0        1
Patent per Innovation               7013    4.079281     3.044918     1       18
Drug importance (Sales)             6805    0.118691     0.234041     0        1
Teva                                7013    0.028091     0.165244     0        1




                                            35
                                                                       Table 2. Correlation Table

                                              1         2        3        4        5         6       7         8        9      10      11       12       13      14      15 16

1.Paragraph IV (patent level)                 1
2.Paragraph IV outcome                  -0.0199         1
3.2007 Dummy                           0.1315* -0.1653*          1
4.External Patent                     -0.0527* -0.0176      0.0007        1
5.Ln(1+Sales)                          0.1814* -0.0549 0.1000* -0.1913*            1
6.Product Patent                      -0.0265* -0.0364 -0.0476*      0.0229 0.0820*          1
7.Drug Delivery patent                  0.0143 -0.0233 0.0260* 0.1211* -0.0475* -0.2299*             1
8.Composition patent                    0.0003 -0.0056      0.0092 -0.0733* -0.0520* -0.4192* -0.2878*         1
9.Method Patent                        0.0380*    0.0511    0.0073   0.0128   0.021 -0.2949* -0.2025* -0.3692*          1
10.Claims                              0.0383* -0.0669 0.0451* 0.0482* -0.0733* -0.1173* 0.0869*          0.0232 0.0260*        1
11.Backward citation                   0.0484* -0.0282 0.0589* -0.0109 -0.0936* -0.1530* 0.1835*          0.0017 -0.0815* 0.3161*        1
12.Forward citation                     0.0200 -0.0222 0.1655*        0.006 0.0852* 0.1013*      0.0106   -0.011 -0.1081* 0.0794* -0.0047         1
13.Newest patent                        -0.0144     0.033 -0.0664* -0.0239* -0.0555* -0.0688*    0.0186 0.0666*    0.0185 -0.0182 -0.0341* -0.2076*       1
14.Patent per Innovation               0.0685* 0.1621* 0.1362* -0.0445* 0.1799* -0.0864* -0.0484* -0.0660* 0.0663* 0.1128* 0.2000* 0.0668* -0.3887*               1
15.Drug importance (Sales)             0.0804* -0.0126 0.0499* 0.0906* 0.1177* -0.0392* -0.0272* -0.0408* 0.1513* -0.0094 -0.0374* -0.0406* -0.0401* 0.1207*              1
16.Teva                                0.4583* -0.0635 0.0748* -0.0334* 0.1252*        0.0191 -0.0223     0.0003   0.0115 0.0062 -0.0233     0.0226 -0.0275* 0.0534* 0.0561* 1

* Indicates that the correlation is significant at the 5%level




                                                                                        36
                                                                      Table 3. Patent Level: Challenge

                               Linear Probability Model                                           Probit                                                 Logit
                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)        (15)
2007 Dummy        0.069***   0.065*** 0.058*** 0.074***        0.069***    0.524***   0.499***   0.492***   0.509***   0.519***   1.012***   0.965***   0.941***   0.945***    0.931***
                  (0.008)    (0.008) (0.008) (0.013)           (0.012)     (0.057)    (0.058)    (0.055)    (0.081)    (0.075)    (0.115)    (0.118)    (0.110)    (0.159)     (0.148)

External Patent -0.030*** -0.034*** -0.017** -0.026***          -0.007     -0.221*** -0.245***   -0.030     -0.232**    0.005     -0.437*** -0.486***   -0.053     -0.516***   -0.069
                 (0.009) (0.009) (0.008) (0.010)               (0.009)      (0.065) (0.065)      (0.059)     (0.095)   (0.088)     (0.126) (0.126)      (0.114)     (0.198)    (0.184)

2007 Dummy*                                          -0.018     -0.023                                      -0.022     -0.061                                       0.047       0.026
External Patent                                     (0.016)    (0.016)                                      (0.114)    (0.111)                                     (0.231)     (0.223)

Product Patent               0.050***   0.043**     0.049***   0.043**                0.432**     0.334*    0.432**     0.335*               0.886**    0.739**    0.886**     0.738**
                             (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.019)    (0.018)                (0.197)    (0.187)    (0.198)    (0.188)               (0.405)    (0.376)    (0.404)     (0.376)
Drug Delivery                0.063***   0.063***    0.063***   0.063***               0.512**    0.576***   0.512**    0.577***              1.055***   1.298***   1.055***    1.298***
patent                       (0.021)    (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.020)                (0.201)    (0.197)    (0.201)    (0.197)               (0.409)    (0.387)    (0.409)     (0.387)
Composition                  0.059***   0.059***    0.058***   0.059***               0.480**    0.508***   0.480**    0.509***              0.985**    1.073***   0.985**     1.073***
patent                       (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.019)    (0.018)                (0.195)    (0.188)    (0.195)    (0.188)               (0.400)    (0.373)    (0.399)     (0.373)
Method Patent                0.082***   0.077***    0.082***   0.077***               0.661***   0.616***   0.661***   0.618***              1.319***   1.287***   1.318***    1.287***
                             (0.020)    (0.019)     (0.020)    (0.019)                (0.198)    (0.189)    (0.198)    (0.189)               (0.404)    (0.375)    (0.404)     (0.375)

Claims                        0.000      0.001       0.001      0.001                  0.002      0.001      0.002      0.001                 0.004       0.002     0.004        0.002
                             (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)                (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)               (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Backward                      0.001     0.001**      0.001     0.001**                 0.002     0.002**     0.002     0.002**               0.003*     0.003***   0.003*      0.003***
citation                     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)                (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)               (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.001)
Forward                       0.001      0.001       0.001      0.001                  0.001     -0.001      0.001     -0.001                 0.002      -0.002     0.002       -0.002
citation                     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)                (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)               (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.002)

Newest patent                -0.017*     -0.010     -0.017*     -0.010                -0.097     -0.017     -0.097     -0.017                -0.177      0.014     -0.177       0.014
                             (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.009)                (0.065)    (0.060)    (0.065)    (0.060)               (0.128)    (0.114)    (0.128)     (0.114)

Ln(1+Sales)                              0.014***               0.014***                         0.211***            0.211***                           0.474***            0.474***
                                         (0.001)                (0.001)                           (0.028)             (0.027)                            (0.045)             (0.045)
Constant          0.072***    0.010     -0.146***    0.006     -0.152***   -1.721*** -2.211***   -4.680*** -2.218*** -4.700***    -3.107*** -4.110***   -9.731*** -4.097*** -9.725***
                  (0.007)    (0.021)     (0.022)    (0.021)     (0.022)     (0.061) (0.203)       (0.411) (0.207) (0.408)          (0.125) (0.417)       (0.689) (0.425) (0.687)
Obs.               7,013      7,013       7,013      7,013       7,013       7,013     7,013       7,013     7,013     7,013        7,013     7,013       7,013     7,013     7,013
Clustered Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.11, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                           37
                                                                  Table 4. Patent Level: Outcome

                               Linear Probability Model                                      Probit                                                Logit
                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)           (11)     (12)       (13)     (14)      (15)
2007 Dummy         -0.165*** -0.178*** -0.166*** -0.239*** -0.226***   -0.560*** -0.600*** -0.579*** -0.854*** -0.834***     -0.949*** -1.023*** -0.991*** -1.464*** -1.434***
                    (0.041) (0.042) (0.042) (0.052) (0.053)             (0.147) (0.153) (0.155) (0.214) (0.217)               (0.254) (0.268) (0.272) (0.379) (0.383)

External Patent     0.013     0.033      0.037     -0.055    -0.049     0.041     0.090      0.106      -0.230     -0.215     0.070     0.156      0.182      -0.393    -0.370
                   (0.043)   (0.044)    (0.045)    (0.065)   (0.064)   (0.147)   (0.146)    (0.152)    (0.221)    (0.222)    (0.248)   (0.248)    (0.259)    (0.379)   (0.382)

2007 Dummy*                                        0.145*    0.141*                                     0.531*     0.539*                                     0.910*    0.926*
External Patent                                    (0.084)   (0.085)                                   (0.293)    (0.299)                                    (0.506)   (0.517)

Product Patent               -0.081     -0.074     -0.089    -0.083               -0.240     -0.239     -0.278     -0.273               -0.403     -0.400     -0.471    -0.463
                             (0.134)    (0.132)    (0.138)   (0.136)             (0.462)    (0.468)    (0.487)    (0.489)              (0.779)    (0.790)    (0.825)   (0.830)
Drug Delivery                -0.040     -0.042     -0.042    -0.045               -0.098     -0.115     -0.107     -0.125               -0.165     -0.192     -0.180    -0.210
patent                       (0.141)    (0.139)    (0.145)   (0.142)             (0.479)    (0.486)    (0.502)    (0.507)              (0.807)    (0.822)    (0.849)   (0.860)
Composition                  -0.038     -0.035     -0.048    -0.045               -0.103     -0.106     -0.143     -0.144               -0.169     -0.175     -0.238    -0.239
patent                       (0.132)    (0.129)    (0.136)   (0.134)             (0.454)    (0.459)    (0.479)    (0.481)              (0.764)    (0.774)    (0.810)   (0.815)
Method Patent                -0.066     -0.048     -0.077    -0.059               -0.165     -0.128     -0.214     -0.174               -0.274     -0.210     -0.357    -0.286
                             (0.133)    (0.130)    (0.137)   (0.135)             (0.461)    (0.465)    (0.486)    (0.488)              (0.776)    (0.785)    (0.823)   (0.827)

Claims                       -0.001*    -0.001**   -0.001** -0.001**             -0.004*    -0.005*    -0.005*    -0.005**             -0.007*    -0.008*    -0.008*   -0.009*
                             (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001) (0.001)              (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)              (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)
Backward                      0.001       0.001      0.001   0.001                0.001      0.001      0.001      0.001                0.002      0.002      0.002     0.002
citation                     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001) (0.001)              (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)              (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.003)
Forward citation              0.001       0.001      0.001   0.001                0.001      0.002      0.001      0.001                0.002      0.003      0.002     0.003
                             (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001) (0.001)              (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)              (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.006)

Newest patent                 0.074      0.076      0.072    0.075                0.267*     0.277*     0.267*     0.279*               0.448*     0.466*     0.449*   0.471*
                             (0.047)    (0.048)    (0.047) (0.048)               (0.159)    (0.166)    (0.164)    (0.170)              (0.270)    (0.281)    (0.279) (0.289)
Patents per                  0.028***   0.030***   0.027*** 0.030***             0.099***   0.108***   0.100***   0.110***             0.167***   0.184***   0.170*** 0.188***
Innovation                   (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008) (0.008)               (0.027)    (0.029)    (0.028)    (0.030)              (0.047)    (0.050)    (0.049) (0.052)
Teva                          0.042      0.057      0.041    0.056                0.015      0.079      0.030      0.091                0.055      0.165      0.084    0.190
                             (0.045)    (0.045)    (0.045) (0.045)               (0.173)    (0.181)    (0.179)    (0.186)              (0.300)    (0.316)    (0.312) (0.327)
Drug importance                         -0.187*             -0.185*                         -0.622*               -0.647*                         -1.071*             -1.114*
(Sales)                                 (0.101)             (0.099)                         (0.356)               (0.358)                         (0.618)             (0.623)
Constant        0.587***     0.478***   0.486***   0.530*** 0.535***   0.303**    -0.080     -0.046     0.110      0.142     0.512**    -0.145     -0.088     0.180    0.236
                (0.038)      (0.139)    (0.137)    (0.147) (0.145)     (0.136)   (0.477)    (0.485)    (0.514)    (0.519)    (0.233)   (0.802)    (0.816)    (0.870) (0.878)
Obs.              676          676        662        676      662        676       676        662        676        662        676       676        662        676      662
Clustered standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.11, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



                                                                                     38
                             Table 5. Event study results divided by subsample


                Pharmaceutical wins subsample
       Time Window (days)       N     CAR                            Z-statistics
 (-1, +1)                                   75       -0.01%                  -0.818
 (-3, +1)                                   75       -0.02%                  -0.818
 (-5, +1)                                   75       -0.09%                  -0.125



                Pharmaceutical loses subsample
       Time Window (days)       N      CAR                           Z-statistics
 (-1, +1)                                   69       -0.53%                   0.487
 (-3, +1)                                   69       -0.82%                -1.519*
 (-5, +1)                                   69       -0.83%               -2.001**
The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01 levels, respectively. Time windows are with
respect to the event date set as t=0




                                                                39
