                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EFFECTS OF FISCAL SHOCKS IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD

                                       Alan J. Auerbach
                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                       Working Paper 21100
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21100


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2015




We are grateful to Seunghwan Lim, Walker Ray, and Mauricio Ulate for excellent research assistance.
We thank Olivier Coibion, Christopher Erceg, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Johannes Wieland for
comments, and Andrew Austin and David Newman for guidance regarding the defense appropriations
process. Gorodnichenko thanks the NSF for financial support. Auerbach thanks the Burch Center
for Tax Policy and Public Finance for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alan J. Auerbach and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Fiscal Shocks in a Globalized World
Alan J. Auerbach and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 21100
April 2015
JEL No. E62,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

While theoretical models consistently predict that government spending shocks should lead to appreciation
of the domestic currency, empirical studies have been stubbornly finding depreciation. Using daily
data on U.S. defense spending (announced and actual payments), we document that the dollar immediately
and strongly appreciates after announcements about future government spending. In contrast, actual
payments lead to no discernible effect on the exchange rate. We examine responses of other variables
at the daily frequency and explore how the response of the exchange rate to fiscal shocks varies over
the business cycle as well as at the zero lower bound and in normal times.


Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
 I.    Introduction
What are the effects of fiscal policy on aggregate economic activity in a globalized world? This
is a key question in current policy and academic debates. The central challenge in this debate is
how to identify fiscal shocks in the data. Previous research has used narrative or structural time
series (SVAR) methods to isolate unanticipated, exogenous innovations to government spending
or revenue. While these approaches have many desirable properties, they typically have been
applied at quarterly or even annual frequencies. These low frequencies can limit the plausibility
of identifying assumptions (e.g., minimum delay restriction for government spending) and
reduce statistical power (e.g., narrative shocks can account for only a few historical changes in
fiscal variables). We address this challenge by using daily data on U.S. government spending.

       Using daily variation does limit the scope of our investigation, for we are unable to
measure the effects of shocks on slow moving aggregate variables, like real gross domestic
product (GDP), for which comparable high-frequency data are unavailable. However, high-
frequency analysis greatly enhances our ability to assess reactions of forward-looking variables
such as exchange rates, asset prices, yields, spreads, commodity prices, etc. In previous research,
analyses of how these variables react to government spending or revenue shocks were very
limited because it was hard to rule out reverse causality using low-frequency data. In contrast,
one can be fairly certain that, on a given day, shocks to actual or contracted payments of the U.S.
government are not affected by economic news and hence causation is likely to flow from fiscal
variables to forward-looking variables.

       Since the U.S. economy is a dominant force in the world economy, domestic U.S. fiscal
shocks are likely to have tangible effects on the rest of the world. However, the workings of
these effects have been relatively understudied for several reasons. First, the magnitude of fiscal
spillovers is likely to depend heavily on how exchange rates respond to fiscal shocks. However,
as we discussed above, exchange rates are forward-looking variables and therefore it has been
hard to establish causality. Second, typical time series analyses relied on relatively short time
series and thus the scope of variables one could analyze was limited. In contrast, we have
thousands of observations and consequently can examine how fiscal shocks propagate to the rest
of the world through changes in exchange rates vis-à-vis changes in commodity prices or
liquidity spreads. Third, asset prices are likely to move at the time when news about changes in
                                                                                                      2
government spending arrives rather than when the changes actually occur. With low frequency
data, it is difficult to obtain precise timing of news and therefore one is likely to obtain
attenuated responses to changes in government spending because low frequency analysis mixes
the impact reaction to the news with the dynamics after the news. In contrast, using a daily
frequency enables us to time shocks with high precision. Finally, at the daily frequency we can
investigate cyclical variation of the response of exchange rates or other variables to various types
of fiscal shocks. Previous research was greatly constrained in this context because we have only
a handful of low frequency observations when economies are in recession or at the zero lower
bound (ZLB).

        We construct two daily series of government spending. The first series is payments to
defense contractors reported in the daily statements of the U.S. Treasury. The second series is the
announced volume of contracts awarded daily by the U.S. Department of Defense. Since one
series measures actual outlays while the other provides a measure of future government
spending, using these two series helps us to underscore the key role of fiscal foresight for timing
shocks to government spending as well as responses to these shocks. While it is possible to
construct more government spending variables at the daily frequency, we focus on military
spending to minimize the possibility of reserve causality and other forms of endogeneity. We
validate our daily military spending series by comparing them to standard government spending
data available at lower frequencies and by relating them to major military developments.

        While interpretation of spending shocks at this high frequency may be complex—we
discuss that these shocks may include “level” (how much to spend), “timing” (when to spend),
and “identity” (who receives government funding) components—we document that certain
shocks to government spending have a non-negligible “level” component, which is the
component typically studied with data at quarterly or annual frequencies. Specifically, we show
that announcements about future military spending move the index of stock prices for firms in
the defense industry.

        To keep our analysis focused, we concentrate on how the exchange rate reacts to
government spending shocks because these responses have crucial information for both
policymakers and researchers. For example, these responses can inform policymakers about
objects central for design of fiscal policies, such as the size of fiscal multiplier, the degree of

                                                                                                      3
fiscal spillovers, and the potential benefit of coordinating fiscal policies. These responses can
also help researchers to discriminate among competing models of business cycles and to assess
the relative importance of various frictions usually employed to match moments of the data.

       Our key finding is that unanticipated shocks to announced military spending, rather than
actual outlays on military programs, lead to an immediate and tangible appreciation of the U.S.
dollar. This finding is broadly consistent with a variety of workhorse models in international
economics and it suggests that fiscal shocks can have considerable spillovers into foreign
economies. At the same time, this finding contrasts sharply with the results reported in previous
studies. Specifically, the earlier work routinely documented that the domestic currency
depreciates in response to government spending shocks, which is hard to square with the
predictions of classic and modern open-economy models. We argue that this difference in results
is likely to arise from the mis-timing of shocks in previous papers and their use of actual
spending rather than news about spending. In short, we find that using daily series can resolve a
long-standing puzzle in international economics.

       To investigate the workings of fiscal spillovers further, we examine reactions of some
key macroeconomic variables (commodity prices, stock market returns, liquidity and risk premia,
etc.) available at the daily frequency. We find little support for military spending shocks
influencing global markets via liquidity or uncertainty effects. Although our estimates have
considerable sampling error, the picture painted by the responses is broadly consistent with the
predictions of the mainstream models where government spending shocks operate through the
demand channel.

       This paper contributes to several strands of previous work. First, we build on the vast
literature—started by Meese and Rogoff (1983)—trying, for the most part unsuccessfully, to
relate exchange rate movements and domestic fundamentals such as the stance of fiscal and
monetary policies, the state of the business cycle, and the current account deficit. We show that
the relationship could be more apparent at high frequencies where identification and timing of
shocks to fundamentals and responses to such shocks are more clear-cut. Second, we add to the
body of work studying the effects of fiscal shocks on exchange rate movements (e.g., Monacelli
and Perotti 2010, Ilzetzki et al. 2013, Ravn et al. 2012). This literature consistently has found the
puzzling result that government spending shocks lead to depreciation of the domestic currency.

                                                                                                    4
We argue that the puzzle can be resolved with enhanced identification of government spending
shocks. Third, we contribute to the literature on microstructure determination of the exchange
rate (see Lyons 2006 and Vitale 2007 for a survey). Specifically, we document that government
spending shocks could be an additional determinant of exchange rate fluctuations at high
frequencies. Fourth, we contribute to the rapidly growing strand of the literature focused on
variation in the responses of macroeconomic variables to shocks in different states of the
economy (recession vs. expansion, ZLB vs. non-ZLB). Specifically, we exploit high frequency
variation in fiscal and outcome variables rather than using variation in quarterly or lower
frequencies as in our previous work (e.g., Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a, 2012b, 2013).
Finally, we contribute to the ongoing debate about using actual vs. announced government
spending to identify innovations to fiscal policy (e.g., Ramey 2011, Blanchard and Perotti 2002).
Our results suggest that, in the context of studying responses of asset prices at high frequencies,
one should use announcements about future government spending rather than actual outlays.

       We structure the rest of the paper as follows. In the next section, we describe the sources
of daily data on government spending on defense (announcements and actual outlays). In this
section, we also relate the constructed series to alternative sources of information about
government spending to validate our series. Section III presents our econometric framework to
study effects of fiscal shocks. Section IV discusses interpretation of shocks. Section V
documents responses of the exchange rate and other macroeconomic variables to spending
shocks. We also investigate how these responses vary over time and across states of the economy
(e.g., recession vs. expansion; binding zero lower bound on nominal interest rates vs. normal
times). Section VI presents concluding remarks.


II.    Data
We use two sources of daily data on U.S. government spending. The first source is the Daily
Statements of the U.S. Treasury. The second source is the daily postings of the Department of
Defense (hereafter DoD) about awarded contracts. In this section, we describe these sources and
discuss pros and cons of each for measuring fiscal shocks.




                                                                                                      5
   A. Daily U.S. Treasury Statements
Since 1993, the U.S. Treasury has published daily reports on the federal government’s actual
receipts and spending. These statements include detailed information by types of receipts and
spending. For example, we know how much money is transferred to defense contractors, to
businesses and individuals as tax rebates, to the unemployed, and to banks (e.g., TARP).

       While daily statements offer rich information about outlays of the government, we focus
on payments to defense contractors for several reasons. First, as discussed in Ramey and Shapiro
(1998) and elsewhere, defense spending is less likely than other types of spending to be
determined by current economic conditions. Consistent with this logic, we do not observe any
tangible cyclical variation in the payments on defense contracts. For example, there is barely any
change in the payments over the course of the Great Recession.

       Second, payments on defense contracts are much less predictable than other types of
payments at high frequencies. For example, tax rebates have a large seasonal component and
unemployment insurance payments appear to be timed to occur on certain days of the month.
Because we are interested in unanticipated shocks to government spending, using payments on
defense contracts provides a cleaner source of variation.

       Third, the Daily Treasury Statements provide limited information on many components
of spending in the early part of the sample, while payments on defense contracts have been
consistently reported in the statements. Thus, we have a long time series for this spending
component. This aspect of the data is important because it allows us to estimate state-dependent
responses of macroeconomic variables to fiscal shocks.

       Fourth, defense contracts tend to have a large domestic component. For example,
Schwartz and Ginsberg (2013) estimate that the percentage of DoD contract obligations
performed outside the United States ranged between 6 and 12 percent over the last 15 years or
so. Such concentration on domestic spending helps us rule out large direct spillover (or
“leakage”) effects. That is, one is more likely to obtain a demand spending multiplier with
military contract spending than with other components of government spending that are
associated with a higher fraction of purchases of foreign goods and services.



                                                                                                   6
         Finally, defense spending is a major source of variation in government spending and
there is enormous variation in daily payments on defense contracts (Panel A, Figure 1): they vary
from $11 million to $4 billion. The payments aggregated to the monthly frequency are
considerably smoother (Panel B, Figure 1), but even this aggregated series exhibits sizable
volatility. The standard deviation of monthly changes in seasonally adjusted monthly payments
is $1.7 billion, with the range going from a reduction of $4.0 billion to an increase of $5.0
billion. Given that the mean monthly payment to defense contractors is about $20.8 billion,
these magnitudes translate into large percent changes.

         To assess the quality of the payments data, we aggregate payments to the quarterly
frequency and compare the resulting series with the corresponding data in the National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPA). We construct the NIPA counterpart of the payments as purchases
of intermediate goods and services (net of own-account investment1 and sales to other sectors)
plus gross investment, which is reported in the BEA’s NIPA Table 3.11.5. Some of the
discrepancy between the series can arise due to differences in timing of purchases (accrual vs.
cash transactions) and the treatment of government enterprise expenditures. Although the
definitions of variables are not aligned perfectly, the payment and NIPA spending series track
each other closely and the levels of the variables are very similar, especially after 2000 (Panel C,
Figure 1). Thus, one can interpret the payment series as a daily proxy for the conventional
measures of military spending available at the quarterly frequency.


    B. Department of Defense contracts
Since 1994, nearly every weekday at 5 pm, the DoD has announced (on
http://www.defense.gov/contracts/) its new contract awards greater than $6.5 million.2 A typical
announcement specifies the duration of the contract, awarded amount, the name of the winner,
location of contract execution, and additional details about the nature of the contract (e.g., fixed
price, “do not exceed”, “cost plus”, etc.). Each contract is assigned a unique code and is


1
  Own-account investment is measured in current dollars by compensation of general government employees and
related expenditures for goods and services and is classified as investment in structures, software, and research and
development.
2
  The threshold for contracts announced on the DoD website varied over time. For the most part of our sample, the
threshold was five million dollars.

                                                                                                                        7
summarized by a paragraph in an announcement. The contracts tend to be of multi-year duration.
This is an example of a contract awarded on July 28, 2014:

       SAIC, McLean, Virginia, was awarded an $89,526,485 cost-plus-incentive fee,
       incrementally- funded contract with options, for management and technical
       support for high performance computing services, capabilities, infrastructure, and
       technologies. Work will be performed at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio;
       Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland; Stennis Space Center, Mississippi;
       Vicksburg, Mississippi; Kihei, Hawaii; Lorton, Virginia; and McLean, Virginia,
       with an estimated completion date of July 28, 2019. Bids were solicited via the
       Internet with four received. Research, development, testing and evaluation fiscal
       2013 ($18,230,430) and fiscal 2014 ($5,770,000) funds are being obligated at the
       time of the award. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Huntsville, Alabama, is the
       contracting activity (W912DY-14-F-0103).
       In addition to announcing new contracts, the DoD also makes announcements about
modifications to existing contracts. The modifications can be linked to the initial DoD
commitments using the unique contract code, and so one can construct a measure of the
incremental changes in defense contracts. For example, on April 17, 2012, the DoD initially
awarded $78 million to Electric Boat Corp., a Connecticut subsidiary of General Dynamics, for
“long-lead-time material associated with the fiscal 2014 Virginia class submarine (SSN 792).”
Using the unique contract code (N00024-12-C-2115), we can see that Electric Boat Corp. was
later awarded an additional $307 million on December 28, 2012 for “… additional long-lead-
time material associated with the fiscal 2014 Virginia-class submarine SSN 792 and the initiation
of long-lead-time material for the fiscal 2015 Virginia-class submarines SSN 793 and SSN 794”
and then another $520 million dollars on February 4, 2014 for “… additional long lead time
material associated with the two fiscal 2015 Virginia-class submarines (SSN 794 and SSN 795)
and the two fiscal 2016 Virginia-class submarines (SSN 796 and SSN 797).” On April 28, 2014,
the DoD awarded Electric Boat Corp. with a $17.6 billion contract for construction of 10
Virginia-class submarines from fiscal 2014 to 2018. The evolution of modifications on this
contract is fairly typical among contracts. In all likelihood, additional tranches are likely to be
widely anticipated before the DoD announcements. To avoid mixing anticipated and
unanticipated awards, we use only announcements of new contracts, that is, contracts that appear
for the first time on the DoD website.




                                                                                                      8
       One drawback of using these data is that the DoD does not provide them in a format
suitable for statistical analysis. To convert this information into usable form, we have
downloaded web pages with announcements from the DoD archive
(http://www.defense.gov/contracts/archive.aspx) and parsed data from the web pages. To verify
the quality of the information, we use several algorithms of parsing information from the text of
announcements, have at least two people check the consistency of collected data, and randomly
check the validity of information extracted from a sample of web pages by independent research
assistants. Overall, the quality of the data appears to be high.

       While the announcements are not immediately translated into actual disbursements, using
announcements offers one key potential advantage. Standard theory predicts that unconstrained,
forward-looking agents should react at the time of the news rather than when actual spending
occurs. The announcements can thus provide a better timing for spending shocks, as measured by
the present value of contract awards.

       Similar to daily spending on defense contracts reported by the U.S. Treasury, daily totals
of announced contracts show huge variation (Panel A, Figure 2). The awarded amounts vary
from $3 million to almost $25 billion with a standard deviation of $1.2 billion and a mean of
$450 million. The daily totals of awarded contracts are weakly (0.08) correlated with daily
spending on defense contracts.

       In contrast to daily payments, daily contract awards do not appear much smoother when
aggregated to monthly frequency (Panel B, Figure 2). The time series of monthly totals of
awarded contracts is characterized by low serial correlation and spikes without any discernible
seasonal pattern. Furthermore, these spikes in monthly totals can be related to major military
developments. For example, we observe a surge in awarded contracts immediately after the 9/11
terrorist attack, the start of the second Iraq war in 2003, the Russo-Georgian war in 2008, and the
start of Operation New Dawn (a major counter-insurgency operation in Iraq). In contrast, we
observe no significant movements in actual payments on defense contracts.


   C. Seasonal variation and other predictable components
While daily Treasury or DoD data provide considerable variation, their use presents a challenge.
Specifically, economic theory predicts unanticipated movements in actual and promised

                                                                                                    9
spending should have stronger effects than anticipated ones. However, the daily data series can
have predictable movements, for example because of institutional constraints such as budget
cycles in military contract awards or spending disbursements. In particular, the daily data exhibit
predictable movements on certain days of the week, days/weeks of the month, and months of the
year, so one may observe systematic cycles at a variety of frequencies.

       Unfortunately, there is no benchmark method for purging seasonal components from
daily data. Popular approaches such as the X-12 algorithm are not available at a daily frequency.
Using an extended set of dummy variables to capture seasonal effects could be unproductive
because it would require many parameters to be estimated and run the risk of overfitting. To
address this challenge, we use a novel framework developed in De Livera, Hyndman, and Snyder
(2011). This framework allows for trends and multiple seasonal components modeled as a
parsimonious series of trigonometric functions. After extensive specification searches, we
include four cycles with periods that correspond to weekly, fortnightly, monthly, and yearly
durations. In our analysis, we use military spending data deseasonalized and detrended using this
approach. Appendix Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the constructed government
spending series.


III.   Econometric framework
In our baseline specification, we follow our earlier work (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a,
2013) and estimate the effect of government spending using direct projections as in Jorda (2005).
Specifically, we construct impulse responses by running a series of regressions:

                         ∑      Δ        ∑      Δ

                                     ,          0, … ,                                       (1)

where Δ is the first difference operator and the impulse response for an outcome variable     is
given by           . As we discuss in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a), this approach has a
number of advantages. For example, in contrast to low-order vector autoregressions (VARs), it




                                                                                                   10
does not constrain the shape of the impulse response function (IRF).3 This property of direct
projection may be important in the context of volatile daily series with complex serial correlation
structure. Furthermore, this approach allows straightforward estimation of state-dependent
responses. Finally, note that when we construct the response of                to a change in , the
contemporaneous variation of            is purified from movements predictable by lags of               and .4

         This specification also corresponds to the standard VAR approach (e.g., Blanchard and
Perotti 2002) where government spending is ordered first in the Cholesky decomposition. This
ordering reflects the identifying assumption that a measure of government spending                       does not
respond contemporaneously to innovations in               . Given that we work with           at daily frequency,
this assumption is likely to be satisfied.

         We extend the direct-projections approach to allow the responses to vary by the state of
the economy. For example for the case where regimes correspond to recessions and expansions,
we estimate specifications of the following type:



                   ∑         Δ                                   ∑         Δ

                   ∑         Δ                                   ∑         Δ

                                                                      ,            0, … ,                   (2)

where                         and                        are indicator or probability variables measuring
the state of the economy. The impulse responses for the recession and expansion regimes are
given by               and             respectively. As we discuss in our earlier work, the direct-
projections approach to estimating state-dependent effects has a number of advantages over
estimating such effects in a standard VAR framework, which we did in Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012b). For example, it automatically incorporates the effect of government
spending shocks on the state itself. Furthermore, the approach can be extended to estimation
3
  In contrast to vector autoregressions, the error term in specification (1) and other similar specifications is
potentially serially correlated for     1 and therefore one has to use Newey-West or similar estimators to calculate
standard errors correctly.
4
 In Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a,b, 2013), we use professional forecasts to further purify government
spending series of predictable movements. Such forecasts unfortunately are not available at a daily frequency. We
use twenty lags in all specifications; that is,    20.

                                                                                                                    11
based on more sophisticated classifications of regimes, such as recession with a binding zero
lower bound (ZLB) on short-term nominal interest rates:

                   ,


                       ,


                       ,
                                                         1
                       ,
                                                         1
                           ,
                 ∑             Δ
                           ,
                 ∑             Δ
                           ,
                 ∑                 Δ                           1

                           ,
                 ∑                 Δ                           1



                                       ,        0, … ,                                      (3)

where             is a dummy variable equal to one when the economy is at the ZLB and zero
otherwise. If one is interested in impulse responses of variable   to a shock in variable   in
                                                                     ,
recession with a binding ZLB, the impulse response is given by                 .


IV.     Interpretation of innovations in government spending
Conventional macroeconomic analyses of how government spending affects the economy
routinely use innovations to government spending as shocks. At relatively low frequencies (e.g.,
quarterly or annual), this treatment of innovations may be a reasonable approach as the
frequency at which innovations are measured roughly corresponds to the frequency of
government spending decisions. The interpretation of changes in government spending is more
complex at higher frequencies.

        For example, the day-to-day variation in amounts of government spending could have
little bearing on total spending over a longer period such as a quarter or a year, perhaps capturing
allocation of resources over time (i.e., news about timing of spending, or “timing news”) rather
                                                                                                   12
than decisions about the level of resources committed for spending (i.e., news about levels of
spending, or “level news”). Economic theory predicts that timing news should be considerably
less powerful than level news. However, previous research (e.g., Parker et al. 2013) has found
that even news about timing can affect economic activity. If variation in daily spending is
dominated by timing news, one may expect that our estimates are likely to be a lower bound for
the responses to news about levels.

           In the context of DoD announcements, there could be additional uncertainty about the
identity of firms that receive a contract but little or no uncertainty about the magnitude of the
contract (i.e., “identity news”). For example, the public may know that the DoD plans to award a
$10 billion contract to build a new fleet of bombers and the only uncertainty from the perspective
of the public is the identity of the contract winner, e.g., Boeing or Lockheed. In this case,
specific DoD contract awards may resolve no uncertainty at the aggregate level. If DoD
announcements are dominated by such identity news, one may find weak, if any, reaction of
macroeconomic variables to DoD announcements.

           The plausibility that DoD announcement might provide “level news” is increased by the
flexibility of the government spending process with respect to defense. Like other government
spending programs, defense spending proceeds through a process beginning with the submission
of the President’s budget and continuing through the Congressional appropriations process,
which creates budget authority for committing the funds that are allocated by the contracts in our
DoD announcement data. However, the funds allocated in any particular contract announcement
do not necessarily come from current-year authorizations. First, through the procedure of
“multiyear procurement,”5 the DoD can award contracts for which future-year expenditures will
be funded through future-year budget authority, rather than current-year authority. Such
procurement requires Congressional approval and may involve penalties if subsequent funding is
not provided, and so may provide news about the level of expected future appropriations.
Second, as the July 28, 2014 announcement from our sample given above indicates, budget
authority may be carried over from one fiscal year to the next. Unobligated budget authority can
be carried over for one or more fiscal years if the appropriations measure specified a “no-year”



5
    For details, see the discussion in O’Rourke and Schwartz (2014).

                                                                                                    13
or multi-year period of availability6, which is common in DoD accounts. Thus, the present value
of spending from a particular year’s budget is affected by when funds in that budget are actually
committed.

           To assess the importance of level news in the daily payments and daily contract
announcements data, we use specification (1) with the stock price index of firms in the defense
industry as the dependent variable. If the only source of variation in DoD announcements is
identity news, then stock prices of individual corporations may react to the news but one should
not observe a reaction in the index since a win for Boeing is a loss for Lockheed. If the only
source of variation in payments or contract announcements is timing news, then the index should
not react to actual payments or announcements because that information should already be
incorporated in the stock prices. If the index reacts to daily variation in payments or
announcements, one can have more confidence that level news is an important source of
variation in these series. Indeed, Fisher and Peters (2010) document that movements in the index
of stock prices of major defense contractors have a significant predictive power for future
military spending.

           Panel A of Figure 3 plots impulse responses to daily DoD announcements for a stock
price index for large defense and aerospace corporations.7 The index rises in response to DoD
announcements. Although stock prices are highly volatile, we can reject the null that the
response is zero at least for several horizons. Furthermore, consistent with the efficient market
hypothesis, stock prices of large defense and aerospace corporations jump at the time of the news
and stay roughly constant for at least 30 days.

           In contrast, daily U.S. Treasury payments to defense contractors generate no significant
reaction of the defense index (Panel B, Figure 3). Furthermore, the point estimates are often
negative so that overall effects are small not only statistically but also economically. These
impulse responses are consistent with the view that timing shocks dominate level shocks in daily
6
    See General Accounting Office, Office of the General Counsel (2004). Page 2-52.
7
  The index includes the following corporations: Boeing Co, General Dynamics, Honeywell Intl Inc, L-3
Communications Holdings, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman Corp, Precision Castparts Corp, Raytheon Co,
Rockwell Collins, Textron Inc, United Technologies Corp, AAR Corp, Aerovironment Inc, American Science &
Engineering, Cubic Corp, Curtiss-Wright Corp, Engility Inc., GenCorp Inc, Moog Inc A, National Presto Industries,
Orbital Sciences Corp, Taser International Inc, and Teledyne Technologies Inc. These corporations are included in
the S&P 1500 index. We use equal weights to aggregate movements of stock prices across corporations.

                                                                                                               14
payments. In this case, one may expect weaker reactions of macroeconomic variables to shocks
in daily payments than to shocks in contract announcements.


    V.   Results
In an ideal setting, one would like to study responses of many macroeconomic variables at high
frequencies to understand the effects and transmission mechanisms of government spending
shocks. Unfortunately, most macroeconomic variables relevant for our analysis (e.g., imports and
exports) are available only at a monthly or quarterly frequency, and even if available might react
too slowly for one to observe an immediate response in daily data. As a result, our analysis
focuses on asset prices available at a daily frequency. While we study the effects of government
spending on various asset prices, we emphasize the dynamics of the exchange rate response
because they represent a key channel for many proposed transmission mechanisms.

         We use the trade-weighted exchange rate (for major trading partners) constructed by the
Federal Reserve Board. A high value of the exchange rate corresponds to strong U.S. dollar.
Figure 4 plots the time series of this exchange rate. The dollar appreciated in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, reaching a peak in 2002, and depreciated steadily thereafter until the beginning of
the Great Recession, after which its movement was quite volatile. Since 2012 the dollar has been
appreciating.


A. Baseline model
Panel A of Figure 5 shows the impulse response of the nominal exchange rate to a unit shock in
the DoD announcements (daily log volume of awarded contracts, deseasonalized and detrended).
At the time of the shock, the dollar appreciates by 0.0001 (that is, 0.01%).8 This
contemporaneous response is statistically significant at the 95 percent level. Over time, the
exchange rate appreciates further and reaches the maximum appreciation of 0.00052 after about




8
  DoD announcements are made at 5pm Eastern Time. Some markets are closed by this time and therefore some
daily variables may be unable to respond to the announcement on the day it was made. In light of this discrepancy in
timing, we use responses at     1 in specifications (1)-(3) as a measure of the contemporaneous response.

                                                                                                                 15
25 working days. Given the amount of volatility in both series (the exchange rate and the DoD
announcements), statistical significance of the point estimates is remarkable.9

           The direction of the response of the exchange rate is consistent with basic
macroeconomic theory: in an economy with a flexible exchange rate, government spending
shocks should lead to appreciation of the domestic currency. The dynamics of appreciation are
broadly in line with economic theory as well. For example, the Dornbusch model predicts
maximum reaction at the time of the shock. While the exchange rate peaks with a delay, the
duration of the delay is fairly short relative to previous studies (e.g., Benetrix and Lane 2013)
where the maximum reaction was delayed by many months. We cannot reject that the
appreciation is zero at long horizons, but it certainly appears fairly persistent based on point
estimates. Interestingly, when we aggregate data to the monthly frequency (Panel A, Figure 6)
the delay becomes more pronounced: the response peaks after six months. Therefore, the delayed
responses in the previous literature may be in part due to the use of low-frequency data.

           To put the magnitude of the appreciation in a proper context, we also report the response
of spending announcements to its own shocks (the figure on the right-hand side in Panel A).
Clearly, the response is short-lived and for all practical purposes the shocks may be treated as
daily innovations. These dynamics make interpretation easy because one does not have to adjust
the response of the exchange rate or other macroeconomic series by the cumulative response of
the shock series. A shock is measured as percent deviation from the daily average of awarded
contracts. Given that there are roughly 250 business days in a year, a unit daily shock (100
percent; roughly double announced award on a given day) to awarded contracts corresponds
approximately to a 100/250 percent (            0.4 percent) increase in the annual volume of awarded
contracts. Thus, scaling the impact to a doubling of the annual budget of spending on defense
contracts, which currently amounts to approximately two percent of GDP,10 the implied dollar
appreciation would be about 12 percent (250*0.00052), a significant amount.



9
    The response is similar when it is estimated using the standard VAR approach; see Appendix Figure 1.
10
  According to the September 30, 2013 Daily Report of the U.S. Treasury, the total payment to defense contractors
in the fiscal year of 2013 was 343 billion, which is equal approximately to 2% of the U.S. GDP. Note that this
accounts for roughly half of the overall defense budget, which also includes labor expenses for soldiers and other
employees, maintenance of military bases, military operations, etc.

                                                                                                                16
        To contrast the difference between announced and actual spending, we present the daily
response of the exchange rate to actual spending (daily payments to defense contractors) in Panel
B of Figure 5. We find no significant response at any horizon. The pattern is similar when we
estimate the response using data at the monthly frequency, as shown in Panel B of Figure 6; if
anything, the point estimates suggest that the dollar depreciates. This weak reaction is consistent
with findings documented in earlier work. For example, Ilzetzki et al. (2013) report no reaction
of exchange rates to government spending shocks in developed countries.11 Furthermore, using
VAR regressions, Kim and Roubini (2008), Monacelli and Perotti (2010), Enders et al. (2011)
and Ravn et al. (2012) estimate that the exchange rate depreciates in response to government
spending shocks identified as in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) or with sign restrictions. We
reproduce this puzzling result in Appendix Figure 2.

        At the same time, Corsetti, Meier, and Muller (2009) document that the dollar appreciates
(with a delay) when one uses news about military spending shocks as in Ramey and Shapiro
(1998). As argued in Ramey (2011), these shocks are likely to have better timing in the sense of
being unanticipated innovations.12 In a similar spirit, Born et al. (2013) find for a panel of OECD
countries that domestic currency appreciates on impact after government spending shocks
purified from predictable movements when one uses OECD forecasts for government spending
as in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a).

        This difference in responses to actual and announced government spending shocks can
explain why previous studies using actual spending and data at low frequencies failed to find a
robust link between exchange rate movements and fundamentals such as the fiscal deficit.


B. Transmission
The previous section documents that announcements about future U.S. government spending—
rather than actual spending—lead to appreciation of the U.S. dollar. In this section, we examine


11
  Ilzetzki et al. (2013) do find that the exchange rate appreciates on impact for countries (developed and
developing) with flexible exchange rates. However, this appreciation is temporary and the exchange rate depreciates
shortly after the shock.
12
  However, even with the better timing of military spending announcements constructed in Ramey (2011), we find
only a moderate improvement in the reaction of the exchange rate. Specifically, instead of depreciation, the dollar
exhibits no reaction to the Ramey spending shocks. See Appendix Figure 2.

                                                                                                                 17
responses of additional macroeconomic variables to have a more complete picture of how
spending shocks are transmitted.

        We start this analysis with high-frequency variables that capture the state of liquidity,
volatility and overall health of the U.S. economy (Figure 7). While these variables are
“domestic”, the U.S. economy is a key player in global markets and thus “local” effects of the
U.S. government spending shocks may spill over into foreign markets. The TED spread,13 which
measures liquidity in the economy, does not exhibit any discernible reaction to spending shocks
irrespective of whether these are announcements or actual payments. Therefore, there is little
evidence that the exchange rate movements are determined via liquidity effects of government
spending shocks. We also find little evidence that announced contract spending shocks result in
greater uncertainty14 (second row, left column in Figure 7). To the extent increased uncertainty
stimulates a flight for quality (i.e., increased purchases of U.S. government debt), these shocks
do not appreciate the dollar via this channel. At the same time, actual spending shocks are
associated with increased uncertainty, for which we do not have a ready explanation. Finally, we
examine if the overall stock market reacts to government spending shocks to assess the strength
of the demand channel. While the response of the S&P 500 index is generally positive to
announcement shocks and negative to actual payment shocks, the standard errors are too large to
draw firm inferences.

        Government spending shocks in the U.S. may influence other economies by affecting
commodity prices. Figure 8 documents that in response to announcement shocks, oil prices tend
to increase at the time of the shock but then gradually fall back. However, the confidence
intervals are fairly wide and we cannot reject a zero response at the 95 percent confidence level.
The response of gasoline prices to announcement shocks has a delayed peak (about 10 business
days) but this increase is short-lived. For almost all horizons we cannot reject a zero response.
While gold prices show no contemporaneous response to announcement shocks, they gradually



13
  The TED spread is calculated as the difference between the 3-Month London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR) based
on US dollars and the 3-Month Treasury bill rate.
14
  We measure uncertainty using the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) DJIA Volatility Index. This index
shows the hypothetical performance of a portfolio that engages in a buy-write strategy on the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA).

                                                                                                                 18
fall and this decline is statistically significant after about 20 business days. Responses to
payment shocks are similar but the contemporaneous reactions to these shocks are attenuated.

       Many theoretical models impose a tight link between movements in exchange rates and
interest rates. Typically, appreciation of the U.S. dollar is associated with higher U.S. real
interest rates. To preserve space, we report (Figure 9) only contemporaneous responses (          1 in
specification (1)) of interest rates and inflation expectations at different maturities so that one can
observe the behavior of the yield curve. Announcement shocks tend to raise short-term (less than
a year) interest rates for U.S. government debt and for interbank loans (LIBOR). The response is
not statistically significant which, apart from sampling uncertainty, may also signal the power of
the Fed to control short-term interest rates. The point estimates for longer rates are close to zero.
In contrast, announcement shocks appear to shift up the whole “yield curve” for inflation
expectations measured from the prices of inflation swaps at different maturities. Unfortunately,
we have measures of inflation expectations only for horizons greater than a year while the
movements in the nominal interest rates are most discernible at much shorter horizons. Thus, we
cannot establish if changes in inflation expectations at these short horizons are sufficiently large
to offset changes in nominal rates. For longer horizons, the responses to announcement shocks
are imprecisely estimated. While our results are statistically inconclusive about the importance of
the real interest rate response, the point estimates of the responses are broadly in line with the
predictions of workhorse models. In contrast, the picture is mixed for responses to payment
shocks (in the right panel of Figure 9). Inflation expectations tend to decrease and nominal rates
for U.S. government debt tend to fall while the nominal rates in the interbank market tend to rise.
It’s hard to reconcile these responses in a standard framework.

       Finally, we examine how stock market indices for foreign markets react to U.S.
government spending shocks. We focus on large exchanges with long time series. Specifically,
we study responses of the NIKKEI 225 (Japan), the FTSE 100 (the U.K.) and the TSX (Canada).
Announcement shocks tend to raise these indices although, again, the confidence bands are wide.
We find a statistically significant, positive response only for the FTSE 100 and the TSX shortly
after the shock. In contrast, payment shocks appear to lead to declines in foreign stock market
indices.



                                                                                                     19
        Overall, these results suggest spending shocks appear to increase the level of demand in
the global economy. Oil/gasoline prices increase, while the price of gold—a commodity often
used to hedge against recessions—decreases. Domestic interest rates and inflation expectations
rise. Foreign stock markets boom. Alternative explanations based on liquidity and volatility risks
seem to have no clear support. However, sampling uncertainty in the estimated responses is large
and, obviously, such interpretation is tentative at best.


C. Robustness
Given that the period we study (1994-2014) is characterized by dramatic volatility in the
economy and in asset prices (e.g., the Great Recession), we explore in this section whether our
results are driven by particular events or subsamples. As a first pass, we estimate impulse
responses for the pre-Great Recession period, ending in December, 2007. We find that the
patterns estimated on the full sample are similar to those estimated on the pre-crisis period (Panel
A, Figure 11). The response of the exchange rate to a DoD announcement is very similar for
short horizons to those in Figure 5 although there is no upward trend as horizons lengthen. At
the same time, the dollar depreciates (rather than stays at roughly zero) in response to increased
payments to defense contractors.

        A binding zero lower bound (ZLB) was a key aspect of the Great Recession; even now,
more than five years since the recession trough, short-term interest rates are at ultra-low levels in
the United States and many other developed countries. Wieland (2012) shows that the response
of the exchange rate to a government spending shock at a binding ZLB can be different from the
response in normal times (i.e., outside the ZLB). Specifically, a government spending shock can,
in theory, lead to depreciation (rather than appreciation) of the exchange rate when the economy
operates at the zero lower bound. Intuitively, in normal times when government spending shocks
increase demand and hence generate inflation, the central bank raises the real interest rate to cool
down the economy. This increase in the real interest rate yields appreciation of the domestic
currency to keep asset markets cleared. In contrast, when the ZLB is binding, the central bank
cannot raise nominal interest rates and therefore inflation generated by increased government
spending translates into a fall in real interest rates. Such reaction of real interest rates at the ZLB
leads to depreciation of the domestic currency. As a result, the fiscal multiplier in an open
economy can be larger than in a closed economy when the ZLB is binding.

                                                                                                     20
       Panel B of Figure 11 plots impulse responses of the exchange rate to government
spending shocks during the period with a binding ZLB. While we continue to find no significant
response to payment shocks, the response to DoD announcements is now such that the
contemporaneous response is weak and then the dollar greatly appreciates. Furthermore, the
response at long horizons (25-30 days) is significant for these announcement shocks.

       The behavior of the exchange rate at short horizons can be rationalized within the
standard, micro-founded framework analyzed in Wieland (2012). In a frictionless economy, the
exchange rate should appreciate in normal times and it should depreciate at the ZLB. If an
economy has, for example, financial frictions, the response at the ZLB should be between these
extremes. Depending on parameter values, one could obtain no reaction of the exchange rate.
This prediction also squares with the traditional, Mundell-Fleming theoretical framework. In
normal times, additional government spending crowds our private consumption and investment
as well as net exports. However, such crowding-out is likely to be less pronounced in times of
slack and liquidity trap (i.e., binding ZLB). In other words, one should observe weaker, if any,
appreciation of the exchange rate in response to government spending shocks. On the other hand,
the delayed, statistically significant appreciation of the dollar is inconsistent with the predictions
of traditional and modern theoretical models.

       One may conjecture that the estimated responses of the exchange rate during a binding
ZLB period in the recent U.S. history could be affected by dramatic developments that are
usually outside theoretical models. For example, the time series of the TED spread (Figure 12)
suggests that liquidity was unusually scarce during the early part of the ZLB period. Perhaps
responses to government spending shocks in such environments are atypical. To control for this
potentially confounding factor, we introduce twenty lags of the TED spread as additional
regressors in specification (1). Panel C of Figure 11 shows that these additional controls
eliminate the “puzzle”.

       To further explore time variation in the strength of the exchange rate response to
government spending shocks, we estimate specification (1) using rolling regression with a
window of 24 months (approximately 500 daily observations). Figure 13 shows the time series of
the contemporaneous response of the exchange rate, with periods of recession indicated. For
DoD announcements, we observe that the response is generally low during recessions and the

                                                                                                    21
strength of the response appears to have declined over time. That is, the contemporaneous
response is larger and statistically significant in the early part of the sample but becomes close to
zero economically and statistically towards the end of our sample, which is consistent with
results reported in Figure 12. Note that we estimate the strongest response in the mid- to late-
1990s, which was the period of a strong expansion of the U.S. economy. Interestingly, the
response to payment shocks (daily statements of the U.S. Treasury) shows the opposite cyclical
variation: the response is larger in recessions than in expansions, although generally not
significant statistically.


D. Microstructure effects
Previous studies of exchange rate movements at high frequencies emphasize that macroeconomic
news could be powerful determinants of such movements.15 One may be concerned that our
findings are driven by a correlation between such news and innovations to government spending.
To isolate the effect of government spending shocks from other macroeconomic news at high
frequencies, we construct additional controls for macroeconomic news.

           Specifically, we use two measures of innovations to monetary policy. The first measure is
the difference between the fed funds rate target announced by the Fed and the expected value of
the rate captured by the futures on the fed funds rate. As in Gorodnichenko and Weber (2013),
we calculate this difference in a tight (30-minute) window around FOMC announcements. The
second measure is the movement in the 5-year Treasury note at the time of the Fed’s
announcements about quantitative easing. Chorodow-Reich (2014, Table 1) reports these
movements in tight windows around the announcements. We use two measures because the first
one is not available at the ZLB while the second was not used by the Fed before the ZLB became
binding.

           For other macroeconomic news, we follow Andersen et al. (2003) and calculate the
surprise component in macroeconomic releases as the difference between the released figures
(“realization”) and expectations of money market managers. We construct macroeconomic
surprises for the following variables: GDP, capacity utilization, consumer confidence, CPI core
inflation rate, employment cost index, initial unemployment claims, ISM manufacturing
15
     See Vitale (2007) for a survey.

                                                                                                   22
composite index, index of leading indicators, new home sales, non-farm payrolls, PPI core
inflation rate, retail sales, retail sales excluding motor vehicles, and unemployment.

       We use these measures (current values and lags) as additional controls in specification
(1). Figure 14 shows responses of the exchange rate to government spending shocks for different
combinations of the additional controls. By and large, we observe little difference in the
estimated impulse responses relative to what we obtain in the baseline specification, which does
not control for other macroeconomic innovations. This negligible difference in the responses
does not mean that the additional controls have no predictive power for the exchange rate
movements. We find (Appendix Figure 3) that these sources of news do move the exchange rate
significantly. As a result, one can interpret the stability of the responses to government spending
shocks as suggesting little correlation between government spending shocks and the additional
controls.


E. State‐dependent responses
Results of Section V.C document variation in the responses of the exchange rate to government
spending shocks. In this section, we examine if this variation can be related to the state of
business cycle. We estimate specification (2) with two regimes: recession and expansion as
identified by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Figure 15 plots the impulse
responses of the nominal exchange rate to DoD announcements (Panel A) and U.S. Treasury
payments to defense contractors (Panel B) for these two regimes. The figure also reports
responses of government spending to its own shocks.

       Similar to the previous results, we do not observe any persistence in our measures of
government spending. The response of the exchange rate to announcement shocks in expansion
is also similar to the response we estimate on the full sample in the linear model: the dollar
appreciates on impact and stays appreciated. In contrast, the dollar depreciates to a payment
shock (not statistically significant). Given large standard errors we cannot reject equality of these
responses from the response we obtain in the linear model that pools data across regimes. The
responses to spending shocks in recession, however, are radically different from those in
expansion. The contemporaneous response is weak but, over time, the dollar strongly
appreciates. This pattern applies to announcement and spending shocks.

                                                                                                  23
        As we discussed above, the gradual appreciation of the exchange rate is hard to reconcile
in the standard theoretical framework. To assess whether these puzzling dynamics are driven by
a binding ZLB, we estimate specification (3) which provides responses in four regimes:
recession without a binding ZLB (March 2001—November 2001, December 2007—November
2008); recession with a binding ZLB (December 2008—June 2009); expansion with a binding
ZLB (July 2009—present); expansion without a binding ZLB (October 1994—February 2001,
December 2001—November 2007). We also highlighted before the importance of using the TED
spread for understanding dynamics of the variables during the Great Recession. Hence, we report
estimated responses when lags of the TED spread are excluded (Panel A in Figure 16 and Figure
17 for announcement and payment shocks respectively) and when they are included as controls
(Panel B in the figures).

        Consider responses to the announcement shocks (right-hand side of Figure 16) when the
ZLB is not binding. We find that in expansion the dollar appreciates and stays strong. The
contemporaneous response in recession is weaker than in expansion but then we observe a
gradual appreciation. Although the magnitude of the appreciation is larger than the magnitude of
the appreciation in expansion, the standard errors are large and we cannot reject equality of
responses. In addition, we cannot reject the null of zero response in recession. Whether we
control for the TED spread or not makes little difference for the estimates when the ZLB is not
binding.

        When the ZLB is binding (left-hand side of Figure 16), the response in expansion is small
and not statistically different from zero. We observe this weak response with and without lags of
the TED spread as controls in specification (3). In contrast, the dollar gradually and strongly
appreciates in recession in the baseline specification. These puzzling dynamics vanish when we
control for the lags of the TED spread. In this case, the response is volatile but it is much smaller
in magnitude than in the case without lags of the TED spread. Furthermore, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that the response is zero once these controls are introduced. This finding is
consistent with Wieland (2012) documenting that the reaction of the exchange rate to inflation
surprises is close to zero.

        When we compare “expansion” responses inside and outside the ZLB after controlling
for the TED spread (Panel B, Appendix Figure 4), we observe that the point estimate of the

                                                                                                   24
response is lower when the ZLB binds than when it doesn’t. The pattern is similar for the
“recession” responses. While we cannot reject the null that the responses are the same across
ZLB and non-ZLB periods, the weaker response of the exchange rate when ZLB is binding is
qualitatively consistent with the modern theoretical models predicting a possibility of such
depreciation (see Wieland 2012).

       The responses to payment shocks (Figure 17) are puzzling. For example, the dollar
depreciates (appreciates) when economy is in expansion (recession) and ZLB is not binding.
Controlling for lags of the TED spread attenuates these puzzling dynamics, but even these
additional controls cannot resolve the problem completely.

        While we find only a weak statistical support for variation in the response of the
exchange rate to fiscal shocks across regimes (recession vs. expansion; ZLB vs. non-ZLB), one
should not infer that the responses are universally stable. Indeed, Woodford (2011) and others
argue that the difference in the responses across regimes depends on the extent to which shocks
spill from one regime into another. Our strongest results are for announcement shocks, but these
shocks indicate spending over multiple years. Since a typical recession lasts for only a few
quarters, it is possible that the differences across regimes are attenuated.


VI.    Concluding remarks
How government spending shocks propagate in interconnected economies is a key question with
a number of positive and normative implications. Yet, despite a great deal of attention to this
question, understanding of the strength and channels of the propagation has been elusive. A main
challenge has been the identification unanticipated shocks to government spending when fiscal
foresight is potentially a dominant feature of the data and government spending can respond
endogenously to the state of the economy. The challenge is particularly acute when
investigations involve movements in asset prices, which respond to information very rapidly.

       To address this challenge, we construct two daily series of an important component of
U.S. government spending, actual defense outlays and announcements about future defense
spending. At this high frequency, it is unlikely that spending reacts to developments in the
economy and hence one can rule out reverse causality. Shocks to defense spending are much less


                                                                                                  25
cyclical than other components of government spending, which further reduces the possibility of
endogeneity.

       We show that, in contrast to actual outlays, announcements about future spending
robustly lead to a significant and immediate appreciation of the U.S. dollar, which suggests
potentially considerable fiscal spillovers. This finding differs sharply from the results reported in
previous studies that find a depreciation of the currency in response to domestic government
spending shocks, which may be interpreted as leading to “beggar-thy-neighbor” effects. We
argue that this discrepancy is likely to arise for two reasons. First, using daily data rather than
monthly, quarterly or annual data allows us to have a much finer precision in the timing of
shocks and responses. Second, previous studies typically use actual outlays while forward-
looking variables such as the exchange rate are likely to move at the time of the announcement.

       In addition to documenting this central result, we also try to shed more light on the
propagation mechanisms by studying responses of other variables. While sampling uncertainty in
our estimates is quite high, the patterns of the responses are broadly consistent with the
predictions of classic and modern open-economy models emphasizing the demand channel of
government spending shocks. Finally, we examine how the response of the exchange rate to
defense spending shocks varies with the state of the economy (recession vs. expansion, binding
zero lower bound vs. normal times). Although we observe interesting variation in the responses,
again sampling uncertainty is too large to reach firm conclusions.

       Previous analyses documenting depreciation of the exchange rate after domestic
government spending shocks stimulated development of new models to rationalize such
depreciations, which were puzzling for the workhorse open-economy models. Our results
suggest that, perhaps, further progress should be concentrated on improving identification of
government spending shocks to establish solid foundations for subsequent theoretical work. We
highlight potential benefits of using high-frequency data to study effects of fiscal shocks. We
focus on defense spending but information for other types of spending is available for analyses.
For example, daily statements of U.S. Treasury have information for dozens on spending
components. While our results here suggest relatively weak responses to payments rather than
announcements, previous research suggests that other components of government spending, such


                                                                                                      26
as tax rebates and transfer payments, might have a more noticeable impact. We hope that future
work will exploit this wealth of information.


References
Andersen, Torben, Tim Bollerslev, Francis Diebold, and Clara Vega, 2003. “Micro Effects of
        Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American
        Economic Review 93, 38-62.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012a. "Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
        Expansion," in Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, pages 63-98, National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Inc.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012b. "Measuring the Output Responses to
        Fiscal Policy," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 1-27.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2013. "Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,"
        American Economic Review, 103(3), 141-46.
Benetrix, Agustin. S., and Philip R. Lane, 2013. "Fiscal Shocks and the Real Exchange Rate,"
        International Journal of Central Banking 9(3), 6-37.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti, 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
        Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 117(4), 1329-1368.
Born, Benjamin, Falko Juessen, and Gernot J. Müller, 2013. "Exchange rate regimes and fiscal
        multipliers," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37(2), 446-465.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014. “Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial
        Institutions,” forthcoming in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Corsetti , Giancarlo, André Meier, and Gernot J. Müller, 2009. "Fiscal Stimulus with Spending
        Reversals," IMF Working Papers 09/106, International Monetary Fund.
De Livera, Alysha M., Rob J. Hyndman, and Ralph D. Snyder, 2011. “Forecasting Time Series
        With Complex Seasonal Patterns Using Exponential Smoothing,” Journal of the
        American Statistical Association 106(496), 1513-1527.
Enders, Zeno, Gernot J. Müller, and Almuth Scholl , 2011. "How do fiscal and technology
        shocks affect real exchange rates? New evidence for the United States," Journal of
        International Economics 83(1), 53-69.
Fisher, Jonas D.M., and Ryan Peters, 2010. “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government
        Spending Shocks,” Economic Journal 120(544), 414-436.
General Accounting Office, Office of the General Counsel, 2004. Principles of Federal
        Appropriations Law, 3rd Edition, Volume 1.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Michael Weber, 2013. “Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence From
        The Stock Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 18860.
Ilzetzki Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Vegh, 2013. “How Big (Small?) are Fiscal
        Multipliers?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60(2), 239-254.
                                                                                              27
Jorda, Oscar, 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,”
        American Economic Review 95(1), 161-182.
Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini, 2008. "Twin deficit or twin divergence? Fiscal policy,
        current account, and real exchange rate in the U.S," Journal of International Economics
        74(2), 362-383.
Lyons, Richard, 2006. The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. MIT Press.
Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
        Do They Fit Out of the Sample?” Journal of International Economics 13, 3-24.
Monacelli, Tommaso, and Roberto Perotti, 2010. "Fiscal Policy, the Real Exchange Rate and
        Traded Goods," Economic Journal 120(544), 437-461.
O’Rourke, Ronald, and Moshe Schwartz, 2014. Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy
        Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress. Congressional
        Research Service Report R41909, July 30.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, 2013.
        "Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008," American
        Economic Review 103(6), 2530-2553.
Ramey, Valerie, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of
        Government Spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
Ramey, Valerie, 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All In The Timing,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 1-50.
Ravn, Morten O., Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe, 2012. "Consumption, government
        spending, and the real exchange rate," Journal of Monetary Economics 59(3), 215-234.
Schwartz, Moshe, and Wendy Ginsberg, 2013. Department of Defense Trends in Overseas
        Contract Obligations. Congressional Research Service Report R41820, March 1.
Vitale, Paolo, 2007. “A Guided Tour of The Market Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rate
        Determination,” Journal of Economic Surveys 21, 903-934.
Wieland, Johannes, 2012. Fiscal Multipliers at the Zero Lower Bound: International Theory and
        Evidence. UCSD manuscript.
Woodford, Michael, 2011. "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics vol. 3(1), 1-35.




                                                                                            28
                              Figure 1. Daily measures of government spending.
            Panel A. Daily Cash Withdrawals from Fed. Res. Acct. for Defense Vendor Payments.




                                              4000
                              Defense Vendor Payments, Mil $
                              1000       2000 0      3000




                                                  01jan1995       01jan2000         01jan2005        01jan2010        01jan2015


                                                                   Panel B. Monthly totals
                              20000           40000
                                              30000
                               Mil $
                                              10000
                                              0




                                           01jan1995              01jan2000        01jan2005         01jan2010        01jan2015


                                                                  Panel C. Quarterly totals
                                           80   120
                                                100
                                  Billion $
                                 60             40
                                                20




                                             01jan1995            01jan2000         01jan2005        01jan2010         01jan2015

                                                               Defense Vendor Payments, quarterly total
                                                               NIPA Defense: Intermed. goods&serv. purchased + Gross Invest.


Sources: Daily Statements of the U.S. Treasury; Department of Defense,
http://www.defense.gov/contracts/archive.aspx. Monthly and quarterly totals are seasonally adjusted.


                                                                                                                                   29
             Figure 2. New contracts awarded by the Department of Defense, millions of dollars.
                                                                                Panel A. Daily totals




                                                             25000
                Contracts awarded by DoD, daily total, Mil $
                  5000      10000     150000     20000




                                                 01jan1995             01jan2000        01jan2005            01jan2010          01jan2015

                                                                              Panel B. Monthly totals
                                              50000




                                                                                                   Russo-           Operation
                                                                     9/11                         Georgian          New
                                                                                                    war             Dawn
                                              40000




                                                                                        Iraq II
                   20000 30000
                       Mil $
                                              10000
                                              0




                                           01jan1995                   01jan2000        01jan2005            01jan2010          01jan2015

                                                                            New contracts awarded by DoD, monthly total
                                                                            Defense Vendor Payments, monthly total


Source: Department of Defense, http://www.defense.gov/contracts/archive.aspx.



                                                                                                                                            30
      Figure 3. Response of index of stock prices of defense corporations to a government spending shock
                                    Panel A. Responses to DoD announcements


                                          Defense and Aerospace index


                       .001
                       .0005
                       0
                       -.0005




                                0              10                    20                  30
                                                        horizon

                                              IRF           95% confidence interval



    Panel B. Responses to a shock in daily payments to defense contractors (U.S. Treasury daily statements)


                                          Defense and Aerospace index
                        .004
                        .002
                        0
                        -.002
                        -.004




                                0               10                    20                  30
                                                        horizon

                                              IRF           95% confidence interval



Notes: Each panel plots impulse responses estimated using specification (1). The dependent variable is the
change in the value of price index for stock of defense corporations. The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured
in days.

                                                                                                              31
                                                           Figure 4. Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index: Major Currencies




      Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index: Major Currencies
      70         80         90          100        110




                                                            01jan1995     01jan2000      01jan2005      01jan2010         01jan2015



Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, H.10 Foreign Exchange Rates.




                                                                                                                                      32
                                                Figure 5. Impulse responses to a government spending shock, daily data.
                                                                     Panel A. Department of Defense announcements
             .001




                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                         government spending response
                                                                                                                                  .8
  exchange rate response




                                                                                                                           .6
            .0005




                                                                                                            .2    .4
             0




                                                                                                                        0
                                    0            10                         20                 30                                                  0             10                         20                 30
                                                           horizon                                                                                                         horizon

                                                IRF            95% confidence interval                                                                          IRF            95% confidence interval




                                                                      Panel B. Daily payments to defense contractors
                             .004




                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                             government spending response
                                     .002
                  exchange rate response




                                                                                                                                            .5
                -.002       0




                                                                                                                           0
                             -.004




                                            0         10                         20                 30                                                      0         10                         20                 30
                                                             horizon                                                                                                         horizon

                                                  IRF                95% confidence interval                                                                      IRF                95% confidence interval




Notes: Figures show impulse response functions for the Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index (Major Currencies)
and government spending to a unit shock to government spending. Impulse responses are estimated using
specification (1). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33
                                                                                  Figure 6. Impulse response to a government spending shock, monthly data.
                                                                                                         Panel A. Department of Defense announcements




                                                                                                                                                                   1
             .002




                                                                                                                                                    government spending response
  exchange rate response




                                                                                                                                                                        .5
     0           .001




                                                                                                                                                          0
             -.001




                                                                                                                                                                   -.5
                                                    0         1       2       3       4        5     6     7      8       9       10    11    12                                             0        1       2       3       4       5      6    7      8       9       10    11    12
                                                                                              horizon (month)                                                                                                                             horizon

                                                                                   IRF                95% confidence interval                                                                                             IRF                95% confidence interval




                                                                                                          Panel B. Daily payments to defense contractors
             -.00001-5.00e-06 0 5.00e-06 .00001 .000015




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                   government spending response
                         exchange rate response




                                                                                                                                                                         0         -.5 .5




                                                          0       1       2       3       4     5      6    7         8       9    10    11    12                                                 0       1       2       3       4    5      6    7         8       9    10    11    12
                                                                                               horizon (months)                                                                                                                       horizon (months)

                                                                                      IRF               95% confidence interval                                                                                               IRF              95% confidence interval




Notes: Figures show impulse response functions for the Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index (Major Currencies)
and government spending to a unit shock to government spending. Impulse responses are estimated using
specification (1). Daily data are aggregate to monthly frequency. The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in
months.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           34
                 Figure 7. Responses of additional macroeconomic variables to a government spending shock.
                        DoD announcements                                             Daily payments
                                  TED Spread                                               TED Spread




                                                                       .06
     .005




                                                                       .04
     0




                                                                       .02
                                                                       0
     -.005




                                                                       -.02
     -.01




                                                                       -.04
             0               10                  20               30           0      10                  20               30
                                    horizon                                                  horizon

                            IRF         95% confidence interval                     IRF          95% confidence interval



                          CBOE DJIA Volatility Index                               CBOE DJIA Volatility Index




                                                                       1.5
     .2
     .1




                                                                       1
                                                                       .5
     0
     -.1




                                                                       0
     -.2




                                                                       -.5




             0               10                  20               30           0      10                  20               30
                                    horizon                                                  horizon

                            IRF         95% confidence interval                     IRF          95% confidence interval



                          S&P 500 Stock Price Index                                S&P 500 Stock Price Index
     .002




                                                                       .005
     .001




                                                                       0
     0




                                                                       -.005
     -.001




                                                                       -.01
     -.002




             0               10                  20               30           0      10                  20               30
                                    horizon                                                  horizon

                            IRF         95% confidence interval                     IRF          95% confidence interval


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1). All series are taken from FRED© database.
FRED codes are reported in parentheses: TED spread (TEDRATE), CBOE DJIA Volatility Index (VXDCLS),
S&P500 Stock Price Index (SP500). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.



                                                                                                                                35
                         Figure 8. Responses of commodity prices to a government spending shock.
                       DoD announcements                                                         Daily payments
                   Crude Oil Prices: West Texas Intermediate                          Crude Oil Prices: West Texas Intermediate




                                                                        .01
     .002




                                                                        0
     0
     -.002




                                                                        -.01
     -.004




                                                                        -.02
             0                10                   20              30           0                10                   20              30
                                     horizon                                                            horizon

                            IRF          95% confidence interval                               IRF          95% confidence interval



             Conventional Gasoline Prices: U.S. Gulf Coast, Regular             Conventional Gasoline Prices: U.S. Gulf Coast, Regular
     .005




                                                                        .02
                                                                        .01
                                                                        0
     0




                                                                        -.01
     -.005




                                                                        -.02




             0                10                  20               30           0                10                  20               30
                                     horizon                                                            horizon

                            IRF          95% confidence interval                               IRF          95% confidence interval



                        Gold Fixing Price, London, USD                                     Gold Fixing Price, London, USD
     .001




                                                                        .01
                                                                        .005
     0
     -.001




                                                                        0
                                                                        -.005
     -.002




                                                                        -.01
     -.003




             0                10                   20              30           0                10                   20              30
                                     horizon                                                            horizon

                            IRF          95% confidence interval                               IRF          95% confidence interval


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1). All series are taken from FRED© database.
FRED codes are reported in parentheses: Crude Oil Prices (DCOILWTICO), Conventional Gasoline Prices
(DGASUSGULF), Gold Fixing Price (GOLDPMGBD228N). All variables are measured in U.S. dollars. The
horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.

                                                                                                                                           36
                    Figure 9. Contemporaneous responses of yield curves to a government spending shock.
                            DoD announcements                                                                              Daily payments
                                             Treasury yield                                                                         Treasury yield




                                                                                                 .01
       .004




                                                                                                 0
       .002




                                                                                             -.01
   %




                                                                                              %
       0




                                                                                                 -.02
       -.002




                                                                                                 -.03
                0                       10                       20                     30               0                     10                       20                     30
                                              maturity (years)                                                                       maturity (years)

                                  IRF                95% CI           66% CI                                             IRF                95% CI           66% CI



                                                 LIBOR                                                                                  LIBOR
        .008




                                                                                                  .06
        .006




                                                                                                  .04
        .004




                                                                                             .02
   %




                                                                                              %
        .002




                                                                                                  0
        0
        -.002




                                                                                                  -.02




                0   1   2     3         4      5      6    7     8    9      10    11   12               0   1   2   3         4      5      6    7     8    9      10    11   12
                                              maturity (month)                                                                       maturity (month)

                                  IRF                95% CI               66% CI                                         IRF                95% CI               66% CI



                                             Inflation swap                                                                         Inflation swap
       .004




                                                                                                 .005
                                                                                                 0
       .002




                                                                                                 -.005
   %




                                                                                             %
                                                                                                 -.01
       0




                                                                                                 -.015
                                                                                                 -.02
       -.002




                0                       10                       20                     30               0                     10                       20                     30
                                              maturity (years)                                                                       maturity (years)

                                  IRF                95% CI           66% CI                                             IRF                95% CI           66% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1) with  1. All series are taken from FRED©
database. FRED codes are reported in parentheses: Treasury (DGS*), LIBOR (USD*D156N), Inflation Swap
(DSWP*), where * denotes the maturity.



                                                                                                                                                                                    37
                 Figure 10. Response of foreign stock market indices to a government spending shock.
                    DoD announcements                                                 Daily payments
                    Nikkei Stock Average, Nikkei 225                            Nikkei Stock Average, Nikkei 225
     .004




                                                                    .01
     .002




                                                                    0
                                                                    -.01
     0
     -.002




                                                                    -.02
                                                                    -.03
     -.004




             0            10                   20              30           0         10                  20               30
                                 horizon                                                     horizon

                         IRF         95% confidence interval                         IRF         95% confidence interval



                               FTSE 100                                                     FTSE 100
    .002




                                                                    .005
    .0015




                                                                    0
    .001
    .0005




                                                                    -.005
    0
    -.0005




                                                                    -.01




             0            10                  20               30           0          10                  20              30
                                 horizon                                                     horizon

                        IRF          95% confidence interval                         IRF         95% confidence interval



                      S&P/TSX Composite index                                      S&P/TSX Composite index
    .002




                                                                    .005
    .001




                                                                    0
                                                                    -.005
    0
    -.001




                                                                    -.01
    -.002




                                                                    -.015




             0            10                  20               30           0          10                  20              30
                                 horizon                                                     horizon

                        IRF          95% confidence interval                         IRF         95% confidence interval


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1). NIKKEI, FTSE 100 and TSX are stock market
indexes for exchanges in Tokyo (Japan), London (the U.K.) and Toronto (Canada). The horizon (horizontal
axis) is measured in days.



                                                                                                                                38
                                     Figure 11. Stability of the responses to a government spending shock.
                                                     Panel A. Pre-Great Recession period
                                      DoD announcements                                                          Payments to defense contractors
               .001




                                                                                             .002
   exchange rate response




                                                                               exchange rate response
                  .0005




                                                                                   -.002         0
       0




                                                                                             -.004
               -.0005




                             0        10                 20               30                                 0         10                 20               30
                                            horizon                                                                          horizon

                                     IRF        95% confidence interval                                              IRF         95% confidence interval



                                 Panel B. Period with the binding zero lower bound on the nominal interest rates
                                      DoD announcements                                                          Payments to defense contractors
               .002




                                                                                                      .005
        .0005 .001 .0015
    exchange rate response




                                                                               exchange rate response
                                                                                        0
   0




                                                                                             -.005
               -.0005




                             0        10                 20               30                                 0         10                 20               30
                                            horizon                                                                          horizon

                                     IRF        95% confidence interval                                              IRF         95% confidence interval



     Panel C. Period with the binding zero lower bound on the nominal interest rates, control for TED spread.
                                      DoD announcements                                                          Payments to defense contractors
               .002




                                                                                             .01
   exchange rate response




                                                                               exchange rate response
                   .001




                                                                                              .005
        0




                                                                                   0
               -.001




                                                                                             -.005




                             0        10                 20               30                                 0         10                 20               30
                                            horizon                                                                          horizon

                                     IRF        95% confidence interval                                              IRF         95% confidence interval




Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1). Specification in Panel C also include 20 lags of
the TED spread. The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.

                                                                                                                                                                39
                                         Figure 12. TED Spread.




                      5.00
                      4.00
               TED Spread, %
               2.00     3.00
                      1.00
                      0.00




                       01jan1995   01jan2000      01jan2005       01jan2010   01jan2015



Notes: TED spread is calculated as the spread between 3-Month LIBOR based on US dollars and 3-Month
Treasury bill.




                                                                                                40
                                                                    Figure 13. Rolling regressions, 24-month window

                                                                                    DoD announcements




                                          .0005 .001 .0015
                          contemp. exchange rate response
                     -.001 -.0005    0




                                                             1995            2000           2005            2010        2015


                                                                                 IRF          95% confidence interval



                                                                            Payments to defense contractors
                                         .002 .004 .006
                         contemp. exchange rate response
                     -.004 -.002    0




                                                             1995            2000           2005            2010        2015


                                                                                 IRF          95% confidence interval


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1).Vertical lines identify recessions as identified by
the NBER. The horizontal axis shows calendar time.




                                                                                                                               41
                                                     Figure 14. Controls for macroeconomic news
                                                Panel A. Control for monetary policy shocks
                               DoD announcements                                            Daily payments
             .001




                                                                                               .003
     .00025 .0005 .00075




                                                                                                       .002
  exchange rate response




                                                                                    exchange rate response
                                                                                 -.001    0     .001
             0
             -.00025




                                                                                               -.002
                           0        10                  20                  30                                0                10                      20                           30
                                           horizon                                                                                       horizon

                                baseline         controls for mon. policy                                         no controls for mon. policy            controls for mon. policy
                                95% CI           95% CI                                                           95% CI                                 95% CI


                                               Panel B. Control for macroeconomic surprises
                               DoD announcements                                          Daily payments
             .0015




                                                                                               .004
  exchange rate response




                                                                                 exchange rate response
                   .001




                                                                                                 .002
     .0005




                                                                                      0        -.002
             0




                           0        10                  20                  30                                0                10                      20                           30
                                           horizon                                                                                       horizon

                                baseline         controls for macro news                                                  baseline              controls for macro news
                                95% CI           95% CI                                                                   95% CI                95% CI


                                   Panel C. Control for monetary policy shocks and macroeconomic surprises
                               DoD announcements                                            Daily payments
             .0015




                                                                                               .004
  exchange rate response




                                                                                 exchange rate response
                   .001




                                                                                                 .002
     .0005




                                                                                      0        -.002
             0




                           0        10                  20                  30                                0                10                      20                           30
                                           horizon                                                                                       horizon

                                baseline         controls for macro news                                                  baseline              controls for macro news
                                95% CI           95% CI                                                                   95% CI                95% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (1) augmented with controls indicated in the panel title and
described in Section 5.C. The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.
                                                                                                                                                                                         42
                                      Figure 15. State-dependent responses to a government spending shock, business cycle.
                                                            Panel A. Department of Defense announcements




                                                                                                     1
       .001 .002 .003 .004 .005




                                                                                      government spending response
                                                                                                               .8
     exchange rate response




                                                                                       0    .2     .4    .6
                   0
                   -.001




                                                                                                     -.2
                                  0            10                 20            30                                      0   10                20          30
                                                       horizon                                                                      horizon

                                                Expansion         Recession                                                  Expansion        Recession
                                                95% CI            95% CI                                                     95% CI           95% CI




                                                             Panel B. Daily payments to defense contractors
                .03




                                                                                                        1
                                                                                         government spending response
                                                                                                                   .8
   exchange rate response
                      .02




                                                                                                      .4     .6
            .01




                                                                                                .2
    0




                                                                                           0            -.2
                -.01




                                  0            10                20             30                                      0   10                20          30
                                                       horizon                                                                      horizon

                                                Expansion        Recession                                                   Expansion        Recession
                                                95% CI           95% CI                                                      95% CI           95% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (2). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in
days.




                                                                                                                                                               43
Figure 16. State-dependent responses of the exchange rate to a government spending shock, business cycle and
                                ZLB. Department of Defense announcements.
                                                                              Panel A. Baseline
                                                    Binding ZLB                                                                     Non-binding ZLB
                           .01




                                                                                                          .001 .002 .003
          .002 .004 .006 .008
       exchange rate response




                                                                                                 exchange rate response
                                                                                        -.002 -.001 0
                           0
                           -.002




                                           0   10                 20               30                                          0   10                  20          30
                                                       horizon                                                                              horizon

                                                Expansion         Recession                                                         Expansion          Recession
                                                95% CI            95% CI                                                            95% CI             95% CI




                                                                       Panel B. Control for TED rate
                                                    Binding ZLB                                                                         Non-binding ZLB
                                                                                           -.002 -.001 0 .001 .002 .003 .004
   -.008-.006-.004-.002 0 .002 .004 .006
            exchange rate response




                                                                                                    exchange rate response




                                           0   10                 20              30                                           0   10                  20          30
                                                       horizon                                                                               horizon

                                                Expansion         Recession                                                         Expansion          Recession
                                                95% CI            95% CI                                                            95% CI             95% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (3). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in
days.




                                                                                                                                                                        44
Figure 17. State-dependent responses of the exchange rate to a government spending shock, business cycle and
                                ZLB. Daily payments to defense contractors
                                                                               Panel A. Baseline
                                                     Binding ZLB                                                                                Non-binding ZLB
       -.02 -.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05




                                                                                          .005 .01 .015 .02 .025 .03
              exchange rate response




                                                                                         exchange rate response
                                                                                                        -.005 0
                                            0   10                 20               30                                                 0       10                    20           30
                                                        horizon                                                                                           horizon

                                                 Expansion         Recession                                                                    Expansion            Recession
                                                 95% CI            95% CI                                                                       95% CI               95% CI


                                                                        Panel B. Control for TED rate
                                                     Binding ZLB                                                                                    Non-binding ZLB
   -.04-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05




                                                                                                  -.005 0 .005 .01 .015 .02 .025 .03
          exchange rate response




                                                                                                        exchange rate response




                                            0   10                 20              30                                                      0    10                    20           30
                                                        horizon                                                                                            horizon

                                                 Expansion         Recession                                                                        Expansion         Recession
                                                 95% CI            95% CI                                                                           95% CI            95% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (3). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in
days.




                                                                                                                                                                                        45
APPENDIX




           46
 Appendix Figure 1. Impulse response of the exchange rate to a government spending shock, daily data, VAR.
                                    Panel A. Department of Defense announcements.


                                                                 irf0, TDC, dln_DTWEXM


                        .001




                      .0005




                          0



                               0                            10                           20              30
                                                                      step
                                               95% CI                    cumulative orthogonalized irf
                     Graphs by irfname, impulse variable, and response variable




                         Panel B. Daily payments to defense contractors, U.S. Treasury.


                                                                 irf0, TDC, dln_DTWEXM
                        .001




                       .0005




                           0




                      -.0005

                               0                            10                           20              30
                                                                      step
                                               95% CI                    cumulative orthogonalized irf
                     Graphs by irfname, impulse variable, and response variable




Notes: The step (horizontal axis) is measured in days.




                                                                                                              47
                 Appendix Figure 2. Response of the exchange rate to a government spending shock


                                               Identification: Blanchard-Perotti


                       2
                       0
                       -2
                       -4
                       -6




                            0      1      2      3      4      5     6     7        8      9     10     11     12
                                                             horizon (quarters)

                                                     IRF                95% confidence interval



                                                       Identification: Ramey
                       3
                       2
                       1
                       0
                       -1
                       -2




                            0      1      2      3      4      5      6    7        8      9     10     11     12
                                                                   horizon

                                                     IRF                95% confidence interval


Notes: Blanchard-Perotti identification amounts to putting government spending first in the Cholesky ordering. Ramey identification
is based on the narrative approach applied to military spending. Ramey shocks are measured in percent of GDP. Impulse responses in
both panels are calculated using direct projections. The list of controls include four lags of growth rate of real GDP, inflation rate
(GDP deflator), government spending (corresponding series), and the exchange rate (see note to Figure 4). The horizon (horizontal
axis) is measured in quarters.

                                                                                                                                    48
    Appendix Figure 3. Response of the exchange rate to macroeconomic news and monetary policy shocks
   Panel A. Exchange rate response to innovations in monetary policy: Quantitative easing, Chodorow-Reich
                                                   (2014).




                                             .2
                                  exchange rate response
                                     0       -.1  .1




                                                           0    10                20               30
                                                                     horizon

                                                               IRF       95% confidence interval


     Panel A. Exchange rate response to innovations in monetary policy: Innovations to fed fund rate target,
                                      Gorodnichenko and Weber (2013).
                                             .05
                                  exchange rate response
                                             0
                                             -.05




                                                           0    10                20               30
                                                                     horizon

                                                               IRF       95% confidence interval


  Panel C. Exchange rate response to news about unemployment rate (constructed as in Andersen et al., 2003).
                                             .04
                                  exchange rate response
                                     0       -.02  .02




                                                           0    10                20               30
                                                                     horizon

                                                               IRF       95% confidence interval


Notes: Panels A and B show that when interest rates increase in response to a change in monetary policy, the U.S. dollar
appreciates. Panel C shows that when the released figures for the U.S. unemployment rate is greater than anticipated, the
U.S. dollar depreciates. The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in days.
                                                                                                                         49
 Appendix Figure 4. State-dependent responses of the exchange rate to a government spending shock, business
                           cycle and ZLB. Department of Defense announcements.
                                             Panel A. Baseline
                                         Expansion                                                                          Recession
                 .0015




                                                                                               .01
                                                                              .002 .004 .006 .008
                  .0005 .001
       exchange rate response




                                                                           exchange rate response
   -.0005   0




                                                                                               0
                                                                                               -.002
                                0   10                20              30                                           0   10                20        30
                                            horizon                                                                            horizon

                                     outside ZLB       ZLB                                                              outside ZLB       ZLB
                                     95% CI            95% CI                                                           95% CI            95% CI




                                                           Panel B. Control for TED rate
                                         Expansion                                                                          Recession
                                                                           -.008-.006-.004-.002 0 .002 .004 .006
   -.0005 0 .0005 .001 .0015
    exchange rate response




                                                                                    exchange rate response




                                0   10                20              30                                           0   10                20        30
                                            horizon                                                                            horizon

                                     outside ZLB       ZLB                                                              outside ZLB       ZLB
                                     95% CI            95% CI                                                           95% CI            95% CI


Notes: Impulse responses are estimated using specification (3). The horizon (horizontal axis) is measured in
days.




                                                                                                                                                        50
                                    Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics

                                     Announcements about contract award,         Payments to defense vendors,
                                          U.S. Defense of Defense                      U.S. Treasury
                                                    (1)                                       (2)
Number of observations                             4,895                                    4,587
Mean                                              0.016                                    -0.004
Standard deviation                                1.337                                     0.315
Interquartile range                               1.677                                     0.326
Percentiles
    1                                                -3.031                                 -1.073
    5                                                -2.165                                 -0.572
    10                                               -1.637                                 -0.331
    25                                               -0.841                                 -0.143
    50 (median)                                      -0.033                                  0.024
    75                                                0.837                                  0.184
    90                                                1.687                                  0.336
    99                                                3.564                                  0.619

Notes: series are seasonally adjusted and measured in log deviations from the trend. The frequency is daily.




                                                                                                               51
